FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10670
19 July 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM
FOUO 7/82

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from nevs agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes vithin the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED UEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE R£STRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOIOH'ICIALUSEONLY

JPRS L/106'
19 July 19!

uoamwe REPORT '

TERROR I 5!!
mo 7/32

Cou'rsms

EAST EUROPB

YUG‘BLAVIA

‘lbrmrinn 0 “upon for Scaling Account.
(Vojin mutdjcvic Interview; 30m, 23 my 82).........1

NEAR EAST AND mam AFRICA

mm AFFAIRS

Arman [busier in Lida: of Bunny
(“.1 ““1; 3m “1‘81, 19n)oooconooo0000000000... 5

"881' Bill)?!

mum mmuc or am

may one umrist Kkin ﬁnances knot-ion
(3‘ SPIBm. 7 “I“ 78)....0000000000.000.00000.000.00.00 28

.mndoun of Evan“. Klein Intcrviev

Inca-view About ‘hmrint Plant, m-Jonahin Klein
Interview

Diacription of “humane.

Klein About Bin Lite
FRAME

SPAIN

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

terrorist Personality: halo of hula in Terrorism
("01! mmnbrff; ‘umlsm’ 1976)....oeooooeoo000000

Steteunt by Revolutionary all Explains Attack
(mmmnwnnl mm, by ”)0ooooeooeooeoooooooooooeooo

bvolutionu'y 0311 hint on the of Violence
(EVOLUTIwABIBR mm, Hay 7S)............................

Hut Berlin hfdnt Daily Ptbmhea 3A? Milan)
(ma nmnlmc. 2 Ju a)....0.0‘COOOOCIOOOOOOOOOOOODOO

New Group Seeks Political, Nonrepreoeive Terrorist-
matron:

(Marcelle Pedovai; LE NGIVEL.(BSBIVA1‘BUR, 22 by 82).....

For-r Prim Linea Her mount“ Career
(u "OWL manvAnm 22 m a)...OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Sunny of Bowing; in 1981
(smno m 80m“ “0 1981’ 19&)0000000000000000010.0.0.

'DerrorieuinSpain
(31. 133303190 EN ISPANA. 1982)

SUITERLAND

‘Derrorion as Passion. keponoihility: bflectiona of'a
Poychoanalyet
Wolfgang Gieyerich; ANALYTISGIB PSYCHOLOGIB. 1979).......

”WWMY

53

93

112

116

127

172
TBRMRISH AS HEAPON FOR $2711.ch ACCOUM‘S

Belgrade 301m in Serbo-Croatien 23 May 82 p 8

[Interview with Dr Vojin Dinitrijevic. profeeaor at the School of Law of Bel-
grade Univeraity and nenber of the Co-ittee for International Terrorian of
the World Association for International Law. by liilivoje Pavlovic: ”A Danger-
oue Heapon in the nande of e ninority"]

[text] [Queation] to it an eaeential characterietic of terror that an arsed
ninority ie aettling accounta with the najority? (we aeked Dr Vojin Dinitrije-
vic. author of a atudy of conteqorary terrorien which will aoon he publiehed).

hthuaiaen and Repugnance

[Answer] Yea. even today terror ie a weapon of a linority which feels that -
eo-e broader intereat of ite own ie being threatened and out of thie fear
wanta to paralyze thie advereery. In eo doing the ninority ie unable. and
aoutinee even unwilling. to dietinguiah between thoee truly to blane and
thoee who are not. The innocent predoninate in the total umber of victim.
either becauae terror in by definition undiacrininating or becauee it ia taken
out of the hande of the initiatore. lhe heete with which note are «mined
and the lack of aurveillance nuke abuaee poeeible. eapecially in the tom of
nettle-ant of peraonal accounte inepired by hatred. envy and aﬂition. thus
in addition to the confueion anong eneniea. a etate of general uncertainty is
created which threat-1e even govern-ant authority itaelf.

[Queetion] Hhat can be eaid about the preaent terninological confuaion over
the tar-e "terror" and ”terroriae"?

[Anewar] The attitude toward terrorien. and indeed toward ite etudy. in
charged with auction. The reaction to individual apta of terroriae nay in one
and the ease caae range fron extrene enthuaiaan to the deepeet repugnance.
There are few terroriat acte which do not aimltaneouely encounter both ap-
proval and condemation. even if we eat aeide the i-ediate circlea around
those co-itting then or their victina. 0n the other hand there doee exiet a
tendency today to put the terroriat label even where previoualy it would by no
eeane have applied. At preeent there ie no agreement in the international
co-mity of epecialiete concerning the definition of terroriee. though by and
large what ie neant by it in well known.
[Question] Can it be said that every act of terror has a political dimension?

[Answer] There are researchers who say that there is such a thing as nonpo-
litical terrorism. Every act of terror "fro: above" is political. because
ruling people falls in the domain of politics. The dilemma arise in atteqts
to define the main dimensions of terror exerted "from below." which any be
aimed at overthrowing the governnent. but may also be a part of a struggle
waged between forces which do not desire power. The international conventions
which have been adopted on prevention end prosecution of particular manifesta-
tions of terrorism such as the hijacking of aircraft or threats to civil air
navigation do not require that the offender conitting the crimes they de-
scribe have political natives.

Our own legislation does take these peculiarities into account. Article 125
of the SPRY Criminal Code describes as acts of terrorism only those acts un-
dertaken "out of hostile motives toward the SPIN."

[Question] Terrorists of all countries are today uniting and collaborating
better than certain official international organisations. mat unites thee.
especially when neither their goals nor means are the same?

[Answer] Until recently nost acts of terrorisa concerned relations within a
country in which a majority of others had no interest. The terrorist act
brought about international consequences only when the terrorists took refuge
abroad. Today. however. the forms of terrorism in international relations
cannot be reduced to single notions. The field of international terrorism is
widening to unprecedented proportions. When the West German. Italian and Jap-
anese “Red" terrorists collaborate. the thing is still comprehensible: they
are waging war out of a conviction that they have a canon enemy. One can
also explain the ties between the Heat German and Palestinian organizations.
as well as collaboration between the Northern Ireland and basque terrorist
groups. There are even suppositions about crisscrossed ties of ideologically
unrelated groups. However. the terrorist today can operate on an interna-
tional scale even when his act has no elements of foreignness whatsoever. The
Nest European fighter against imperialism need not. according to this concep-
tion. enter into association with the fighter in Latin Anerica to kidnap an
Arab minister to make this an international act. lie attacks his worldwide en-
emy right at home by killing. in Rest Geruny. say. the director of a German
bank!

I Do Not Believe That “here Is a "terrorist Internationale'

Governnents on the other hand are unwilling to admit that domestic causes of
terrorism exist. and they are inclined to proclaim all terrorists agents of

foreign forces and services.

[Question] Do you believe in the existence of any sort of secret "terrorist
internationale"?

[Answer] I have occasionally read about this in our own and the world press.
Supposedly that kind of "internationale" brings together all terrorists solely
because they are terrorists. because terrorian is their trade. Certain seni-
legendary figures have even been created. and files have been lads about the
nysterious "Carlos" and certain other "abstract" superterrorists. "meters of
the world." So far I have not seen a single convincing piece of evidence con-
cerning the existence of a "terrorist internationals." I do not believe that
it exists.

[Question] Terrorist is a dangerous threat to certain general hunen values.
Does sgrasnent exist about the values which should be protected by interna-
tional law?

[Answer] Terrorisn can be described as a pathological phenonenon in interna-
tional relations. At the sane tins it is a sywtoe of deeper unfavorable con-
ditions in societies and in relations between then. and it threatens to dis-
rupt those relations yet further. The lawyers have nade this area fairly coe-
plicated. so that at the international level it is not easy to agree either
about the causes or prevention. nor even about the neasures of deterring (re-
pressing) terrorisn. In this divided world it is not easy to identify with a
sufficient neasure of clarity those international values which terrorisn is
threatening. Heny international treaties end conventions have been signed
which individual countries interpret end enforce depending on a nunber of
variable circueatances. At present there is no general convention against
terrorisn that enunuates terrorist acts which are dangerous in an interna-
tional context. Because of ideological fragnentation. considerations arising
out of alliances or the nonentary political interest of individual states.
the terrorist still has places of refuge: he even knows in advance where he
will go and how he will take advantage of double standards.

[Question] Unfortunately. the story about terrorian cannot bypass even our
own country. Terrorist activity against the new Yugoslavia has not died out
even now after four decades. Can you say what it is that is feeding contsnpo-
rary terrorisn against Yugoslavia and what are all its characteristics?

[Answer] Activity ained against the new Yugoslavia is being carried on by the
ease forces which in the years of the war attenpted unsuccessfully to subju-
gate the population of the country by applying the nost horrifying forna of
violence. Vs are referring to a reactionary co-nity which has been perpetu-
ated artificially and which has also turned up in other places after a najor
revolutionary change. The defeat in open conbat and the loss of every politi-
cal point of support cause desperation and usually give rise to the notive for
terrorisn. Revenge. spite and suicidal notives are nixed with self-delusion;
the uproar over the act of terrorisn serve the functions of convincing the
perpetrators the-selves that they st‘il exist.

Parasites of Bloc Policy

If there is no outside support. this kind of terrorists without doneetic roots
usually dies out with the biological aging of the defeated generation. Unfor-
tunately. the ideological divisions and the Cold Var have nade it possible for
the enenies of Yugoslavia to represent thenselves differently in nany quarters:
in places where their fascist orientation was unacceptable. they declared
themselves to be antics-waists: in places where this was not good. they rep-
resented theuelves as fighters for freedom and civil rights; when they were
able to get rid of the traces of their collaboration with the occupier. they
have cone forth as fighters for national liberation.... Aside from these
nethods. which are ained at support or at least smathy with the public. an-
other circa-stance that has operated reliably is that claims against Yugoslav
territory. irredentist and bloc-oriented. have not disappeared; the extremist
emigre con-unity has always been able to obtain the material aid of those or-
ganizstions. governmental and nongovernmental. which have had ready-made tasks
for them as a function of the situation.

[Question] You probably have records on the total nuder of such misdeeds
since the war.

[Answer] I have the figures for the period up to the middle of 1981: about
200 serious acts of terrorism were carried out against Yugoslavia; 92 persons
died in them. and more than 330 were wounded. Unfortunately. these figures
have increased in the meantime; in Belgium alone there have been 13 assassina-
tion attempts in the last 8 months in which 3 Yugoslavs have lost their lives
and 5 have been wounded.

Since the war not a single act of terrorism has been recorded that was en-
tirely prepared and carried out within the country. The anti-Yugoslav terror-
istsnusually Yugoslav citizens or foreigners of Yugoslav origin—have pre-
pared all their nefarious acts in the comfortable shelter of foreign coun-
tries. where as a rule they do not empect organized preventive activity. vig-
orous prosecution and severe penalties.

[Question] What is the size of the extremist Yugoslav emigre co-mity?

[Answer] It is calculated that it runs to about 1.000. this historical
snachronisn is from the naterial standpoint a parasite in the garbage dun of
bloc policy. ideological exclusiveness. ignorance and the calculations of the
secret services. nice it has financial support. it renews itself with new
"cadres" which arrive from the dark edges of Yugoslav society. where. as in-
deed in many other countries. there are people who seek a way out of their
own failure. a cover for their own criminal inclinations and a remedy for
their own personal difficulties.

Terrorism. however. is a weapon of those who are weak in nunbers and in char-
acter. Its effects do not depend directly on numbers. If not prevented.
1,000 people can inflict great evil. The lack of a response within the coun-
try will not discourage them. It is in the nature of the terrorist that he
does not cast doubt on his nsthods. but constantly blames his failure on oth-
ers. his adversaries—whom he hates still more fiercely. those who are indif-
ferent-whom he only wants to injure. and rivals from within his own ranks—
who suffer in the mutual settlement of accounts.

70105
050: 6131/1001
FOI!OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY

Allllﬂll AITIIRS

ARMENIA“ IDSSIER IN LINE? OF 315M!
IstanbuL BDHENI DOSYASI in Turkish 1982 pp 386-425

[Sections 63 through 68 and table of contents from book "Armenian Dossier in the
Light of History“ by Cemal Anadol. turan Publishing house, “26 pages]

[Text] Armenian Organizations Today and France

The reason the revolutionaries of the anhak [Social Democratic Party] and
Dashnek [Armenian Revolutionary Federation] organisations have, from the
outset, planned most of their operations out of France is that France leads the
nations of the world in inciting the "Armenians."

France thinks it is still fighting world Dar 1. It will be recalled that many
years ago Special Services agents captured at the French consulate in Damascus
documents in connection with "Arab Revolutionary Committees."

At the time, France was bargaining with Great Britain and Italy, who called
themselves the "Entente Powers," as well as Greece, Serbia and Romania, who had
entrusted their fates to these powers, over the remnants of the Ottoman Empire.
France wanted to have Antep, Urfa and Adana and an "Armenian State in Cilicia"
under its own protection.

Today France supports a number of Armenian terrorist organizations including
the Beirut-based "Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia--ASALA";
the Los Angeles-based "Justice Comnmndoe of the Armenian Genocide-JCAG"; the
Paris-based "New Armenian Resistance 0rganisation-«NAR"; the Paris-based
"Armenian Liberation and Freedo--BKO"; the Beirut-based "Youth Action Group-
CECE"; the Beirut-based "Armenian Liberation Front-3 October Commandos"; and
the Geneva-based "9 June Armenian Organisation." This support stems from
France's old "hatred against the Turks." French incitement of the "Armenians"
is not any less than Soviet provocations and incitementa.

Information gathered by the Interpol in various countries indicates that militants
of the ASALA, the most active Armenian organization, are trained in camps
operated by the organisations of "Naif Hawathme" and "Dr George Habash" in
(Ammuriye) in Syria and Damur and Sidon in Lebanon.

FOI:0IIIC1A1.1EIZ¢IVLY
F0!‘OF11CIAI.UBI§(NVLV

In these camps. experts from the Soviet intelligence organization, the KGB,
provide special training to the militants. 1n l981, it was determined, for
instance, that a K63 operative of Armenian descent, named Brutens, held a
conference in the (Ammuriye) camp in the south of Damascus with the participation
of 317 people, of whom a were from the West German Red Army, 6 were from the
Italian Red Brigades, h were from the Japanese Red Army, 3 were f‘sm a Basque
organization in Spain, 170 were Iranians and 130 were Turks.

Among the ll Armenian organisations--which are divided into "death" and

"propaganda" groups--3 primary groups have identical goals and activities, but
use different methods.

ASALA made itself known for the first time on 1 January 1975 with a bomb attack
on the offices of the World Council of churches. This is an organization that

considers itself part of the "International Terror Movement" and has announced

that its struggle can only be waged by the force of arms.

According to the communique: they have issued, ASALA's goals are:

i. To liberate Armenian lands under occupation and to establish a united,
democratic and socialist Armenia. (According to ASALA, Soviet Armenia is a
"liberated area," and Turkey's Eastern Anatolia provinces are "Armenian lands
under occupation.“)

2. To give the Armenian people the opportunity to exercise their right of
self-determination when they return to their homeland.

3. To force Turkey to accept the "genocide" as a historical fact.
a. To force Turkey to pay reparations on those grounds.

ASALA has been cooperating with divisive organizations in Turkey. ASALA and
the Apoists (Kurdistan Workers' Party) announced at a press conference in Sidon,
Lebanon, on 8 April 1980 that they have formed an alliance against the Turkish
government. At this press conference, 12 men and 2 women, wearing black masks
with openings only for the eyes, introduced themselves as "Armenian guerrillas
and Kurdish revolutionaries from Turkey" and told the "Palestinian guerrillas"
loyal to Dr George Habash surrounding them that they want "to consolidate their
ties with Palestinian organisations."285

The JCAG was established with the goal of avenging the alleged Armenian genocide,

which, supposedly, has gone unpunished, and restoring the rights of the Armenians.
The JCAG wants:

1. To force Turkey to admit the Armenian genocide of 1915 and to pay reparations;

2. To recover Armenian lands the borders of which are specified in the Sévres
Treaty of 1920.

it is seen that the JCAG has the same goals as the Armenian Revolutionary
Federation [ARF]. Their ultimate goal is, naturally, identical to that of ASALA,

IIII(Iﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂ£(NULY
INDIiOFIﬂCLAL lEIECMNLV

namely the unification of those lands with Soviet Armenia.

The New Armenian Resistance [NAB] made itself known for the first time on
1k Hay 1977 by a bomb attack on the Turkish Tourism Office in Paris.

It is now evident that these international terror organisations are dyeing the
world with blood with the support of Armenians in the United States and the
encouragement of Soviet agents. It is a fact that France today endorses the
existence of an "Armenian question." Furthermore, fanatic Armenians who pass
themselves as academicians, such as Dennis Papasian, Professor of Russian History
at the University of Michigan, and A. 0. Sarkissian, Chairman of the Armenian
Assembly, wfitebooks which distort facts and documents and which present the
Turks as being "wrongful."

The answer given by Armenian Patriarch shnork Kalustyan and other Armenian
notables [in Turkey] to allegations that the 50,000 to 60,000 Armenians living
in Turkey are still subjected to "genocide" and oppressed under a cultural
imperialism is undoubtedly very significant. Furthermore, the resolution
endorsed by the French Cosngil of State to the effect that "the Armenians in
Turkey are not oppressed" 8 can, if well publicised, bring some sense to the
western world and render the continuing Armenian murders as unforgivable.

It is now known that some Armenian clergymen in Turkey have also helped the
Armenian terror organisations-—which, so far, have taken 19 Turkish lives--
and that Armenian and Assyrian orphans have been taken to Jerusalem supposedly
for "religious educatiog" only to be turned into "anti-Turkish" militants by
"brainwashing" methods. 87

Turkish security forces launched a broad investigation into this matter when
certain documents were captured on an Armenian clergyman who was on his way to
a foreign country. The investigation revealed that the first such group of
children was taken to Jerusalem in 1968 under the supervision of Varujan
Hirkaciyan, a priest from the Holy Trinity Church in Bayoglu. Istanbul.

Under this scheme, certain clergymen--though opposed by the Armenian citizens of
Turkey-gather Armenian and Assyrian orphans from parts of Anatolia and bring
them first to Istanbul supposedly for "religious education." These children are
then taken, in groups of 10, to the Armenian Monastic School in Jerusalem. The
first group in 1968 was followed by a second and a third group. Hhile the
clergymen took these orphans from Turkey to Jerusalem, those sent previously and
trained as “anti-Turkish" militants were brought back to Turkey.

ﬂayko Eldemir, a priest on the teaching staff of the Armenian Monastic School in
Jerusalem, said in his testimony after his capture by the Turkish security forces
that he was one of those taken to Jerusalem in 1968 by Varujan ﬂirkaciyan. He
said:

"He traveled in groups of ten. Among us there were children who did not know
Armenian and spoke Kurdish. Our teachers at the school were members of the Dashnak
organization, which has been killing Turkish diplomats. This organization had

a building of its own on the campus. In the course of our training, we were

llllflﬂﬂ(1Al.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

taught courses which had an anti-Turkish character. We were brainwashed. At
the end of our training, we became anti-Turkish Armenian hard-liners. Later on,
l taught Armenian history at this school. I told my students that the Turks
massacred the Armenians and that this can only be avenged by Armenians like us
who hate the Turks."

Hayko Eldemir stated that he was a friend of Arpiyar Demirciyan, a terrorist who
has sabotaged Turkish institutions in Europe. Eldemir added:

“Shahe Acemyan, the principal of the Armenian Monastic School in Jerusalem.
assigned me to find good children to be trained at the school. I would become
one of the administrators of the school after I returned with the children. But
1 was caught before 1 could do that."

The security forces also determined that the clergymen involved collected money
from Armenian citizens in Turkey supposedly for the "religious education" of
these children. Priest Mikail Saglam and Armenian citizens who were asked to
testify confirmed that money was collected. However. the contributing citizens
said that they thought the money would be used for the education of the children
and that they did not know that the Armenian Monastic School in Jerusalem is an
anti-Turkish institution operated by the Dashnak organization.

Operations by the security forces revealed that some Armenians who were taken to
Jerusalem to be trained as anti-Turkish militants later returned to Turkey, while
others joined terrorist organizations. It was also determined that the priests
who have returned to Turkey have sung marches associated with the Dashnak terrorist
organization at the end of religious ceremonies in the churches. Priest Hikail
Sagiam, a former student of the Armenian Monastic School in Jerusalem, said in

his testimony:

"I was taken to Jerusalem when l was 10 years old. I studied there for 5 years.
During my training, i forgot my Turkish identity. We were constantly
brainwashed to hate the Turks. 1 met Hayko Eldemir in 1977. At the time, he
was teaching Armenian history; he frequently talked about the Armenian genocide.
l returned to Turkey in July, 1980. I went to the Armenian church in Buyukdere
to attend Mass. Hayko Eldemir was holding the Mass. After the ceremonies we
were invited to a dinner. During the dinner. Eldemir asked the guests to turn
their children over to him and inquired whether they felt oppressed by the
Turkish government and whether they had any complaints. The Armenian citizens
replied that they are not under pressure and that, on the contrary, they have a
very comfortable life. Upon that, we left the church and boarded a Car. He
sang Dashnak marches and Armenian songs in the car."

The children taken from Turkey to the monastic school in Jerusalem go through a
two-stage training system.288 Those children who know Armenian go directly into
middle and high school level education. Those who do not speak Armenian, such

as the Assyrian children, are first taught the language. Those who complete

their high school education then go on to receive professional religious

training. During this training period, priest candidates, who attend Mass at the
Saint Jacobs church. are brought up as "enemies of Turkey" through general history
and Armenian history courses.

FINICMﬂﬂCIAI.USE(MNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£IMVLY

The captured priest, Hayko Eldemir, who served as the assistant principal of the
monastic school, said that he studied for 7 years at the school and subsequently
became a teacher. He said:

"Ten of us were taken to the Armenian Monastic School in 1968 by Priest Varujan
Hirkaciyan. I spoke Armenian then, because I had attended an Armenian school in
lstanbul. Ohannes Pakrat and Ohannes Saves. who both read and spoke Armenian
like me, and myself were placed in the same class. The Yeznik, Aram and Ohennes
Balyan brothers who were Assyrian and did not speak Armenian were placed in a
different class.

"He were under very strict discipline at the school. Students who broke the rules
would be severely punished. First, we were taught extensive courses on modern
spoken Armenian. Hatred against the Turks was instilled at Armenian history
classes. Armenian history is taught from the first grade until graduation. In
the first year, the emergence of the Armenian nation is taught. In the second
year, the development of the Armenian nation is taught. In the third year, the
Roman conquest of Armenia and Armenian relations with Arabs and Turks are discussed.
Hatred against Turks is injected into the students' brains most pointedly during
the final year. The students are told that on 25 April 1915 Armenian leaders in
lstanbul were murdered and the genocide was launched with the collaboration of

the Germans. The students are taught that those Armenians who escaped the
killings were then forced into exile and sent to Syria, the United States and
European countries.

"when I started teaching at the school. I instilled and fanned the flames of
hatred against Turks among the students. I told them that the Turks massacred
the Armenians, that several provinces in eastern Anatolia belong to the Armenians
and that the Armenians must take their revenge from the Turks. When I was
teaching at the school, every classroom had a map showing the borders of Greater
Armenia. Classwork was conducted on these maps."

Hayko Eldemir said that the Armenian organisations in Jerusalem receive large
sums of money from the United States and that most of the money comes from the
"Armenian Relief Committee" which was established by Aleks Hanukyan, a rich
Armenian from New York. Shahe Acemyen, the principal of the monastic school,
told us during our conversation with him that a new building for the school was
completed at the cost of $1 million in 1975 and that all the expenses were paid
by Hanukyan's Armenian Relief Committee. He added that this organisation will
continue to provide financial assistance. Hayko Eldemir, who is currently under
arrest and whose trial will begin soon, said that this committee provides
monetary assistance to all Armenian organisations and churches around the world.
Eldemir said the following about the form of this assistance and the activities
of Armenians in Turkey:

"1 do not think that the Dashnak and anhak organisations have any branches in
Turkey. Because they do not like the Turks. Their activities and operations
are based mainly abroad. However, the Armenian Relief Committee in the United
States keeps contact with Shnork Kalustyan, the Armenian Patriarch in Turkey.

As far as I know, current efforts involve educating Armenian orphans at schools
abroad and turning them into professionals, gathering Armenian children who have.

IKIICIﬂﬂCJAl.USE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lost their Armenian identity from various parts of Anatolia. bringing them into
Istanbul and improving their social and economic lives. These activities are
organized by the Patriarchate. As far as I know, Bedros Gregor Tokatliysn has
been appointed by the Patriarchate to coordinate these activities. This person
regularly goes to Anatolia to find Armenians who have lost their national identity,
brings whole families of them with him, helps them settle in Istanbul and then
arranges passports for them so that they can leave for countries where there are

a lot of Armenians. He also brings the children of such families to Istanbul and
places them in Armenian schools or orphanages. In order to ensure that these

8 to 10-year-olds are brought up as proper Armenians. they are sent to the Armenian
Monastic School in Jerusalem.

“Varujalﬂlrkaciyan, the Head Priest of the Holy Trinity Church in Beyoglu, is
also involved in similar activities. The Armenian children who are sent to the
monastic school are then trained to hate the Turks by teachers who are members of
the Dashnak and hnchak organizations. Some of these students return to Turkey;
others receive asssignments in chulcses in the United States and Europe and
Armenian societies around the world. Very rarely do students dislike the school
and return to their homes."

while innocent brains are injected with "hatred against Turks" under the pretext
of "religious training” at the monastic school in Jerusalem, the Saint Jacobs
Monastery across from the school doubles up as a training center for the
terrorist organizations.

Two Armenian terrorist organizations are at the heart of the monastery's structure,

which is considered part of the monastic school. Of these, "Hay Yeridasartagan
Hiutyun." that is the "Armenian Young Men's Association," is a branch of the

anhak organization, and "Hay Harzagan Unthanur Hiutyun," that is the "Armenian
General Athletic Association," is part of the Dashnak organization.

The Armenian General Athletic Association building stands right behind the church
on the school campus.

The leader of the Armenian General Athletic Association branch at the Saint
Jacobs Monastery ls Abraham Papazian who also teaches general history and Armenian
language at the school.

Takvor Ohannesian and Hagop Sandruni are also members of this organization. Both
these persons have their living quarters at the monastery. Meanwhile, the
Armenian Assistance League. set up by women who are affiliated with the Armenian
General Athletic Association, provides financial assistance to needy Armenian
women.

The Armenian Young Men's Association of the anhak organization has a club in the
basement floor of the monastery. The club consists of a reception room, a
cafeteria and a conference room. This organization is led by Varujan Diredurinn,

a Jerusalem watch dealer who was born in Lebanon. Other members of the organization
include Liberit Bedrosian, a touristic goods shop owner who is a close friend of
Varujan's and Vartan Der Vartanian, a jeweler who also teaches at the monastic
school. Other members of this organization are Agop Heneshian, a baker who used

10

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(M‘LY
FOIlOFFHJAl.USE(HVLY

to be a physical education teacher at the monastic school; Agop Kalaydjian, a
jeweler; and Alex Kalaydjian, a photolithographer.

1n the east wing of the Saint Jacobs Monastery is housed a third organization
called the “Armenian Hell-Hishers' Association." The members of this organization
are most.y Armenians born in Jerusalem. These Armenians, who spnak with an

Arabic accent, work closely with other Armenian organizations. Moslem Arabs in
Jerusalem say that this organization is mostly involved in aiding elder

Armenians and active young men and women rather than in terrorist activities.

This organization is led by Garabed Carabedian, an employee of the UN Military
Command in Jerusalem.

Hoslem Arabs say that the Armenian organisations housed in the Saint Jacobs
honestery are an inseparable part of the Armenian Monastic School and its church.

in June, Armenians bombed the two floors of the Turkish Tourism Office in Paris
and blew up a large part of the building. They thus caused a damage of b million
Turkish liras to the Turkish government.

Meanwhile, reports to the effect that the Armenians are going to cruelly murder

a number of our diplomats in Europe around August are causing anxiety among our
citizens abroad.

The time has come to bring an end to the treacheries and the attacks of these
rabid Armenians against Turkey. If the authorities cannot stop these inimical
attacks, we will consider them responsible for and guilty of the consequences.

we read in HILLET the following imgortant article entitled "Armenian Organizations
Horking Against Turkey in France": 89

There is a powerful Armenian movement in Paris and in France in general. He
learned in 1975 that the "Front de Liberation Armenienne," that is the "Armenian
Liberation Front," gained powerful new members. These new members are mostly
engineers, technicians, lawyers and other professionals who have reinforced the
organization financially and morally. Among these, Gregorian, a 3h—year—old
nuclear-electronics engineer is one of the most active. His family are
immigrants from the Kayseri-Sivas region. Gregorian's spouse, Elie, heads an
extremely important chemical research laboratory. Both husband and wife are
active and influential in the said Armenian organization. We wrote to the

Press Counselor of the Turkish Embassy in Paris. Necla Brbakir. that the Armenian
nationalists are holding most of their meetings in the Paris mosque. As is known,
this mosque is headed by Si Hamsa Aboubakr, a former Algerian deputy at the
French National Assembly during the colonial period and currently a professor

of lslamic civilization and theology at the Institut d'Btudes Husulman which is
housed in a building on the mosque grounds. Hausa Aboubakr is also a well-known
enemy of the Turks. This person is not too deeply involved with Armenian
activities. but he has been disseminating Kurdish propaganda and he is known to
be supporter of the Kurds.

Among the Armenian militants isawoman named lloury lpekian who has a degree in the
history of law and social sciences at the French universities. She has also done

11

illl(lﬂﬂClAl.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extensive research in Armenian history. lpekian's family is also originally from
Anatolia. Before the most recent Armenian wars, her father served in an important
position in the Ottoman government during the Union and Progress Party period.

He represented the Armenian community in the Ottoman government. In conferences
she holds in France and Europe, Houry lpekian talks about Armenian civilization
and focuses on the Armenian genocide. She also explains the Armenian cause at
French schools and institutions of higher learning. Ipekian is officially a
member of the cultural arm of the Dashnak party. In the last few years, Hs
Kalustyan, the headmistress of the Esayan Lycée in Istanbul, has also been working
for the cultural arm of that party. Another member of that cultural arm is Dr
Marie Louise Chaymont who wrote "Recherche sur l'Histoire de l'Armenie de
l'AVenement des Sassanides a la Conversion du Royaume" published in Paris in

I909. Although her name sounds French, Chaymont is an Armenian. All these three
women work for the Dashnak party which has the most inimical attitude against
Turkey among the Armenian organizations in Paris. The names of these women will
not he found in membership roster of the Dashnak party which the Turkish Embassy
in Paris has obtained from the French police. That is because these women, being
university faculty members, are forbidden to join political organizations. These
three women, together with other members of the Dashnak party. meet at an Armenian
library, only 150 meters away from our embassy in Paris. This library is called
"Fondation Nubar" and is located at 11 Square Alboni, Paris/6. The library has

a thickly wooded garden around it and is 50 meters away from the Passy subway
station. Turkish Ambassador lsmail ﬁre: was martyred [in 1975] only 60 meters
away irom this library. This library is headed by a Turkish Armenian named
Karindashinn who speaks very fluent Turkish and who says he is from Egypt. it

is in this library that all the anti-Turkish communiques and plots are prepared

by Armenians from Paris as well as other places around the world. Kurdish leaders
living in France also meet and work in this library. It is known that Alishan
Maktubi, who directs the Kurdish movement in Europe and who spends most of his
time in britain, has come to this library several times and that his assistants
work here. The Kurdish language professor of the 5(012 Nationale des Langues
Hrientaies Vivandes is also one of the visitors of this library. We have learned
lrom Houry lpekian that members of the illegal Turkish Communist Party [TCP] also
visit this library and that there is close collaboration between the TCP and
Armenian organizations in Paris. Every effort is made in this library to recruit

Turkish students in Paris to be sent as agents to Turkey. Host of the targeted
students are from Eastern Anatolia.

In a book entitled “Manifesto," published in very limited quantities in July
l97n. the plotting of anti-Turkish incidents in France and around the world was
Hrl as a primary goal. To that end, the book proposed a media drive, the
organization of rallies and church ceremonies and the recruitment of persons
working in Turkish representative offices around the world. A large number of
Armenians live in France. and since they hold French passports they can freely
enter Turkey. Armenians in France closely follow domestic political developments
in Turkey and are able to gather all the information they need. The said book
proposes that anybody who stands against the Turks must be cooperated with. The

publisher of the book is not specified. The book only says that it was printed
by the Fondation Nubar.

The anti-Turkish activities in Paris are primarily directed by the Dashnak party.
but they are also joined by the Nnchak and Ramgavar [Democratic Liberal Party]
pnrtivs. The ﬂnchak party follows a communist ideology, but is not linked to the

l2
F0!‘0FFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOIICN“N(1AI.IEIE(M§LY

Soviet communists. The Ramgavar party, on the other hand, is directly
affiliated with Soviet Armenia and is governed from there. All three parties
have offices in Paris. The most anti-Turkish group among the three is the
Dashnak party. Lately, the Ramgavar party has also gained strength in France
and has become influential within the Armenian community. These three parties
are in rivalry among themselves in matters of methods and goals. The Dashnak
party is directed by rich Armenians who have been in France for a long time.
Members of the anhak party, despite their communist affiliations, are forbidden
from entering the Soviet Union.

In 1976, the anhak and the Ramgavar parties jointly formed a new organization
to counteract the Dashnak party. This new organization is called "Front de
Liberation de l'Armenie Turque" [Front for the Liberation of Turkish Armenia].
The organization is headquartered at and directed from the Fondation Mubar.
According to the 1962 census, 200,000 Armenians live in France. Many of them
occupy important positions in that country. Most of these Armenians are
engineers. Armenians usually have an affinity toward well-paid professions and
profitable businesses. M. Daen, the special secretary of French President
Ciscard d'Estaing is an Armenian and comes from a Turkish-Armenian family. M.
Median, the Chairman of the Department of Comparative Literature at the Sorbonnes
University, is also an Armenian and comes from a large family. Dedean, the
foreign minister under General De Gaulle, was also an Armenian.

Eva de Vitary-Mayeravisch, who was invited by our tourism office in Paris in

I967 to give a lecture about the "whirling dervishes" and who has visited Turkey
several times, and her live-in Iranian companion Muhammad Madri say in the No 1-2,
1973 issue of the "Revue des Etudes Armeniennes" that Mevlana [the mystic leader
of the whirling dervishes] was not a Turk. that he was Iranian and that he could
even be an Armenian.

Arthur Beylerian has published a very important research work.290 The SO-page
paper talks about the reasons the Armenians sought the protection of big powers
[in the years preceding World Her 1]. It also talks about the harassment of the
Armenians in Turkey and their oppressed living conditions.

In our opinion, to bring an end to this anti-Turkish movement in France.
publications of this type must be closely monitored; all available literature on
Turkish history, literature and culture must be immediately sent to all libraries
in Paris; Turkish academicians must give frequent lectures-at least once every

2 years--at our tourism office in Paris about new Turkish publications. Turkish
history, language. literature and culture; and more emphasis must be placed on
academic exchange programs with foreign universities. First of all, when

somwone is sent to France, care must be taken that he is a genuine academician.
There are very few books on Turkish culture and civilization in France and French
institutions acutely feel this deficiency. The chief reason behind the French
anti-Turkish stand is the fact that they do not know us very well. He have not
been taking serious measures to correct that situation, while our enemies are
using it to their maximum advantage. He believe it is our conscientious duty to
report all these incidents we have witnessed to the proper authorities.

13

ll!!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEli(ﬂMLY
sou OFFICIAL USE ONLY

France. Turks and a Page From History

The Princess of Savoi, Louise, the mother of French King Francois 1 who was
enslaved by Charles Quint, said in a letter addressed to the Ottoman Sultan.
Suleyman the Magnificent:

"If you, the King of Kings. will have the grace to give us the assistance we have
asked for, we will be enslaved by your favors."

The great Turk replied in a manner that justified his title of "Magnificent":

"The imprisonment of kings is not right. You have nothing to worry about. Our
horses are saddled and our swords are ready. He will do whatever is necessary 29
to drive your enemies out of your country and to rescue you from your captors." 1

when Henry ll succeeded Francois l. he wrote to the Serailles in lstanbul through
the French envoy, d'Aromont: "i ask the Turkish King, who helped my father
Francois l and who adopted him as his son, to give ngall the help he can to rescue
my country from the oppression of the German King."

History records all the favors that the great Turkish ruler has done for France.
Today. we see France biting that valuable and helping Turkish hand.
Armenian Terrorism and Turkish Diplomats

In March 1982, the famous Rockefeller Foundation held a secret meeting on
"international terrorism and the protection of diplomats from terrorist attacks."
The meeting was held in Villa Serbelloni, a snail--population 3,000--Italian village
on Lake Como, near the Swiss border. Turkey was not invited to this meeting.

According to the conclusions of this meeting. "Turkish diplomats do not know where

to keep their guns; a pistol should be kept above the right thigh or behind the
right arm so that its handle faces outwards."

According to international terrorism experts. diplomats must not live in the top
and bottom floors of buildings. Because it is easier to enter these floors
compared to the middle floors.

A diplomat must not park his car in the same place every day. if he does not have
round-the-clock police protection. the diplomat must always look under his car
before he enters it in the mornings.

A diplomat must keep the doors of his home locked 26 hours a day. He must never
open the door without knowing who the visitor is. He must be aware of letter bombs.
Ho must not carry the gun as an ornament. Having in mind that a single bullet can
save his life, he must continually practice shooting with a pistol.

A diplomat must report the slightest suspicious thing to the security forces. even
il It Is just an unidentified car parked in front of his home.

16

filliOFTWCJAl.l15EI(ﬂVLY
roe omcut use. ONLY

All visitors to embassies and consulates must have their identities checked and
searched for weapons in a bullet-proof glass compartment before they are admitted
into the offices they are supposed to visit.

The experts also stress two important points:

The appointment of bodyguards by the local authorities and the establishment of
checkpoints at specified locations.

Palsifications by Armenian Terrorists

The British Foreign Ministry has announced that telegrams allegedly sent by the
Ottoman Interior Minister Talat Pasha and published in the London DAILY TELEGRAPH
in I922 do not exist and that, consequently, such allegations have no basis of
truthg93These telegrams are cited every 26 April [Armenian Martyrs' Day] by

Armenian organisations as proof that the Turks planned and executed an "Armenian
genocide."

Studies have revealed that General Allenby, who was reported to have captured
these telegrams. has not even heard about them and that these documents were
forged by Armenian rebels at the time.

As is known. members of the Ottoman government and the Union and Progress Party
were tried in Istanbul for their responsibility in the alleged genocide after

the occupation of Istanbul by British and French forces. A number of those tried
were later sent into exile in Malta.

later. the British began looking for documents to prove those exiled to Malta
guilty. They could not find any documents to confirm their allegations in the
Ottoman State Archives.

The British Embassy in Washington wrote:29‘

"i am sorry to report that there is nothing that can be used as evidence against
the Turks exiled to Malta. Not a single incident exists that can constitute
sufficient evidence. The reports in question do not seem to contain any evidence
that could reinforce the information already at the disposal of his Majesty's
government."

Subsequently, the British Foreign Ministry turned to the Royal Prosecutor for
directions as to what action to take next. The Royal Prosecutor replied that

no evidence has been fgggd to suggest that the Turks exiled to Malta ordered
the Armenian genocide.

The British noted that the German court that tried Talat Pasha accepted only five
of the telegrams brought forth by writer Aram Andonian as being authentic and

rejected the rest as forgeries and, consequently, decided that falsifications
were involved in the case.

Talat Pasha. on his part, showed a great deal of sensitivity in his orders and
demanded the severe punishment of those who break the rules. He said:296

FOIiolFIJA1.USEioNlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"It has been learned that certain officials and individuals have committed unruly
and illegal acts during the relocation of the Armenians which was undertaken for
military and security reasons. Three investigation panels will be set up to
observe the situation on location and to send guilty parties to a court-martial.
Committees will begin their investigations as soon as possible. The Treasury
will allocate funds for their daily expenses."

Those tound guilty were severely punished. In fact. a number of innocent people
were also punished simply as a result of pressure applied by the Armenians on
ioreign powers. It is now clear that most of those found guilty and punished
were wretched peop‘; who were permanently and irreparably hurt by the Armenians.

Ottoman intellectuals Against Armenian Propaganda

Armenian dreams to set up a "Greater Armenia" on Ottoman territory go back to
1830.

Ottoman intellectuals have often responded to Armenian propaganda.

The following document297 consists of two sections and was written for the Sultan
for publication by the Deputy inspector and Secretary of the Non-Moslem and
Foreign Schools.

Document (lst Section):

"western public opinion has turned against us as a result of the lies, erroneous
reports and libels published by the Armenians in the European press. As a loyal
subject of the Sultanate. I consider it my duty to reject these lies and libels

on historical. gongraphical. statistical and political grounds, to correct existing
miscaken perceptions and to remind the European public of the special privileges
accorded to the Armenians from the very outset by the Ottoman government. Our
Sultan is already aware that the Armenian question has gained importance through
the press. Therefore, he can publish this defense in either a pamphlet or
newspapers. its publication in the press will be more effective. However. the
Sultan can. naturally, make the most correct decision.“

[Signed] Hehmet Sukru, Deputy Inspector and Secretary of Non-Moslem and Foreign
.‘rt hools. ‘

(2d Section):

"A variety and a a large number of thoughts and ideas have lately appeared about
rhe Armenians in the European press. Since some of these publications seem very
serious about their intentions, we must scrutinize their writings before we
express our own thoughts and ideas.

"when these publications are closely scrutinized, they are found to be the

summary of the lies and libels propagated by Armenian propaganda experts and
historians. Of all the books and articles on this issue, only three have
guﬁgrﬂphlcal and historical sections that could be used as references. Even those
have mistakes that need to be corrected. One of these is the 'Geographicai Atlas,‘

16

EOIINHHCJAI.USE(NVLY
mmussomv'

a work prepared by Chradaire and his colleagues for an academic institution and
published in 1889 in Paris. The second one is the 'La Grande Encyclopédie,‘
again published by a prestigious academic institution, and the third work is
'Geography: The authors of all three works are well known in Europe and their
works are considered to be authoritative. For example, on page 38 in the
'Geographical Atlas,’ the Ararat mountain and the Area valley are shown as part
of the Armenian homeland. 'Ls Grande Encyclopédie' says that the Armenians are
least mixed with foreign elements around them in an area bordered by the Kara
and Arax rivers on the one side and the Euphrates river and Lake Van on the other
side. The cities of Echmiadsin and Armavir (both in Russia) are shown as centers
of this area. In reality, if we travel 100 kilometers in any direCtion from
these two centers, we have to pass through regions where Turks, Armenians, Kurds
and Georgians have alternating majorities. The same article notes that this
piece of territory was captured by the Persians in 628, by the Arabs in the 7th
century, by the Bytantines in the llth century, by the Seldjuk Turks a short

time later, by the Mongols in the 13th century and finally by the Ottomans in
lSla. Hithout noting that some of these lands have later been occupied by other
powers, the 'Atlas' shows Kara, Yerevan, Elisabethpol, Tbilisi and Kutais as part
of Russia. Part of Aserbaidjan is shown as part of lran. in addition to these
areas mentioned in the 'Atlas,' the 'Encyclopédie' considers Van, Eitlis and
Erzurum, that is all of Southeastern Anatolia, as part of Armenia, thus making
the errors even more visible. The demands made are only on Ottoman territory.
Therefore, we will not discuss the situation of the Armenians in Russia and Iran.
He will base our conclusions on figures gathered by the Europeans themselves in
the course of their investigations in the area. Although these figures are biased
and disfavor the Turks, they can still clarify the issue to a certain extent.“

Hehmet Sukru provides in this section of his document a listing taken from a
work called "Ottoman Asia." Sukru continues:

"Even in exaggerated accounts prepared by the Europeans, 3b0,000 Armenians are
shown in the region in question against a Moslem population of around 1 million.
In reality, at least 100,000 can be deducted from the Armenian total and
500,000 can be added to the Hoslem figure. Thus, in reality, there are 240,000
Armenians and 1.5 million Moslema living in the said region. Even if we accept
the European figures, which deliberately disfavor us, the Armenians constitute
only 23 percent of the population of the said region, thus falling far short of
being the majority.

"Now that we have discussed the geographical and ethnographic situation of the
Armenians in the said region, let us look at the historical aspects of the issue
as given by the 'Encyclopédie.‘ It is generally accepted that neither the
Ottomans nor the Seldjuk Turks before them nor the Abbasi Arabs even before them

found an independent Armenia when they came to this region. Although an
adventurer named Tigranes did establish an independent kingdom around 2,000 years

ago, he was soon defeated bv Roman commander Lucullus and taken as a slave to

Rome. Since that time the areas inhabited by Armenians have been ruled by the
Romans, the Bysantines, the Abbasi Arabs, the Seldjuk Turks, the Ottomans, the
Russians and the lranians. The provinces of Ersurum, Van and Bitlis which remained
in Ottoman hands were, until recently, collectively called Arsi Rum, meaning the
FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MVLY

‘laud ml the Rum [Byzantine Greeks].' This name was also used by the Abbasi
Arabs and the Seldjuk Turks.

“Victorious nations always try to annihilate the culture, the customs and the
legality of the vanquished. Even in these civilized times, advanced nations

like Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia are trying similar tactics. The Ottoman
government, on the other hand, has never acted against the Armenians that way.

Certain privileges were granted to them in the past few years, but never has any
action been taken to hurt their dignity.

"0n the political field, the latest reforms insure that none of subject ethnic
groups of the Ottoman Empire are oppressed or enslaved. The Armenian minority

has benefited most from this state of affairs. Depending on their work and
competence, Armenians have been appointed to government ministries, counselorships,
embassies. the Assembly and the courts. They also serve as governors, mayors,
village chiefs and as public servants in criminal and trade courts, municipal
councils, public works and national education commissions. That is, apart from

all the special privileges they have. the Armenians enjoy all the rights accorded

to Moslems. In other words, they have Privileges that even the Moslem population
does not have."

Epilogue and Professor Shaw

Dr Stanford J. Shaw, a professor at the University of California at Los Angeles,
and his spouse, Ezel Kural Shaw, have prepared, after yegsg of research, a work
called "History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey" which establishes the
facts related to the Armenian question. When this book was published by the
university and distributed to all the libraries around the world. Armenian
terrorist groups in the United States launched a campaign against Professor Shaw.
His class was repeatedly dispersed by force, his papers were stolen and his home
was bombed.

hut Professor Shaw did not give in; he did not distort the facts. As a result,

he won the admiration and support of the university community. But, still, he was
lorced to leave the United States with his family.

He have reserved the epilogue section of this book--which in effect is a summary
oi the whole book-~to Professor Shaw. We are asking the world to put aside its
“crusader mentality" and to look and listen to the unfortunate fates of thousands
of innocent Turks who have lost their lives to "Armenian massacres." He are
asking the world to lend an ear to the haunting cries of bayoneted children,
burned old men. raped women and people who lost their lives after having their
eyes gouged out and ears cut off and after being subjected to tortures that make

a man forget about humanity. He are asking the nations of the world to put an
end to their “hatred against the Turks."

Prolessor Shaw says:

"when the Russians realized that they will not be able to establish control over
southeastern Europe through Bulgaria, they sought another alternative to bring
about the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. They directed their efforts toward the

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢MHHC1AL.USB(HNLY

Armenian minority, which, at the time, had no Intention of rebelling against the
Sultan. The Armenians had integrated themselves with the traditional Ottoman
society. They had cultural and religious autonomy within their Gregorian
community as well as the administration of the Armenian Patriarchate in Istanbul.
As among the other non-Moslem communities of the Ottoman Empire, any discontent
among the Armenians about their administration was a product of their religious
hierarchy.

"This is evident from the fact that the few Armenians who did express discontent
did so in religious terms and that some of them converted to Catholicism and
Protestanism.

"The official Ottoman recognition of Catholicism and Protestanism during the
reform period gave the Orthodox Armenians the opportunity to challenge the
traditional structure of authority. The Armenian community felt uneasy under the
domination of an alliance of the rich, the religious leaders and usurers. The
rivalry that emerged with the reform movement opened the way to democratization
in the Armenian as well as other communities. Although the rich maintained their

dominance in various ways, less rich members of the community also began to make
their voices heard.

"In the Middle East, the Armenians dominated the fields of money and gold trade,
jewelry, foreign trade, construction, pharmacy and theater. They always played
an important role in Ottoman trade and industry.

"Here, it must be mentioned that after the Greek revolution, Creeks in schools and
bureaucracy around the Empire were replaced by Armenians. Their fluency in
foreign languages and experience in financial and trade matters helped them rise
in every branch of the reform bureaucracy, including foreign affairs, finance,
education, justice, the mail service, railroads and the census service.

"Some European travelers and missionaries have claimed that there were around

2 million Armenians living under the Sultan's rule. According to the records of
the Ottoman Census Bureau, which regL.arly took population counts on the basis of
identity cards, the number of Armenians living in the Empire was 988,887. if we
assume that two-thirds of the 160,166 Catholics and the 36,339 Protestants were
Armenian, this figure rises to 1,125,000. This number constituted 5.5 percent

of a total population of 20,é75,225 (excluding the provinces of Yemen, Tripoli,
Benghaai, Egypt and Tunisia where no census was taken).

"Even in Istanbul, where the largest group of Armenians lived, according to the
1878 census, there were 97,782 Orthodox Armenians, #07 Catholic Armenians and

360 Protestant Armenians constituting 18 percent of a total city population of
562,637.

"The Armenians began to disperse to the four corners of the world under Byzantine
rule and during the conquest of Anatolia by the Turks.

"As of 1882, the Armenians were the minority in all provinces and counties which
they claimed to be their homeland. Very rarely would they be the majority at the
district level in rural areas. There were only two such districts.

19
F0!‘0FIIC1A1.USE¢MVLY
INXROFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

"In rural areas, the economic condition of the Armenians dispersed among Moslem
peasants was better than that of other settled villagers or nomads. The nomads
occasionally raided the cultivated farmlands as a consequence of bad administrative
methods employed by the large landowners and the bureaucrats. These raids hurt
both the Moslem and the Christians. All problems among the Armenians themselves
stemmed from infighting among their religious leaders.

I'The Armenians, like the other subjects of the Sultan, were free to live as they
liked. They could operate the schools, churches and hospitals the way they wanted
to.

"Influenced by Western missionaries, Catholic and Protestant Armenians began,
around the beginning of the 19th century, to revive Armenian national culture.

"Thus, classical Armenian studies were developed. The Bible was translated from
classical Armenian into the spoken language. A new literary school was born.
The Orthodox Armenian community began to assume a more democratic structure,
partly as a result of pressures from the government. Meanwhile, grassroots
pressure forced them to adopt a more secular system of education which produced
a cultural renaissance.

"Many wealthy Armenians sent their young to Europe, France in particular, for
their education. These people were, naturally, influenced by French culture,

and, when they returned to their homeland, they became the vanguard of a radical
reform movement. Their demands included secularism and independence. As a result
of these views, they took part and worked prominently in the 'Young Turks'
movement.

"The Orthodox Armenian community prospered at the time under the Ottoman
administration. Consequently, Armenian merchants and civil servants opposed and
checked demands by a small minority for independence.

"The independence of Bulgaria and Serbia following the Berlin Congress provided
inspiration for the Armenians.

"in 1877, Armenian officers and administrators working in the Russian army led
Russia's conquest of Caucasia and Eastern Anatolia. When they called upon the

Armenians in Turkey to unite against the Sultan, some Armenians obliged, and
the rebellion movement began to escalate.

"in San Stefan and Berlin, Patriarch Nerses attempted to win the support of the
Europeans for the establishment of an Armenian state in Eastern Anatolia.

Meanwhile, some Armenians resorted to terrorism--with encouragement from the
Russians--to achieve their ends.

"Thus, a number of Armenian revolutionary organizations emerged. These
organizations began printing magazines in big cities in Europe and distributing
them In the Ottoman Empire using foreign mail services.

"A group from Tbilisi began shipping weapons and ammunition from Batum to Rise.
Armenians in Tabriz began planting agents in Hoslem villages. However, the

20

FORfﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.US£(NVLY
INDR‘OFBNCJAI.IJSE:(HVLV

Armenian movement did not succeed like similar movements in Bulgaria and Serbia
because their efforts did not concentrate on a specified region. Moreover, Tsar
Alexander cut his support for the Armenians for fear that undermining the Sultan
could encourage radical doctrines among his own people.

"The Armenians formed terrorist gangs and carried out massacres and acts of terror
in the East to force the British and the Russians to intervene. These acts made

it increasingly difficult for the Hoslem and Christian cam-unities to live together,
although the security forces of Sultan Abdulhamit II occasionally prevented the
Hoslems from retaliating against the Armenians.

"The anhak party was established by Armenir‘ students in France and Switzerland.
In 1890, the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, also known as the Dashnak party,

was established in Russia in an effort to unite the Armenians who were dispersed
by the Tsar in a drive to eradicate radical movements in that country. These

two organisations assumed responsibility for the acts of terror committed in the
Ottoman Empire. They planned and executed raids and massacres against the people
and officials of the Empire. They even attacked other Armenians. Their ultimate
aim was the establishment of an independent and socialist Armenian state in the

six provinces of Eastern Anatolia after the expulsion and annihilation of the
Moslem population of that region.

"The Dashnak party formed cells in Istanbul, Trabson and Van, but could not do
anything significant until 1895. The anhak party, on the other hand. established
a broad network covering Ersurum, Harput, Izmir, Aleppo and Geneva and enjoyed
success within and outside the Empire. This party also cooperated with groups
fighting against the Ottoman Empire in Macedonia, Crete and Albania.

“The "nchak party also distributed revolutionary literature within the Empire,
bombed several public places and murdered officials.

"Heanwhile, Hoslem tribes and villagers began retaliating against the Armenians.
At the time, there were millions of refugees who had suffered massacres in
Russia. Bulgaria and Bosnia. It was not difficult to mobilize the Hoslems
against the Armenians with the leadership of these refugees.

"Initially. Sultan Abdulhamit II maintained close ties with the Armenians.

However. he changed this stand later on. He accused the Armenians of being
disobedient. He ordered the government to take measures to reduce the indisputable
economic power of the Armenian merchants in the marketplace. He used the hamidiye
brigades to suppress the rebellions in the East.

"Faced with the bloody Armenian terror movement of 1890-1893, the government was
forced to use harsh measures occasionally. However, this harshness was not at a
level to make the voice of the hnchak party heard in Europe.

"The unchak party organised a rebellion in Sasoon, which had a large Armenian
population, and provoked the villagers to attack the government tax collectors.
when the army was sent in to restore order, the rebels burned Hoslem villages

and fled to the mountains. By the time the army and the Hamidiye brigades reached
Sasoon, all the villages were destroyed and their inhabitants massacred.

FOI‘OFFIJA1.USEGMVLY
FOR 0FF1C1AI.USEIMVLY

"At the time, the Europeans accused the Ottoman government of burning 25 Armenian
villages and massacring 20,000 Armenians. Commissions were set up, ready to
believe the worst allegations. However. Sultan Abdulhamit II succeeded in staving
oil the foreigners by promising that he would implement reforms in the East.

"The stance of the Europeans disappointed the Mnchak party. This time they chose
Istanbul as their target. They organized a march on 30 September 1895 in the
embassy district and Babiali on the pretext of protesting a commission report.

But the masses in the capital, including unemployed and homeless refugees, were
angry. Rumors that a security officer was killed triggered large-scale rioting.
The government brought the situation under control by declaring martial law.
Similar incidents occurred in Trabzon and other cities. Subsequently. Europe
began clamoring about a massacre of the Christians by the Hoslems with :he support
of the government. But there was no intervention, and the terrorists were even
more disappointed.

"Security deteriorated even further between 1895 and 1896; painful incidents took
place. On 26 August 1896, a group of Armenians occupied the Ottoman Bank in
Beyoglu to attract attention to their cause. They placed bombs around the building
and held the employees as hostages. On another occasion, the Armenians marched

to Babiali, killed a few soldiers and threatened :0 kill the Grand Vizier.

Various parts of Istanbul were bombed and innocent people were killed. A bomb
placed under the Sultan's car killed 20 of his bodyguards. The Sultan rejected

the Armenian demands in order to maintain his authority. The bank incident ended
after a day of occupation: the hos.ages were freed and the rebels dispersed.

”The Sultan declared a general amnesty to reduce tension and to prevent further
incidents. Christian administrators were appointed to regions where Christians
iormed a sizeable minority.

"At the time, Lord Salisbury wanted to have the support of Tsar Nicholas II. He
proposed sending the British fleet to Istanbul as a means of support for the
Armenian demands. But Russia and France rejected this proposal out of fear that
British influence over the Ottoman Empire could increase.

“Thus deprived of foreign support, Armenian terrorist groups began to divide up
trom inside. When their provocative influence was removed, intercommunai relations
in many areas returned to normal. The Ottoman government did not hesitate to
return Armenians to high positions in the civil service. Armenian merchants and
iarmers returned to their work. Some rich Armenian merchants and a number of
revolutionary intellectuals migrated to Iran. Egypt, Europe and the United States.
The Armenian question was forgotten until 1897. But when the Empire lost the
Balkans too, the relative proportion of the Armenians in the total population rOse.

"Enver Pasha first wanted to realize his objectives in the East. As soon as he
took over as Minister of Her, he began strengthening the Erzurum-based Third

Army whose area of defense included all of northeastern Anatolia extending from
lake Van to the Black Sea. So that when World War i started, he was ready to
attack. He made one last attempt to secure the support of the Armenian population
in the area. But his meeting with Armenian leaders ended in failure. The Russian
promise for the establishment of an autonomous Armenian state in the Caucasus and

22
FOI‘OFIICIAI.USE(HVLY
FOIJOFFICJAl.lEﬂE(NNLY

parts of Eastern Anatolia played an important role in the outcome of that meeting.
The Armenians hoped they could complete the expulsion and annihilation of the
majority Hosiem population of the area with Russian help. So, the Armenians told
Enver Pasha that they would stay neutral. However, it was impossible to hide
their sympathy for the Russians. Right after the meeting, an Armenian delegation,
including a member of the Ottoman assembly, went to the Caucasus to discuss
cooperation with Russian military authorities. It was clear that the Armenians
wanted to scuttle the Ottoman war effort.

"Even so, aner Pasha maintained that Ottoman security forces were strong enough
to prevent Armenian sabotage acts.

I'llhlle the Ottomans were preparing for a winter assault, Tsar Nicholas ll went
to the Caucasus to review the latest Russian plan of cooperation with the
Armenians. Nicholas II told the leaders of the Armenian National Bureau in
Tbilisi:

“'Armenians from all over the world are rushing to join the Russian army in order
to contribute with their blood to the victory of the Russian forces. The Russian
flag will fly over the Dardanelles and the Bosporus. The nations living under
the Turkish yoke will win their freedom. The Armenians of Turkey, who were made
to suffer because of their faith in Christ, will have a new and free life under
Russian protection.‘

"Thus, the Armenians began to join the Russian army. Confident that the days of
occupying Istanbul were near, the Tsar returned to St. Petersburg.

"The Russians attacked on 1 November 1916. but were repulsed within a few days.

On 21 December, the Ottoman Third Army launched a counteroffensive. This force
was led by aner Pasha. The purpose of the operation was to cut off the Russians
from their main bases in Kars and to retake Kars, Ardahan and Datum. The first
Ottoman objective was Sarikamis. On 26 December, the Ottoman army captured
Sarikamis, but soon lost it back to the Russians. The deteriorating morale of the
army paved the way for a Russian offensive in Anatolia and an Armenian rebellion
against the government. '

"The Russians had already evacuated the Armenians from their sector of the border
and turned the area into a battle zone. The Armenians went along with this
Russian action without hesitation because they were certain of a Russian victory.

”Around the middle of March 1915, while the war was going on against the Russians
as well as the British in Egypt, it was decided to evacuate the Armenians from
Van, Bitiis and Erzurum for security reasons. These evacuees would be resettled
in villages and camps in the Husul region in northern Iraq. Armenians living in
Syrian flatlands would also be sent to the interior. The army was given special
instructions to protect the Armenians from attacks by nomads during their
migration and in the areas of resettlement. Special provisions were made to
meet all the needs of the evacuees. Military leaders were instructed to prevent
those who had suffered from Armenian terrorism for years from exploiting the

the situation. The Armenians would be protected and taken care of until they
returned to their homes after the war.

FOI:OIINCJAI.USE|HNLY
INJItOFF1CJAI.lEﬂE(NNLV

"A special commission set up by special legislation recorded the properties the
Armenians left behind and kept the‘revenues obtained from the sale of any property
so that they could be returned to their owners when they came back. Hoslems
could only stay as tenants in evacuated buildings and on condition that they leave
when the owners returned.

"Armenians as well as the west have always claimed that more than 1 million
Armenians were massacred during World War I. This allegation is based on the
assumption that there were 2.5 million Armenians living in Turkey before the

war. However, according to Ottoman census records, the pre-war Armenian
population of Turkey was only 1.3 million. Only half this number of people lived
in the areas where the said incidents occurred. Thus, around 400,000 Armenians
were resettled in Iraq. Around 500,000 Armenians left for the Caucasus during
the war. After the war, around 150,000 to 200,000 Armenians migrated to Hestern
Europe and the United States leaving only 100,000 Armenians living within the
borders of the Empire. Around 200,000 Armenians perished as a result of starvation,
disease and war conditions and not just as a result of the evacuation. It must
not be forgotten that more than 2 million Moslems died from the same causes. None
of the secret archives of the Ottoman government contain any genocide orders from
any Union and Progress Party leader or central government official. In fact, we
can find specific orders to local leaders demanding measures to prevent any
clashes or disorderliness that could cause loss of life.

"As the evacuation of the Armenians got under way in April 1915, Dashnak party
operatives from Russian Armenia organized a rebellion in Van, where 33,789
Armenians--constituting 62.3 percent of the total Armenian population--lived.
Although local Armenian leaders opposed this idea for fear that they would be
hurt, they were finally convinced that the Russians would provide military
assistance once the Hoslem population of the area was expelled. Thus, the
Russian army in the Caucasus launched an offensive against Van. 0n lb Hay 1915,
Russian forces supported by the Armenians entered Van. These forces massacred
the Moslem population in two days. The small Ottoman garrison was forced to
retreat to the south of Lake Van. Thus, an Armenian state was established under
the protection of the Russians. An Armenian army was set up to drive the Turks
out of the southern shores of Lake Van and to prepare the ground for the Russian
assault into Bingol. Thousands of Armenians living in Hus and other major
population centers began to migrate to the new Armenian state. By July, there
were 250,000 Armenians in Van, which could support only 50,000 Moslem and
non-Mosiem residents before the war. Ottoman reinforcements sent to the area
forced the Armenians to retreat. A large number of Armenians who were afraid

to account for the massacres they had perpetrated helped the Ottoman forces.
After a resistance that lasted for one month, Van was retaken by Cevdet Bey.
Around 200,000 Armenians migrated to the Caucasus on the trail of the retreating
Russian army. Host of these refugees were Armenians who lived in provinces not
covered by the evacuation order. Many of these Armenians died when Ottoman
soldiers chased the fleeing Russians."

26.
INDI‘OFFICIAl.lEﬂE(MHLV
285.

286.
287.

288.

288.

290.

291.

292.

293.

29k.

295:
296.

297.

298.

FIIICIﬂNC1A1.USEGM9LY

FOOTNOTES

Secretariat General of the National Security Council, "Before and After
12 Septe-ber". pp 215-217.

Istanbul BURRIYET. 19 Jan 82.
Istanbul TERCUHAN, 15 Jan 82.

Tokay Cozutok, "In Armenian Cultural Centers", Istanbul TERCUHAN, 15-19
Mar 82.

Istanbul HILLET. 18 Feb 77.
Arthur Beylerian, "Les Origines de la Question Ar-enienne, du Traite de
San Stefano et-Congrea de Berlin (1878)". Revue d'ﬂistoire Diplomatiqe.
June 1973, A. Delon, Paris.

"Correspondences, Traites du Grand Seigneur", Paris, 1886, p 69.

"Hemoiree dea Anbaaadeurs de France au prés des Sultans Otto-ans", Paris,
1891.

Istanbul HILLIYET. 27 Apr 82.

"Pron British Anbassador in Washington R. c. Craige to Lord Carson".
British Foreign Ministry Archives. 13 July 1921, 371/6500/8765.

Ibid., 29 July 1921, 371/6506/8765.
Prime Hinistry Archives, Istanbul Asseablv Cabinet Minutes, No 169.

Prime Ministry Archives, Yildiz Documents, Section 19, Docunent No 123,

'File No 1&3, Carton No 56.

J. Stanford Shaw and Reel Kural Shaw, lbid., Cambridge University Press.

25
INDIiOIIICIAI.Il§II(HVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00050R000500000044-0

II'OI OFHOAI. USE ONLY

Table of Contents

I. Foreword

2. Unending Hatred

3. A short Look at Armenian History

a. Question of an Armenian Homeland

5. Armenian Language and Literature

6. Armenians Under Parthian. Roman and Byzantine Rule

7. Armenians Under Seldjuk Turks

8. Armenians Under Ottoman Rule

9. Armenians and Religion

lo. Armenian Reform Projects

II. Armenians After the Reform Movement

12. Armenians in Ottoman Government Service

I]. Training Centers or Spy Schools?

lb. Decision to Kill All Turkish Children
More Than Two Years Old

I5. Armenian Gangs in Armenian Schools

16. Unchak: First Armenian Party

17. First Armenian Organizations in Anatolia

18. The Dashnak Party

19. Cooperation with Macedonian Rebels

20. Armenian Nassacres in the Caucasus

21. The Sivas Incidents

22. Armenian Gangs in Tokat

23. The Yozgat Incidents

24. The Herzifon Incidents

25. The Erzurum Incidents

2h. The Kumkapi Rebellion

27. The Kayseri Incidents

28. The First Sasoon Rebellion

2°. The Babiali Incidents

30. Assassination Attempt Against Sultan Abdulhamit II

‘II. The Ottoman Bank Raid

12. The Second Sasoon Rebellion

IT. The Zeytun Rebellions

'51:. The Van Rebellion

35. The Erzincan Incidents

36. The Diyarbakir Incidents

37. The Bitlis Incidents

18. The Adana Rebellions

30. The Second Adana Rebellion

£0. The Harput (Elazlg) Rebellion

Al. The Trabzon Incidents

62. The Izmit and Adapazari Incidents

63. The Bursa Incidents

64. The Allepo Incidents

as. The Canik (Samson) Incidents

£6. The Urfa Incidents

a7. The Maras Incidents

an. The Seblnkarahisar Incidents

4". The Findicik Rebellion

50. The Gaziantep Resistance and Armenians

26
FOIIOFFKJAI.USE(MULY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R000600080044-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500080044-0

POI/OFFKJA1.UGIIHVLY

51. ﬂassacres in Rats, Ardahan and Artvin
52. The Evacuation of Arlenians

53. The Two-Paced Russian Policy

54. The Victlns of the Evacuation

55. The Arlanians and the Young Turks

56. Arlenians at Lausanne

S7. Armenian Incidents After world War I
58. Otto-an Foreign Affairs and an Incident
S9. A Question and an Answer

60. The Trial of Talat Pasha

6l. Noon-ants of Revenge

62. Ataturk and the Arlanians

63. Arnanian Organisations Today and France
66. France, Turks and a Page from history
65. Ar-anian Tarrorisa and Diplomats

66. Falsifications by Arnenian Terrorists
67. Otto-an lntsllactuals Against Arlenian Propaganda
68. Epilogue and Professor Shaw

69. Bibliography

9588
030: 6000/0022

2; .
FOI‘OFFI!M1.USIIINLV

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R0005000800M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC 0? cm

"HY OPEC MIST KLEIN announces WIS!
Bundwn of Events
nadmrg on SPIBGIL in Gernsn 7 Aug 78 pp 68-70

[Preface to interview with one terrorist Klein by DEB sum: "'1 Believed
in It with a Blind Rage'”]

[Text] "hat was supposed to save the world was "crazy.”
what was supposed to be conveyed to those in power
through violence was "a crappy way.” Hith such co-snts
0980 terrorist llans-Joachin Klein has turned away fron
terrorisn. He has told DER SPIN. shout his extremely
dangerous defection and the fantastic plans of his

conrades.
Main Post Office. Hilan. 26 April 1977.

Hans-Joachin Klein. 30. one of the terrorists wanted worldwide after attacking
the OPEC conference in Vienna in 1975 and kidnaping ll oil ministers as

hostages. stands at the counter for nailing packages.

He wants to get rid of a package in a plastic has containing. wrapped and
tied. his revolver. a “m Zhroyovka 38." not loaded couplets with leather
case and a case with 12 pieces of a-xnition. A letter is enclosed. The
addressee: DB SPIBGBL. Rene.

The postal alone does not want to take the package from his. drawing
attention to the regulation, in effect following nunerous bombing attacks.
that packages first have to be opened and then provided with a control stanp.
Klein takes the package back. flings it on the floor and calls out with
feigned indignation. "l'here is no boﬂ in there!" The teen behind the window
falls for this and accepts the package unopened.

The scene is the crucial point of a biography and at the sane tine describes
the nan: the sane sangfroid he displayed at the OPEC raid in Vienna. he now
shows at the post office window as he leaves the internationalist terrorist
scene. In the letter _he has enclosed in the package with the revolver. he
dissociates hinself fron his guerrilla conrades. saying ”I have done enough
nischief" (DER SPIBGEL lo 20. 1977).

28
“OFFICIALIJSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Ready to throw up" in light of the "crazy actions" of the international
terrorists. he is seeking to like contact with the public in order to issue
warnings about murder attempts. planned at the time, against the heads of
the Jewish co-unities in Berlin and Frankfurt. Since that time he has been
wanted not only by the police.

Klein: "I realize that the guerrillas will think of it; they'll be after as."
what this means is that the defector must fear the revenge of his former
comrades, such as caught up with Ulrich Schmecker of the "2 June Movement"
terrorist organization. Schmuecker was murdered.

Nevertheless Klein wants to speak out again. In a SPIEGBL interview managed
with the camouflage of a borrowed identity. he now spills the beans. talking
about previously unknown details of the OPEC raid. not previously described

background information and the fantastic-sounding plans of the international
guerrilla movement.

He reports about Wadie “added, the wirepuller. about the ties between German
and Arab terrorist groups. about his "leader" in Vienna. legendary Ilich
Ramirez Sanches alias Cenon Clarke alias Glenn II. Gebhard alias Carlos--a
truly revealing document.

For to this day no one who has dissociated himself from terrorism has had the
kind of insider's view that Hans-Joachim Klein has about the international
entangelenent of money. violence and political interests. A deaerter. in other
words. another star witness like former BM [Baader-Meinhof] people Karl-Heinz
Ruhland. Gerhard Mueller or Dierk Hoff? A provident man who while in hiding

wants to secure a kind of penalty discount in case the police nab him after
all?

Former terrorist Klein--and that makes his case unique-does not do the
obvious. The man who first took part himself in the shooting during the OPEC
raid and then dispatched his "piece" takes a quite specific stand. Though he
does not want to make comon cause with the police. he pursues in his own
way their aim of putting an end to terrorism. He himself, as he puts it.
had "believed in it with a blind rage," but now that he has abandoned his

erroneous views, he sees the anarchists of violence "bowing themselves
deeper and deeper into the morass. Surely that is no leftist policy."

Thus he personally tries to draw a clear line between "treason" (against former
fellow culprits) and "prevention" (of further terror). If he went straight
over to the police. Klein says. he would forfeit credibility among the very
comrades whom he would like to address.

As a "leftist" (and that is what he continues to regard himself as), "I would
lose my political identity. and thereby also the opportunity to get others
away from terrorism." As a traitor he could not set an example. and to
surrender to the police--their declared enemy--he says. is asking too much.
and. therefore. ineffective. But. he says. it is not only high time. to put
it mildly. to stop and quit terrorism; as his exanple shows. it is possible to
do so in practice.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On such a narrow path, the for-er terrorist seeks to preserve both his
internal and his external balance. If he is seized one day. he will have to
answer for his participation in the attack against the OPEC ministers. Those
three victins of Vienna. though. as has long since because clear to the police
as well. were not killed by shots fired by Klein. Contrary to plan, he even
had spared two hostages. incurring. as he reports. aassive criticise by
"Carlos" and caarades.

But it reneins an unsolved legal question whether he will be held responsible
for the brutality of the others. which would asan that he would have to figure
on life inprisonaent as a coparticipant. or whether he will be classified as
an accessory and thus would get away with a lesser penalty.

Sonewhers anong likeninded leftists. whoa he calls ”the so-and-eos." Klein

at present is writing a book which is to cone out in a few nonths. "If with
this interview and with ny book." Klein says in the SPIEGEL interview. "I get
10 people away from the guerrillas. I will have eccowlished more than the DEA
[Federal Criminal Police Bureau] with its 100 aillion marks."

For "I know of 17 and 18 year olds who would like nothing better today than to
put an ad in the PM (muster ”MINE! to get a gun and enter the
terrorist scene--crasy. They have to wake up."

He is faailiar with the fatal process of dropping outuhow one goes to seed
rather than gmwingup in a desperate situation at hone. how one finds his way
to leftist groups out of nassive behavioral disturbances. how one wants to

ruin what is ruining one and then ends up with the "Revolutionary Cells." he
describes this in an article of his own written for DER SPIEGEL. entitled "I

An a Real Frankfurter" (see below).

The face of this character from the environnent of the Frankfurt poor aade
the rounds of the papers for the first tine in 1976 when. as chauffeur and
bodyguard rolled into one, he set French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre at the

Stuttgart airport together with attorney Klaus Croissantui-prisoned in the
aesntiae—and drove his to Staini- for his leader visit.

At that tine Klein was a clerk in the lawyer's office of leftist attorney Inge
Ilornischer. Through her he got to know one of her friends. aton executive
Klaus 'l‘raube. Together with others he visited Trsube in the Ehineland. where
the specialist was in charge of the "fast breeder" project in Kalkar. and then
also went on vacation with his. triggering later through his participation in
the Vienna OPEC attack the illegal "bugging attack" against Traube--one of

the aonentous legal and constitutional conflicts of the Federal Republic.
Like ‘l'raube, Klein learned about it all initially fron DER SPIEGEL.

Klaus Trauber told DER SPIEGEI. about Klein at that tile in the following words:
"He was a very childish person. with whoa one could not really converse.... I
could not nentally reconcile the childishness of this man. his sonewhet adoles-
cent ways, with the kind of danger he represented. as it turned out later."

To deaonstrate this danger once then turned out to be enough for the Frank-
furter Klein. During the OPEC raid, his "baptiual of fire.” he was hiaself

30

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

critically wunded by a shot into his abdomen. He was taken to the Vienna
General hospital and identified before "Carlos" and his comrades-in-action
carried him on a stretcher into the plane which they used to kide the oil
ministers as hostages.

Today Klein regards his gunshot wound alnost as a personal bit of good luck.

He was able to display it time and again to his underground comrades when he
wanted to keep out of further terrorist actions. and it finally offered hin
the chance of preparing the risky mneuver of his defection.

Interview About Terrorist Plans
Hamburg DER SPIBGEL in Gernan 7 Aug 78 pp 70-79. 81

[Interview with Hans-Joachin Klein about the assassination and kidnaping plans
on the international terrorist scene: "'Snooped on the Pope for a Honth'”]

[Text] SPIEGEL: Hr Klein. you have been on the run for 2 and 1/2 years. since
the attack on the OPEC conference. In the meantine you have quit terrorism.
You are hiding not only from the police but fron your conrades. “hon do you
fear more. your own people or the police?

Klein: Neither must be allowed to nab ne. If my former people get us.
they'll kill me. when this interview is in print. I'll have nothing to laugh
about. And if the fuzz catches me. I'll go into the clink—who knows.

perhaps for good. In terrorists' trials. after all. it is only the collective
guilt that counts.

SPIBGEL: How long will it in fact be possible for you to keep up playing
hide-and-seek with your own people and playing cops and robbers?

Klein: Forever. I hope. I have to go on living like this. illegally. with
well-forged documents and with the help of ao-called ao-and-sos, comrades
supporting me. Only a tiny nudaer of people know who I really am.

SPIEGEL: Is this "forever" really indefinite? You need honey, you want to
move around, you are being a burden to others. Are you in a position to earn
money of your own?

Klein: The chances of being productive are not exactly rosy. and where I live
they are especially poor. Unemployment is asking itself felt there. I an

an autonotive mechanic by trade. and here and there I repair some cars or do
some other things. Besides I happen to be writing a book. and I get an
advance from tine to tine.

SPIEGEL: You already have a publisher then?

Klein: Yes. a German one. and a publisher abroad has expressed interest. But
it goes on and on; I am not a born writer.

SPIEGEL: When will the book come out?

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe Ml. use ONLY

Klein: Probably quite soon. I really was supposed to read galleys today.
SPIBGBL: Do you figure on confiscation?

Klein: That cannot be ruled out. But whoever confiscates the book cannot be
quite right in the head. for the books doesn’t say. "Rebuild the Red Army
Faction.“ or sonething like that. It says exactly the opposite. If with
this interview and with by book I get 10 people away fron the guerrillas. I
will have accoqlished more than the "A with its 100 Iillinn -rka.

SPIEGEL: You have to figure each and every day that your underground

anonymity will blow up. that sonebody will not keep quiet after all. that
you will be seized.

Klein: First. in the first few nonths after Vienna. I was terribly careful
and also very nervous. Hhenever I opened the door to ly roo- in any hotel.
I always figured that sonething night explode or that soneone blows ne away.
But as tine passes. all that quiets down. And if aonathing really does

happen. I don't have a chance anyway. In other words. if they get Buback or

Schleyer. they can get us too.
SPIBGEL: Are you arned?
Klein: A year ago I sent ly gun to DIR SPIBGEL. Since that tine I have been

unarned. what use is it really for ne to drag a gun around? The only thing
that might happen then is that none night perhaps sone cru-Iy burglar cones

in and I do away with him because I think he is one of the guerrillas. Anong
the so-and-sos I an with now. though. there was a huge debate because I said
I don‘t want any weapon. No one at all could understand that.

SPIBGBL: what kind of people are those. those so-and-sos?

Klein: They are leftists.

SPIBGBL: Do they the-selves have arns?

Klein: They do not have any. but they can easily get sone.

SPIEGEL: Do you have any contacts with terrorisn?

Klein: Then? No. no.

SPIEGBL: Can you sleep well at night?

Klein: He? "all. actually I can. At first not so well; everything was very
shaky than.

SPIBGEL: You are bound to be worried about the lynch court nurder of
Schnuecker by the "2 June hove-1t." aren‘t you?

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Klein: Of course I know that they want to kill me. And for that reason I
don't travel all over the place. I an not afraid of death, but I want to live.

SPIBGBL: What did you think of that lynch court Iurder at that tine?

Klein: when it had happened, I was very excited. I thought it was right for
then to have killed Schwecker. It looks like he really cooperated with the
Office for the Protection of the Constitution people. Then there can be only
one thing: blow him any. At the tine it was a question of making it clear
to everyone that whoever quits is done for.

SPIEGEL: In your letter to DER SPIEGEL you wrote last year that there was a

"teensy-weensy but inportant difference between treason and prevention." Do
you still see it that way?

Klein: Yes, treason is not my job. I an no fun.
SPIEGBL: And if prevention is not possible except through treason?

Klein: I did put an end to the natter of the two heads of the Jewish
coununities in Berlin and Frankfurt.

SPIEGEL: How far had the plans proceeded for the attacks against the two

Jewish community heads which you revealed in your letter to DER SPIBGEL as
far as actual inplenentation was concerned?

Klein: They had been pretty well completed. The two were to be shot and
killed. It was to be done by people of the Revolutionary Cells. Galinski
normally is under heavy guard when he sits in his office in the synagogue.
From his house to his office. however. he ’goes by foot or by bicycle. lie
was to be shot en route from hone to the synagogue. The Frankfurter.
virutally the same way. The R2 [Revolutionary Cells] first had to swipe sone
cars, however. Another action was to take place in March 1976. A JAL plane
was to be brought dam. with a smggled-in explosive case.

SPIEGBL: "ho planned the attack?

Klein: [It was] planned by Hadded. People free "2 June" and from the RAP
[Red Army Faction] were to execute it.

SPIEGEL: Who?

Klein: That I won't say.

SPIBGEL: You know who?

Klein: Of course I do.

SPIBCEL: Are they still running around free?

Klein: Sone are. and some are in prison. The thing with the plane did not

come of f, though. A hostess discovered the unaccompanied cosmetics case, got
it out, and than it exploded in the Bangkok air terlinal. After Mogadishu,

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as I read in the paper. three Lufthansa planes supposedly were to be brought
down by bombs. After all I had experienced. that couldn't be right. I said
at the tine: when the first one is brought down. I'll flush out the whole
shebang. There were huge discussions with the son-and-sos. But what have
people who are flying sonewhere or other to do with the dead of Sta-hail.
with the sadness of Mogadishu? “IO flies to Hallorca? Pensioners; certainly
not rich guys.

SPIBGBL: Buhack. Drenknsnn. Schleyer say be liquidated—that is your norsl
standard?—-but a kindergarten. which was involved once. or pensioners should
be spared? Has that your idea of guerrilla warfare at the tine?

Klein: "hat was done in 1972 in Frankfurt or in Heidelberg. against the Asia.
against the Vietnas war—those, as far as I was concerned. were the only truly
political actions. The rest was self-portrayal. As recently as 3 years ago

I said: With bombs one can change something. If they don't listen to us
this way. we'll fling a few bodis. Then they will have to react. Today I
don't see it that way any nore. Now the only thing that one is changing is
the climate in Geruny-“and that way one is raising a new generation of
terrorists.

sum: When did the first scruples cone? When did you become shaky?
Klein: After Vienna. after OPEC.

SPIBGBL: What did you feel when at the attack on the OPEC conference you
threatened people with area. making then mortally afraid?

Klein: I won't start putting on a show of penitence, but it sakes ne vosit
that three people were killed there, because they were killed for nothing.

As far as I an concerned. that is mlrder. There was no reason for it at all.
If I now stand here and say I regret it from the bottom of my heart. it

sounds awfully sticky. But when I think about seeing that Iraqi there...
SPIBGEL: You feel guilty?

Klein: Not really guilty. I feel a little cheated about the rest of my
life. Cheated. of course. also by myself. because I believed in it with a
blind rage. As a result of the OPEC operation--the first I took part in, ly
baptissal of fire-4 was disappointed no end. cheated in my political
expectations.

SPIEGBL: Previously there was nothing? How is it possible then. that you.
with no experience in the terrorist scene at the tine. were inediately
allowed to take part in such a delicate. spectacular utter?

Klein: I belonged to the Revolutionary Cells, and I was the only one who had
been with the Bundsswehr [PRC Arned Forces] and could handle the whole seas--
firearms and explosives. Actually the people were to have received military
training for the OPEC operation in an Arab country, but there was not tine
for it any sore.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

SPIBGEL: In what country?

Klein: I won't say.

SPIPBBL: In South Yemen?

Klein: In an Arab country. That's all I will say.
SPIBGEL: Why?

Klein: Because it would be contrary to my political ideas. and the Arab
intelligence services would then be after ne. I know too Inch. 1 even dined
once with one of their foreign ministers.

SPIEGBL: whose idea was it to attack the OPEC conference in Vienna. and with
whom did the plan originate?

Klein: The idea is that of an Arab president.
SPIECEL: In Libya? 0f Colonel Qadhdhafi?

Klein: No cement. All our infatuation about the conference. particularly
about the security measures. we received fro- that country. which itself is

an OPEC country and took part [in the conference]. For example. the con-

f erence was supposed to end officially on Saturday but then lasted a day
longer. We therefore postponed everything until Sunday. That cane in very
handy for us. because we weren't quite ready. There was an enormous problen.
you see: the arms arrived very, very late—not until Friday night.

SPIBCBL: Where are the people fro-7 Hhere did they meet?

Klein: 1 had come from Frankfurt. in early Deceuber. Together with Boese.
It was the first time that I crossed the border with forged documents. First
we were in a hotel near Saint Stephen's Cathedral. in a deadend street. The
next one who arrived was Sanchez.

SPIEGEL: Called "Carlos." When did he arrive?

Klein: The sane day. He stopped at the Hilton. lie loves Biltone. Then
came another four of the Revolutionary Cells. They. in pairs, rented an

apartment 70 kilometers from Vienna. They only took part in the preparations
though.

SPIEGEL: But knew beforehand what they were for?

Klein: Yes. The comndo—Khalid, Yusif. Joseph and Nada-~had arrived 2 days
before the operation.

SPIBcEL: Did everyone know what his part was?

Klein: Yes. "hen Carlos arrived, we went over it. Boese translated everything
for me. I didn't know any English yet at that time.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPIEGBL: Carlos was the boss?
Klein: Yes.

sum: Had he taken special precautions to re-in incognito as far as
possible?

Klein: No. he was quite relaxed. The fsnous beret. incidentally. he bought
in Vienna.

SPIEGEL: how did the talks proceed? Here there any reservations? Did
everyone agree? Has that the first tine you had seen Carlos?

Klein: No reservations were uttered. Carlos. I had net in Paris as early as
laid-1975. I was there together with Boese. I did not catch ranch about
Carlos. They spoke English. which I could not understand. At night Carlos
showed us cone weapons--the "Scorpion" and other special handguns. Bgyptian
secret handguns. The Revolutionary Cells had just received a "Scorpion" and
did not know how to handle it yet. It isa teensy-wesnsy Czech subaschinegun.
7.65 caliber. If you snap it shut. you can carry it in your pocket like a
pistol.

SPIBGBL: Has it only in Vienna that you learned about the planned attack
against the OPBC conference?

Klein: No. earliernin Frankfurt. I was told there that the OPEC ninisters
were to be kidnaped. At first I said that it could not be done. Petroleun
ainisters require an enornous anount of security; you can't get near them.
The: I learned that they had inside infornstion. At that point it started
looking a bit easier. And then I said: Okay. I'll take part.

SPIBGEL: "ho briefed you in Frankfurt?

Klein: Brigitte Kohl-son. I first set her in a wood. We always had a nice
little spot.

SPIBGBL: Why did the Palestinians. if they were going to stage the attack on
OPEC. not go it alone? th was it necessary for Ger-ans to be a part of it?

Klein: The Palestinian leader lisddad. who is said to have died recently (I
don't believe it)--he wants to get his aoney's worth. The Revolutionary
Cells get a pile every sooth. Anyway. that's the way it was then; whether
it still is so today. I don't know. Every nonth 3.000 dollars-«onetime
Dore-“and they also get arns fro. his.

SPIFBEL: Through couriers?

Klein: No they pay regular visits to the country. you know. And if it
happens that no one cones. they would just pile up. The dough is dished out.

SPIBGEL: Does all that cone fron Libya?

FOIOFFICIALIBEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Klein: No consent. The Palestinians have logistical problems in Europe.
Therefore Carlos (incidentally, he was the chief of finances for Europe)
for instance established a huge logistical headquarters in Paris, which then

was flushed out. But Carlos could do that only with the support of Germans.
of Europeans, familiar with the situation.

SPIBGEL: How are arms and equipment brought to Germany. to Europe?

Klein: In diplomatic bags. for example. When I returned from the country
to Vienna the first time. I. together with Boase, at the private residence
of the aabassador picked up a huge diplomtic bag full of arms which an
antassador had hauled through customs in Rome.

SPIEGEL: What in fact was supposed to be the political significance of the
OPEC operatim?

Klein: The contradictions in the Arab area were to be made worse. and
Palestinian resistance strengthened. The Palestinians were again being

liquidated in Lebanon. and a great many had already been finished in Jordan.
As far as l was concerned, it was an operation in support of the Palestinian
struggle of liberation.

SPIECEL: What did the plan look like?

Klein: We nab the oil ministers. Then we deliver each to his country, but
before he gets out a pro-Palestinian statement has to be read out. Iranian
011 Minister Amuzegar and Yanani of Saudi Arabia were to be killed.

SPIBGEL: Has there not money involved as well?

Klein: No money was involved. Some papers wrote that we wanted to haul away
millions and millions. There was no such demand. Nor did we get any money.

SPIECEL: 0r needed any?

Klein: The plan was to read out this letter in Vienna. The next thing was to
get out of Vienna. No one was to be able to figure out what in fact was
going on--except that a few med Arabs are running around. Not until we were
in the air was the really political part of the plan to begin.

SPIEGBL: But a couple of mrders were part of the plan from the start.

Klein: In the case of Yamini I had some misgivings; he didn't mean much to
me. But I had no problem whatsoever with Amsegar. As far as I am concerned.

he is still a swine par excellence; among other things the SAVAK (Iranian
intelligence aervice--Bd) is under him.

SPiFJGEL: How were the two ministers to be killed?

Klein: En route. Not in Vienna. There is power behind them, and perhaps
one would not have let us leave Vienna. It simply had been discussed briefly

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

that Carlos will do it hinself—get rid of the two. It is custonary for the
leader to do that.

SPIBGEL: How were the parts distributed in Vienna? Did Carlos tell you:
"You stand in the hall with a subnschinegun and secure the entrances and
exists"?

Klein: I didn't have a subeachinegun. I had a pistol and a revolver end a
couple of handgrenadea.

SPIEGEL: Hhat kind of a pistol was it?

Klein: It was the Czech revolver which I later sent to DER SPIBCEL. In
addition. a Beretta. 9 In. brandnew. and Russian or Chinese handgrenades.

SPIEGEL: How can one so heavily laden...

Klein: ...Yes. that was a problem. The Vienna police probably are still
trying to figure out what vehicle we used to get to OPEC headquarters. He
took the streetcar. right to the door.

SPIBCBL: The whole col-ando in one streetcar?

Klein: Yes. in one. It was a funny picture. he couldn't sit down with all
that junk. And the conductor. he was staring. for it was Sunday. early in

the morning. and the streetcar was cowletely enpty. Particularly Yusif.
he really looks like a true Arab. Straight in front of OPEC we got off.

SPIBGEL: "hat did you have to do?

Klein: Hy job was to get in together with Joseph. to secure things. to
search the people and send then to the conference hall.

SPIBGBL: what people?

Klein: The ones in the lobby. He knew there was a lobby with a telephone

switchboard. He had figured on a real shootout in the conference hall. even
in entering the building. with bodyguards and secret service people.

Amzegar. as you know. is a boson friend of the shah. At first we siaply
could not believe that he was running around there without any bodyguards.

But the inside infornation was 100 percent correct.

SPIBCEL: If necessary. the co-ando would have storned the OPEC headquarters?
Klein: Yes; but that was not to be expected.

SPIBCEL: And if it has been necessary after all? "as the conando in a
position to do so?

Klein: Oh yes, we had plenty. But then everything went off very nicely.
The policeean standing at the entrance even nicely said hello to us.

38
1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When we were inside. Carlos gave the signal to begin by opening his bag and
taking out a submachinegun. At that soenent we all rushed up. in the pre-
viously agreed order. I was next to last; behind me was Joseph with the
explosive. Carlos was first. then Khalid, then that Nada...

SPIEGEL: Gabriele Kroecher-Tiedenann. who has just been sentenced to 15
years’ imprisonment in Switzerland.

Klein: No comment. Carlos. Khalid and Nada were to go into the conference
hall immediately. And so they did. Joseph. too. with the explosive.
Naturally he was to start fixing things at once in a corner, and that's what
he did. Nada also had the job to block the elevators.

SPIEGEL: And then it happened.

Klein: Then there was shooting in there. I did not worry about it. for I
had things to do outside.

SPIEGEL: Why was there shooting in the conference hall?

Klein: I found out only later. A Libyan OPEC employee had attacked Carlos.
apparently grabbing his subnachinegun. There was a brief to and fro, with
the magazine dropping out of the gun. At that point Carlos pulled out his
pistol, which he had carried in his belt. and hit hin--in the shoulder. He
then put the magazine back in the subnachinegun and fired the rest from the
pistol into his head of chest.

SPlECEL: Another seven bullets?

Klein: Yes. to set an example, as he put it. It was definitely unnecessary.
One shot in the shoulder is enough. So now he was defenseless. One of the
oil ministers later said he thought it was the Israelis who were attacking
OPEC. Carlos keeps complaining about his big nose; he is often taken for a
Jew.

SPlECEL: You heard the shots outside. How did you react?

Klein: I looked around quickly. But I really was fairly safe in the narrow
hallway. The people were standing with their faces against the wall. It
was all very complicated because I didn't know any English. I kept shouting
nothing but "jacket out. jacket out.“ I did not want to check then for
weapons; that was too dangerous for ac.

SPlECEL: Did you wear a mask?

Klein: Yes, the only one to do so. I wanted to go back to Frankfurt. I
wore a ski cap leaving free only a strip for the eyes.

SPIEGEL: You also fired, though. why? At whoa?

Klein: The first tine at the telephone. The secretary kept phoning. I
wanted to prevent that. I kept shouting. ”Finish!" I didn't want to speak

39

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
YOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Ger-an. because they weren't supposed to how that I was Germ. But the
secretary kept calling unperturbed. and that's when I shot the phone to
pieces.

SPIBGE: Did it occur to you to shoot and kill the secretary as well?

Klein: No; that's baloney. I don't shoot a secretary just because she is
telephoning. But later there was a big discussion about why I didn't. I was
also criticized for not having killed the Iraqi security officer. I said: I
don't kill his; all he wanted was to get away. stepping backward. his hands
stretched high.

SPIEGKL: Had it been agreed before the operation when there would be any
shooting?

Klein: Of course. but there was a row there too. Carlos said: Anyone who
wants to get out is shot; otherwise the fuzz outside finds out what is going

on inside. But we ourselves sent people out to pass on our infornetion; so
the fuzz finds out anyway. hell. the Iraqi security officer then leaves. At
the tine I didn't yet know that he was fron security.

SPIBGEL: And if you had known?
Klein: I would have fired only if he had attacked ne.
SPIBGBL: Gabriele Kroecher-‘l‘iedenenn behaved the way Carlos had ordered.

Klein: In our co-and there was only one wonan. and she called herself Nada
and spoke a little Gemn. Anyway. I saw how soneone wants to get out back-
ward. Okay. I let hin go. looking a bit in his direction. At that nonent
Nada cones out of the conference hall and runs toward his. She puts her
pistol to his chest. Couplers idiocy. The character, and he really was
huge. took her, held her close and dragged her along. Then there was a bang.
and he was down. There he lay. His jacket was askew. and I saw he was
carrying a gun. I took it away fron his. lie was still alive then. he lay
there in an awful pool. I had cospletely run out of steam.

SPIECEL: For carrying on?
Klein: I was conpletely confused.
SPIBGBL: At the sight of the nortally wounded nan?

Klein: It lust have been a head wound. “tanner he nade a sound. sons
stuff cane out, out of his south.

SPIEGEL: There was nore firing. with yet another person dying.
Klein: I didn't see it at all. I only heard about it later. It must have

been a pretty old fellow. He went into the elevator and probably wanted to
scraa.

40

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPIEGEL: Nada fired at him?
Klein: Yea, into his back.
SPIBGEL: And then you too fired once more.

Klein: Yes. Suddenly four close-combat fighters were jumping around on the
stairway. They were part of an Austrian squad that had been established only
a couple of years before after Palestinians had seized a train with Israelis
in Marchegg. The police were wearing steel helmets and were armed. They
were making an enormous noise. So I went back, and that is when it started
right away. I was lucky. The hallway was fairly narrow. and I was standing
in a blind spot. In other words. they had to fire round the corner or
advance far enough for me to be able to fire back. Joseph was standing

opposite me, also in a blind spot. providing cover with his submachinegun.
SPIEGEL: And then you fired?

Klein: Yes.

SPIEGBL: How many times?

Klein: Five or six, until my gun was empty. But when I was about to reload.
I got it.

SPIEGEL: A shot in the abdomen.

Klein: A shot in the abdomen. a ricochet into my shoulder, a grazing shot

at my thigh. I dragged myself a few meters into the kitchen. Finished.
Yusif stopped with his gun somewhere near the corner. Later Carlos shouted
something. A handgrenade was thrown. and then there was quiet.

SPIECEL: Here any of the Austrian police wounded?

Klein: One got a shot in his behind. I saw that again briefly later when I
was lying in the hospital in Vienna.

SPlEGEL: How long were you in the kitchen?

Klein: God knows. At some time or other a petrominister came--the one from
Gabon, 1 think. He is a doctor, he looked at me, and they told me that I

absolutely had to go to a hospital; otherwise I was finished. The wound
burned a lot. No blood came out at all--perhaps a few drops. The whole

thing looked as if someone had quickly cut me with a knife.
SPIEGEL: Did you lose consciousness?
Klein: After being hit I didn't take in anything at all any more. I only

know that Carlos took my gun and the handgrenades and my briefcase, emptying

my pockets, so to speak. I then put my cigarettes back into my pocket. and
the lighter--that's a present from someone.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY

SPIBGEL: how long did the blackout last?

Klein: Quite long. I render being taken down the stairway in the OPEC
building. ny jacket pulled over ny head. About two people supporting ny
arns. I know nothing. Soneone naked ne if I was a terrorist or a hostage.

I only shouted. "Ky fight nene is 'Angie'" [in tnglishluafter the song by the
sane nane of the Rolling Stones which I liked. I did not notice at all being
taken to the hospital. In the hospital I once briefly regained consciousness
when I was fingerprinted and photographed.

SPIBGEL: Has any consideration given to your conrades leaving Vienna without
you? The transport night have endangered your life of course.

Klein: It was definite that as soon as the plane takes off I an on it. It
had also been agreed that I would be finished off if it had turned out that I
was paraplegic.

SPIBGBL: who would have seen to that?

Klein: Carlos.

SPIBCBL: The plane with the OPEC ninisters first flew to Algiers. There
you were put in a hospital again. how long were you in there?

Klein: Nine days.

SPIEu'dL: Not longer?

Klein: No. they kicked ne out when I could be noved. After 5 days they
renoved all the hoses and took out the stitches. And then injections in
huge anounta. One norning a security officer cane in to say that the plane
would be ready at noon.

SPIEGKL: To go where?

Klein: An Arab country.

sunset: Which?

Klein: I won't say.

SPIEGBL: Did you nest your buddies again?

Klein: Then and acne others. Many of the Revolutionary Cells were there as
well; they happened to be receiving nilitary training.

SPIBGBL: Carlos too?
Klein: as had been there a long tine.

SPIEGBL: Here there reproachee against you?

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

Klein: No. the spokesman was liaddad. Baddad is boss down there.
SPIEGEL: Did lladdad direct the Carlos force?

Klein: There is no Carlos force. Carlos is a meter of the Haddad force.
But he has now quit. -

SPIECBL: Carlos has quit? when did he do so?
Klein: Shortly before Bntebbe. about May 1976.
SPIEGBL: Why?

Klein: Hard to say. Anyway. it all has to do with the OPEC affair. In an
Arab country where the OPEC plane landed, Carlos let himself he bought. lie
must have got a vast anount of money. lie then stopped the operation. They
told him: Stop the operation without killing Amuzegar and Yamani and without
doing the whole show.

SPIEGBL: How much money did Carlos get?

Klein: God knows. It must have been quite a bundle. "hen Carlos quit the

Haddad force. he was terribly afraid that they would kill him. Therefore he
wrote a letter, making a few copies. Boese had to fly to a certain country

and take the letter to some governnent nan. A copy was also deposited with
the Revolutionary Cells in the federal Republic.

SPIEGEL: Hhat does the letter say?

Klein: That Carlos quits the force and leaves the country he was living in
at the tine.

SPIEGBL: Is the letter to be taken seriously?

Klein: Yes. certainly. Carlos also told Haddad about the letter so that
he doesn't get any. dumb ideas. And he said: "Okay. go on your way."

SPIBGEL: Does that mean that superterrorist Carlos has been out of action
since Spring 1976?

Klein: What is certain is that he quit at that time, and I don't think he

joined up again. A superterrorist? The papers and the fuzz made him that.
and he liked it. lie said: The more little stories they write about me.

the more dangerous they make me. the better it is for me, the less ready
will the regular fuzz be to catch me. For him it meant security somehow.

SPIBGBL: How does he dress? What language does he speak?
Klein: He always speaks English or Arabic; actually always extremely cool.

The first week and a half he ran around Vienna unarmed. Then the R2 brought
a gun and a few handgrenades. and he got those.

1:3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
913681.: Is he vain?

Klein: Yes, there are a MC! of little stories. lie is extra-sly anal.
lie washes and takes showers incessantly. He always kidded his. for he

powders hinself fron head to toe. And he has a trace of breasts. Once
“added suggested to his that he get hiaself a new face. But the only thing
that interested hin was whether doctors night be able to rs-ove his tits.

SPIBGBM llow does he behave in a group?

Klein: There is enornous solidarity. but he also always really behaves like

a boss. lie has got a leader nsntality. tins and again he tried to give orders
to the Revolutionary Cells despite the fact that they are an exclusively
Ger-an guerrilla group.

SPIBCEL: Does Carlos have a political concept?

Klein: A political concept? In any case. he have a lot about politics. lle
even how: about Germany. about the Social Duncan and Christian Democrats;
he knows the score there.

SPIBCEL: Did he tell about his stay in Moscow?

Klein: Yes; I now know the fine difference between beluga and ulossol
caviar.

SPIBGEL: what does he think of the Soviet Union, of Soviet co-unisn?

Klein: lie didn't talk about that in Iy presence. But he still hopes to be
able to return to Moscow. he says they only expelled hin fron the university.
not fron the country, because he took part in a forsipers' denonstration.
SPIBCEL: "bet would Carlos want in Moscow?

Klein: Live there, because he is wanted everywhere.

SPIBCEL: You said Baddad was the actual boss. not Carlos. Does Baddad play
the role on the international terrorist scene which is being attributed to
Carlos?

Klein: No question about it. Every talk he had with any of us. he nade
detailed ninutee of. filing then in his archives.

SPIEGBL: llow does naddad influence individual terrorist operations?

Klein: Re conceives then and then dispatches the people for planning then.
OPEC, Entebbr-his doings.

SPIBCBL: “hat is his political ail?

Klein: He told us how it was when the Israelis destroyed his village and
chased hia out. That day he swore he would fight Israel for the rest of his
M urn-lulu. us; ONLY

life. lie has contacts with alnost all guerrilla groups and always makes sure
that the individual groups do not establish liaison among each other. That
was possible only with his pernission. For a long tine lladdad was a under
of the Central Conittee of the Palestinian organisation pm [Popular front
for the Liberation of Palestine]. Then there was a huge row there. perhaps

in connection with OPEC. They kicked his out. denoting his to ordinary
nember of the organization.

SPIBGBL: But the PFLP lets him has his way nevertheless?

Klein: Yes. and it was purposely not nsde official. he goes with his little
suitcase to various Arab countries and has it filled. And he gets it filled
only as long as he represent the PM position.

SPIBGBL: And where does he get his funds?

Klein: Fron some Arab countries. Every now and then he also gets sone fron
Ger-anyuinvoluntarily. For exanple. at the hijacking of the Lufthansa plane
to Aden in South Yemen. There they pried loose S nillion dollars. That too
was a Haddad commando.

SPIECEL: Did Haddad also get noney fros Qadhdhafi?
Klein: th don't you ask Qsdhdhafi sons time? He has denied it constantly.

SPIECEL: 1n othe words. whenever there is mention of international terrorisn.
the name of Haddad is bound to come up?

Klein: They always say that the individual groups--the RAP. the 2 June Move-
meat or the Revolutionary Cells--are conpletely independent. That isn't so
at all. Nothing is launched without Baddad. The nost drantic operations of
all staged by the Revolutionary Cells was conducted in Haddad's behalf. That
was about 1970 to 1971. one of the first boat: attacks. the incineration of a
whole factory in Berlin. It nust have been connected somehow with the
Israelis.

Then there was another plan. also Haddadnwhich never becane know. It concerns
al-Tajir. personal wealth of 13 or 16 billion dollars. He wanted to buy up
half of London. he was to be kidnaped. He wanted to get I00 to 60 nillion
dollars for hin; that was in spring 1975. I was in London then.

SPIEGBL: What was supposed to execute the plan?

Klein: Carlos. Michel Houkarbel and I. Boese was to take part as well.
Brigitte Kuhlnann. someone from the R2 who can take good photos and yet

another Arab who has been shot and killed in Beirut in the meantime.

SPIBGEL: And how was this to he done?

Klein: It was a pure blackmail operation. But the necessary information
which we were supposed to get free a diplomat didn't come. Only after 3 weeks

(.5

ma OFFICIAL use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE (ELY

did we in fact see al-‘l'ajir for the first tine in front of his house on

Kensington Road. with two bodyguards. lie was constantly going sonswhere.
Carlos then had the affair called off.

If Haddsd didn't want it. it didn't take place. An mule: The "2 June"
wanted to kidnap the popeo-that was in April 1976. For a nonth the "Iloly
Father" was checked out in detail. How he is constantly hopped in his chair
to those funny audiences. With hin Ceraan prisoners were to be blackmailed
out of jail. Haddad told BA! and "2 June': If you want to kidnap the pope.
you have to nake it a suicide action. No Arab country can officially tolerate
your running around free after that.

SPIBCEL: You keep nentioning the Revolutionary Cells. Apparently they are
far were important on the terrorist scene than has been known so far—also
as far as the police are concerned.

Klein: I an very mch surpised at that. The Revolutionary Cells continue to
be powerfully underestinated. After all. they already rendered logistical
assistance at the Olynpics nsssacre. boese hiuelf told no that he had his
hand in providing quarters for the Palestinian "Black Septeder" comndo.

spmn: And Boese was the It: boss?

Klein: Yes. Boeae of course also took part at Bntebbe; he was killed.
SPIEGEL: H'hy did boese not take part in the OPEC operation?

Klein: One thing is clear: leaders of groups never take part in operations.

That was lladdad's decision. I was to take part at Entebbe. But there Iy
gunshot wound cane in very handy. I went to a hospital.

SPIBCEL: But you continued to be considered part of then; otherwise. you
surely would not have been wade privy to such mrderous plane.

Klein: Surely I don't get out and than get in again. and if I want to get
out. I certainly don't broadcast it.

SPIECBL: when did you first get the notion to quit terrorisn‘l

Klein: Shortly after Vienna. in l’ebruary 1976. The fact that they were
blasting as for having let the Iraqi furs go had been a kind of crucial
experience for as. I then wanted to send a letter to Ger-any which would
say so acre or less. 30 or 4'00 pages long. But to get out was not all that
simple. I knew too reach. and it won't work without assistance. As late as
after Bntebbe I had to lake new contacts for Carlos. I knew where "2 June"
was and knew the connections with the 32. So I had to travel around. And
besides. they intercepted. read and destroyed my letter.

SPIBCEL: Did you sense any distrust after the letter.

Klein: I had to be careful as the dickens. Before getting out. I even had
to contribute once in a while. I suggested kidnaping Princess Caroline of

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Monaco to get money. She was living in Paris at the time. But I already
realized than that in the next 2 or 3 weeks I can take the jump once and for
all. I even had already written the first 60 pages for my book. in the 82
hut in the Italian mountains-not. as is often presumed. in the Aoasta
Valley.

It is against the people of "2 June" that I must guard especially. As late
as a month before I quit, they spoke about all of their things in detail.
about the Loren: kidnaping for instance. Bow Lorenz got his comeuppance.

how they took care of his. Of course also sone completely different things.
about which I won't say anything.

SPIEGFL: Did you later have any contact with the prisoners who were released
as a result of the Lorenz kidnaping blackmail?

Klein: No, but I did with the people who left the clink in Berlino-Viett.
Rollnik and Planbeck. I trained then for a month in the military camp in
that Arab country. Sometimes they were a little awkward, but they learned to
handle arms. In that training it is like being in the army. There are three
basic positions. The first is taking aim through the notch and the front

sight. the second is to put the barrel on the back of your hand. when you
regularly burn your bones. and the third is to take some lunging step. but
that is no use at all. To shoot from the hip is forbidden.

SPIEGEL: What are the targets?

Klein: The landscape, rocks. Besides there is a huge firing range. with
dynamiting and firing of antitank rockets--also British antiaircraft rockets,
which hardly ever worked.

SFIEGEL: Has it not danger to handle such explosive stuff?

Klein: No. But I almost did kill Inge Viett one time. The big firing
range for heavy weapons is in the desert. We were staying there for a few
days. with a tent having been put up. I was getting the weapons ready in

the tent and put a nagazine into a worn British Sten subnschinegun and pulled
back the lever. when suddenly the gun went off and a whole series of bullets
marched out. right through the tent. The Viett girl came in pale as a ghost.
A bullet had missed her head by only a few centineters. Very embarrassing.

l was at least as pale as she was.

SPIEGEL: How did you finally manage to get out?

Klein: I could not get out until I had established contact with people
helping me. I had virtually no noney, and only stolen documents which weren't
much good. Besides I an a real Frankfurter through and through; I practically
know only people from Frankfurt.

SPIEGBL: when were you able to make your first contacts?

Klein: In February l977--with the people that are still helping me. with the
so-and-sos.

$7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Sl’il-LGBL: Has it ever occurred to you to surrender to the police?

Klein: No. I don't want to go to jail.
SPIBGEL: Aswme you knew that you would get 10 years in prison.

Klein: No. Once, I was 19 than. I spent 8 months in a cell by myself in a
prison for juveniles. Because of auto theft. I was not as well off then as
many a political prisoner these days. Some people will raise a hullsbaloo
when they read this. but it is true. Even 10 years would be too auch for me.
Even if they let me go again after 3 years-what then? Then I still have my
"friends" of the past on ny neck. more so than ever.

SPIBGEL: But you would be rid of an enenyuthe police.

Klein: Oh. they aren't ny enemy any more. Por me they are no more than a
problem now. If I went and spilled everything. including what I am not saying
here or in my book, there might be an meaty. But I won't do that. That's

not my job. I did not invent the guerrillas. I was part of them only a short
tine. And ny friends who are helping me now-I would then lose them as well.
Nor would any of them understand. though none of these ao-and-sos today. for
exaqale, would protect someone who continues to engage in terrorism. Nor
could I reconcile it with my own conscience. The road to Vienna was a shitty
way. I realize that now.

SPIEGEL: Hr Klein, we hope for your sake that you will do the right thing.
Description of Terrorists

Hadmrg DER SPIBGEL in German 7 Aug 78 p 73

[Profile of international terrorists: "Escaped. Arrested. Shot"]

[Text] "Carlos": 28, cover name of terrorist leader Ilich Ramirez Sanchez
froa Venezuela. wanted worldwide; accused of nunerous terrorist attacks in
Europe and, among other things. leader at the attack on the Vienna OPEC
conference in Deceaber 1975.

Hilfried Boese: One of the first international activists of the Rest Gemn
"Revolutionary Cells." Recruited by "Carlos" first as courier and procurer
of arms. he was killed by the Israelis in Entebbe in 1976. The Palestinian
organization PFLP honors him as one of its "nrtyrs."

Brigitte Kuhlmann: Arah cover name “Bali-eh." Student of education from
Hanover. Trained. together with Boese. especially for hijacking operations
in a PPLP training camp. Killed at Entebbe.

Michel Houkarbel: Art student in Paris fron Lebanon. A menber of the PPLP

and "Carlos'" closest collaborator, he revealed the terrorist headquarters
in Paris to French counter-intelligence. DST. Shot and killed by "Carlos."

1'08

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gabriele Kroecher-‘l‘iedenann: 27. was released fron prison as a result of the
Lorenz kidnaping blackmail after having been arrested in 1975 on suspicion
of having attempted to kill members of the police. Arrested in Switzerland
in December 1977 after the kidnaping of Vienna industrialist Palmers. Month
before last [June 1978] sentenced to 15 years' imprisonnent for having tried
to kill two Swiss customs officers.

Inge Viett: 34, kindergarten teacher by profession from Berlin and militant

head of the "2 June Hovenent." In 1976, while in detention pending trial.
escaped for the second time fron the Berlin women's Penitentiary.

Gabriele Rollnik: 28. former social science student. member of "2 June."
Installed the "people's prison" in which the kidnaped Berlin CDU Chairman
Lorenz was held captive. Also accused of having participated in the Drank-
nann and Palmers cases. Escaped from prison in 1976. In l978—together with
Till Meyer. freed by her--arrested in Bulgaria and extradited to the federal
Republic.

Juliane Plaabeck: 26. joined "2 June Movement" via the prisoners' Caritas
"Red Aid" in 1974. Like Viett. wanted for having participated in the Drank-
mann and Lorenz cases. One of four women who escaped fron prison in Berlin
in 1976.

Klein About His Life
Hamburg DER SPIEGEL in German 7 Aug 78 pp 80-81
[Biographical sketch by former terrorist Klein: "‘1 Am a Real Frankfurterm]

[Text] How did I come to take the leftist trip? Hy progenitor thrashed me
there. He was with the fuzz at one time--the Kripo [crininel police]. I
can't get the word "father" over my lips. You might say that my contact with
him was primarily skindeep. lie is a wardrobe but one with nothing in it.

I was weakly. developed extremely late. When I was born. I almost didn't
make it. That probably has to do with my mother. She was Jewish and had been
in the Ravensbrueck concentration canp.

But not even that I learned from my old man. It was revealed to me by a

sn-called educator in the reform school in front of the assembled crew. I was
17 then. I left the ranks crying.

I don't know anything about my mother to this day. not even when she was

born. Four pictures of her I always carry with me. I took then out of my
old man's photo album when I took the final jump from hone.

The only nice time of my youth I spent with my foster parents. But when l
was about 9. when my old man married again, I had to go back to him. Once. at
15. the ice gave way under me in the Ostpark in Frankfurt. and someone got as
out at the risk of his life and took no home. Instead of being glad that I
was still alive. he thrashed me half dead.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE am

A thrashing and into bed on the slightest occasion. with a rolling pin. with
ropes and with cooking spoons.

I put up with it all. what could I do? I simly was afraid of the nan.
stood in the corner and didn't do anything any were. Every few days.
especially Sundays. I was locked in. Door shut. locked. and the old nan
slept in the next roo- with the key.

Once when I was 11 I was locked in Iy roon again. with his ”Bubi" [little
fellow]. a parakeet next to we in its cage. I was sorry for it in its mll
cage, and so I just let it fly away. Just like that-«not because I wanted to
let ny old nan have it. When he saw that the bird was gone. it really
started. lie thrashed we so hard I though I would kick the bucket. I crapped
into ny pants and all.

I had been at the youth welfare office before at tines. showing then what I

looked like. But when will such a youth office actually do sonething? That
night I went to see a representative of the youth office. I trusted her.

Two days later I got into the reforn school.

But I hadn't been there nore than an hour when I was beaten sonething awful.
The educator was a forner furniture maker.

One year; then I went away from there. Before that. they had put we into
psychiatrics. in Landau, probably because of develop-ent deficiencies. There
they creamed me full of psychopharnsceuticala and hornones. At age 17. I
still had no hair under my arse or pubic hair. Then it slowly started to
sprout. and I also grew some sore.

when I quit the reforn school, where could I go? So I went back to ay old
son. Then the locking out started. If I didn't cone house by 10. I couldn't

get in. I would then sleep in the cellar.

shortly before I got into the Bundeswehr. I had my very first girlfriend.

She was almost 20. she gave ne a little necklace. which my old run then tore
off use one day. He thought it was effeninate. I let him have it then. for
the first tine. quite a powerful blow. Pros that nonent on he didn't try to
come close to es any more.

The leftist groups. I net when the student revolt started. I was 20 then.
shortly before I went into the Bundeswehr. My old nan had always painted the
nicest picture of the fuzz. The police. he said. were there to protect the
wonen. our nothers. our girlfriends. At that ties the "riots" started, and
being a curious person I wanted to see the. close up.

I saw how the fun. like devils, went on a reapege in the blockade of the
printing plant of the Frankfurt BILD. I saw three of then hit an 18-year-old
woman. Two ideas I had of the world were destroyed all at onceo-one. that
woeen are poor and weakly. and. two. that those who were supposed to protect
the weak. three of then. are beating up this poor creature.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F09. OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Something clicked in me at that moment. and I swiped the fuzz one. and got
one myself. At that moment my superstition was gone.

So I got to talk with such groups. The first 3 months it was all Greek to

no. Then I slowly dared go to a teach-in. I saw. for instance. how they
smoked Gitanes there, and since that time I have only smoked black cigarettes.
I really had a fantastic respect for the students. As far as my progenitor
was concerned. the students were nothing but rowdias and radicalniks.

First I thought students later all become fancy gentlemen, and that's why

they are raising hell now. But when I saw them getting their heads bashed in.
I thought they must have a reason.

I first wanted to refuse military service. In the Bundeswehr I was often in
the clink. Undermining of the armed forces. For instance. I stuck up posters
and distributed leaflets against militarism.

A long way to terrorism. We read a little bit of Mao, and everyone interpreted
Mao in his own way. He understood none of it. In the meantime. however. I

had a hell of a circle of acquaintances on the leftist scene-for instance
the base plants group, the later "Revolutionary Struggle."

The first bomb had not yet been thrown in Frankfurt when I started sympathizing
with the guerrillas. I thought it was necessary to sing a different tune here
for once. I adopted the entire ideology as well. The slogan of Ulrike

Heinhof that fuzz "can be fired at" I never accepted. Nor did I equate my
thrashing progenitor with all police. That would be too cheap.

Until I got my first gun--that too was a development process. At some time
or other I said. I've had enough. because nothing is going on any more. when
the "Red Aid” was founded. I immediately was part of it. In mid-1975.
however. I quit again saying: You're only conducting a pseudoleftist policy.
send your packages to the clink. and that's all.

The first pistol I put in my pocket the night when I heard that Bolger Heine
kicked the bucket in the clink. Something snapped inside me. Comrades who
had known me a long time then had a hard time stopping me from doing something
crazy. The pistol I had got from my depot. Every Rz member has his depot and
his false ID.

Today I look at things differently. There is in fact somebody who in the
clink got orders to kick the bucket—-not Holger Heins but someone else. He
fortunately survived. This person got into the clink. and she was told: You
have to kick the bucket. we need someone dead. Since that time I have in fact
found it difficult to say that Heine is only a poor victim of the system.

The gun didn't come out again until I went to Vienna. apart from target

practice. The way to OPEC was a long. continuing matter. There was my work
in the legal left. in the Vietnam movement. There they really staged geno-
cide. Olof Palme. for instance. had courage. but Hilly Brandt surrounded
himself with a halo and, for reasons of power. kept silent. '

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Then there use still the urban district work in Frankfurt, the squatting.
He hit like tinkers there. ‘l'hey kick the little grannies out of the houses
and bring then into these ne-oth towns. these suicide centers.

that is there left for me to do in ly life? Difficult to define. 'l'o stsrt
with, I consider the meaning of I31 lifetobs to survive. The: is quite a
difficult job in itself.

I would lite to join s leftist political group sgsin. work in it and then
conduct a realistic policy. Sane kind of project, an alternative novenent
for a better life. without all that environ-sot junk.

If I were in Pranfurt today, I vould vent to take part in the project for on

alternative newspaper. 0f children's shops. I have been busy with children
in the neantine. They like me. But I do live a very restricted life. I

have to have s lot of consideration for the people I live with so that they
don't get into trouble on my account.

8790
cso: 6100/0006

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FIHIIIFFICJAI.IIIE(MNLY

PBDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

TERRORIST PRISONALITY: ROLE OF IBHALE IN 132301018)!
Heidelberg KRIHINALISTIK in German 1976 pp 289-296, 357-363

[Report by Dr Holf Hiddendorff, Freiburg]

[Text] Summary [Part 1]: Following a definition of its concept and an
overview of the history and the present status of terrorism, its various
forns are dealt with: individual terrorisn, group acts, ordered acts and
approved murders, bombings,” arson, kidnsping, skyjscking and bank robbery.
Criminological evaluation is first made, and later summarized, of cases in
Russia, Ireland, the United States, the PBS and other countries. After
dealing with the problem of distances, there follow finally outlines and
recommendations for combatting terrorism (1. An eye for an eye? 2. Trends
toward fir-ness; 3. Avoid the creation of sanctuaries!) and prevention

(1. Police work must be upgraded!) 2. Preventive meesures.). Due to the
length of the article, it is being published in two successive issues.

Editor

1. Definition--History--Causes

Today there is much talk about terrorism, but the question is rarely asked
about the exact significance of terrorisn. A UN cos-ittee has attempted for
several years to come up with a definition of this concept, with no success.

Terror primarily means fright, and terrorisl is, according to volume 18 of
the Brockhaus encyclopedia, a violent form of the political power struggle.
It is differentiated as to state terrorism, military terrorism and group
terrorisn by revolutionary and extremist groups. These groups, which are
frequently encountered in our century, commit specific attempts at assassi-
nation snd nonspecific anonymous acts of terrorism, for the purpose of
"challenging the power of the state to counter-terror to shake confidence
in the reigning order and to discourage the majority" .

In the following report I am using the historical-biographical ’ethod, as I
have described it in ny "Contributions to Historic Criminology" . The

emphasis of evaluating facts is placed on the psychology of the crininal,
i.e., understanding. Understanding is the expert evaluation by the historian

53

FOIIOFFKJA1.USI(NNLY
FOI1DFFHJAI.UBE(IVLY

and comprehension by the psychologist. The criminologist Merger has defined
psychological understanding as "the categorization of a given intellectual
happening into a scientifically effective context of the senses." Merger
further differentiates this understanding into phenonenological, motivational,
characterological and sociological understanding3. Modern historians too

are more interested in personality rather than social conditions, since

"world history is not principally being deterlined by economic statistics,

as the present vogue dictates, but rather by human passions. Since the latter
remain constant, every era and also every reader is reflected in the images

of the actors... Anyone wishing to explain historic happenings nust describe
the human beings which make them happen"“. At the same time we must rennin
cognizant of the fact that, as Theodor Mom-sen put it, "history itself

reaches to the borders of teh incomprehensible and includes the unexplored
depths of the human psyche and the fate of humanity"5--and this applies to

the historian just as much as to the criminologist. Anyone quarreling with
the scientific validity of psychology and psychoanalysis can take solace

from the words of Andre Green: "It could be that it isn't very scientific.
But in this area, man's understanding of structure and history--is there
anything that is more scientific‘tG".

The so-called nihilism of the past century in Russia, which to begin with

was not necessarily negative, finally had nc other goal than the

destruction of the state}. We have a docuntnt from the year 1869 which was
called the "revolutionary's catechism." It‘s first article started as follows:
"The revolutionary is a man consecrated to death. he has neither personal
interests nor business, neither personal feelings nor ties; no property of

his own; not even a name. His entire being is dominated by one exclusive
interest, a thought, a passion: revolution. He must practice withstanding
torture and must be ready to die at any time. Laws, conventions and civilized
society's moral code have no meaning for him. he only lives in this putrefied
order so as to be able to more quickly and sore surely destroy it. To him,
everything is moral which contributes to the victory of the revolution:
everything that gets in his way is immoral and criminal.”

This catechism divides "this entire putrified society" into categories,
depending upon whether such a category should, upon the victory of the
revolution, be eliminated immediately or some time later. "Aristocratic,
rich or stupid creatures" are initially to be bled white by blackmail and
other means. Women are particularly esteemed by the revolutionaries: they
are their "most precious treasure." The catechism says nothing about the
goals of the revolution; it only concerns itself with total, comprehensive
and mindless destruction. It recommends an alliance with highwaymen, which
it calls the only true revolutionaries in Russiaa.

Even outside the catechism it is always emphasized that criminals, the so-
called crininal stratum of society, are the natural allies of revolutionaries.
1n the early phases plans were already being made to finance the organization
with such means as robbing postal transports or poisoning one's parents so

as to come into an inheritance. Subsequent paragraphs provide for "disorgan-
ization" activities, the liberation of prisoners and the liquidation of spies
within the ranks. "Expropriation” stood for obtaining money through robbery,
especially bank robbery.

$6
lﬂllllﬂﬂtlAl.lﬂiB(lVLY
FOI‘OFFRJAI.USEtoNLY

The revolutionaries realized that they would not attain their goals within
the foreseeable future; nevertheless, they wanted to try to shake up the
population by constant act of terrorism. This is perhaps the place to make

a distinction between terrorism as a condition of sustained exercise of
violence for the purpose of creating fear, and revolution as a one-time

event. Transitions are possible between the two forms of exercising violence;

we can recognize them in the French Revolution, which also knew the reign of
terror on the part of the state9.

In the course of history some material has been accumulated on the activity
and personality of revolutionaries, especially those of revolutionary women.
Differences among those revolutionary women are considerable. 0n the one

hand we might consider the activities of the Princess Cristina di Belgiojoso
(1808-1871), who played a preeminent role in the Italian liberation movementlo;
on the other hand, we might remember experiences with revolutionary women
after World War I, when Hans von Bentig described as an exceptionally good
subject for criminological study. According to him, it can be explained that
during politically turbulent times mentally ill women were active in
revolutionary movements. Their role was restricted to the conduct or the
initiation of a collective act of desperation or of political assassination.

To von Hentig, female revolutionaries appear particularly significant whose
activities are based on grudges which can be either remediable or irremediable.
"In one case the unhappy woman's grudge can be remedied, one part at a time,
through improvements in her fate; in others there is no possibility of rising
above the depressing depth of their inferiority; at best a detoxification
through religious substitutes or a sublimation in the direction of artistic
achievements or humanitarian efforts. Women with irremediable grudges are
permanent revolutionaries; whether they pacify their fantasies with ideas

of reform or operate actively in the political life," depends on external
circumstances. "In peaceful times these women's graduges hide behind
occupations hwich permit the causing of pain or the sight of pain from social
motivation. They become teachers, physicians, nurses; they love and train
animals; they engage in caring for young people; they fight prostitution;

they fight for womens' rights--they are forever fighting." Says von Renting

in conclusion: "If the revolutionary woman plays a fermenting role in cultural
evolution, if some consciousness of deficiency drives many an intellectually
outstanding woman to make great achievements, woman is in revolutionary times
an extraordinary threat for several reasons. Experience has shown that in
revolutions women as a rule show greater resolve than do men"11.

In the context we might mention the terrorist activities of the English
suffragettes; in their battle for womens' rights they initially made a
difference between violence against inanimate objects and violence against
persons. 0n 1 March 1912 a group of some 200 women broke almost all show
windows with rocks of hammers in the elegant shoppijg district around London's
Piccadilly Circus. "hen this action did not provide the desired results, they
switched to arson. A renowned physician wrote a letter to the TIMES in which
he expressed his opinion that one half of English women were crazy as a

result of being in the change of life. Belligerency, he thought, was a
symptom of mental illness. '

55
memmeoimr
IIIICIHNCIAI.USE¢N‘LY

In the spring of 1913 another threshold was crossed: several rural railroad
stations were set sfire and some bombs were set to explode. Arrested
suffragettes went on hunger strike in jail. Parliament gave the government

the so-called "cat-and-mouse law," which empowered the minister of the interior
to set free any prisoners who became debilitated in prison and to have them
rearrested as soon as they had regained their health. One of the suffragette
leaders, Hrs Pankhurst, went on hunger strike no less than 12 times.

Suffragette activities claimed their first victim in June 1913, when during
the Epsom horserace a woman threw herself in front of an approaching group

of horses and died of her injuries 6 days later. In early 191‘ the suffra-
gettes' actions increased in violence; among other things, they cut up
paintings in the National Gallery. The outbreak of world war I then deflected
their aggressiveness against other tergetslz.

Among the reminiscences of male revolutionaries and anarchists there are the
books by Rudolf Rocker, "The Memoirs of a German Anarchist"13 and more
recently, Hilovan Djilas' "The Young Revolutionary--Hemoirs l929-l9bl"14.

Today terrorism is a worldwide phenomenon. It would take too much room to
list individual occurrences. But it appears appropriate to discuss the

justifications given by terrorists in many countries for their acts of
violence.

Groups and individuals find their justification in the believed or pretended
necessity to defend themselves against "violence from above." Thus they
construct a type of emergency defense or emergency help against the state
and its institutions. Criminologiats and so-called peace researchers have
given considerable aid to this. Thus, at the Twenty-third International
Symposium of Criminology in 1976 in Maracaibo, Venezuela, much less was said
about modern crimes of violence, like the taking of hostages and skyjacking,
than extensive discussions about the so-called "institutionalized violence"
of the state against the freedom of the individual. For this purpose the
concept of violence was stretched to such an extent that the original legal
and criminologicsl significance of the word was completely lost.

A few definitions are given here to illustrate this ideological trend. It is
for instance considered murder if not everybody gives aid to starving children
in Ethiopia. In our latitudes, it is considered violence if someone is being
addressed and forced to listen. It is violence if one's time is being wasted
by authorities. Economic competition is a source of violence. Stock market
speculations are violence. New forms of credit management are considered
violence against the economic situation of the fsimly. Continuing occupational
education constitutes violence against workers who are forced to study for the
sake of profits for the enterprise. Latin Americans primarily have emphasized
generally that violence against the state is a means of proving that an
individual is alive and to preserve his human dignity. Violence is the only
language that unites mankind, and the following words by Eva Peron were cited:
"Violence in the hands of the people is not violence, but justice."

56
FOIIIIHWCJAI.USI€0NLN
FOI OFFICIAL L8! ONLY

Norwegian peace researcher Galtung defines violence by stating that if
effectively serves to keep human beings from reaching thier potential. A
consumers' union constitutes violence, he says, because the system is
oriented toward reward and is based on promises of euphoric wellbeing,
and ‘hercfore restricts man's scope of activityls.

Cnltung also speaks about structural violence in place of institutionalized
violence, which he describes also as social injustice. According to him,
it is structural violence if 1 million husbands keep 1 million wives in
ignorance. But Galtung and other peace researchers like him consider the
destruction of property only a kind of training, "a blow against the
bourgeois within us, a liberation from shackles present heretofore, an act
of communication."

Though this kind of thinking appears absurd to reasonable people, it plays
a big part in many countries in the political discussions of leftwing
movements of all hues; this type of justification permits any illegal act
of violence to be converted into a legal one and to make it justifiable.

In a publication entitled "Violence and the Use of Violence in Society"
(Guetersloh, 1973) the Chamber for Public Responsibility of the Evangelical
Church in Germany says this: "Because of its basic dangers, the use of
violence presupposes that without it there is no chance of a change in inhuman
living conditions. It can therefore be seriously taken into consideration
only if all other means for improving conditions have failed or else hold no
promise whatever. Even then some other conditions must be fulfilled: a
viable concept of a new. operable order must be available which could replace
the old, embattled order. For its part, the desired order must be oriented _
toward human rights and must provide living space to those who have hereto-
fore been oppressed. The use of violence must be a promising means to the
firmly defined goal of doing away with present violent oppression within a
foreseeable span of time."

In the following section, it will be understood that cimres of violence in
the traditional sense mean violations against existing laws. Criminology
is a legalistic science: the subject of its investigation can therefore be
only that which the state designates as a crimels.

II. The Forms of Terrorism
1. Individual Acts of Terrorism

The term "disorganization" quoted above was understood by the Russian
nihilists to mean also the "systematic annihilation of the most dangerous
or the most prominent members of the government and other persons of the
government and other persons who are the main pillars of the political and
social order which we hate."

This terrorism wastlot conducted systematically, but manifested itself in
spontaneous individual actions, e.g., for revenge. Petersburg Chief of
Police General Trepov visited the detention prison on 25 July 1877. Since

he was annoyed about the demeanor of one particular detainee, he ordered that

57

IIIR¢INHC1AI.lEﬂi(ﬂVLY
“WISEONLY

the man be flogged. Hhen news of this became public outside the prison, the
revolutionaries decided to take their revenge on General ‘l‘repov. But since
apparently there was disagreement about the time and place of the assassination
attempt, Vera Sassulitch decided to take the matter into her own hands. She

had already spent 2 years in prison for revolutionary activity, had been
deported and had later learned the profession of eidwife in Kharkov, where
she was living under police observation. Since the spring of 1877 she had
been working in Petersburg as a typesetter in the print shop of the "Land
and Freedom" organization. On 29 January 1878 she asked for an appointment
with the chief of police and was inediately adnitted, since she was a member
of a prominent family and General Trepov knew her father well. She fired a
shot at the general which wounded him seriously, but not fatally. She
offered no resistance to her arrest.

For reasons which are now obscure, the prosecution did not consider this
assassination attempt to be a political act and the trial was conducted
publicly by a magistrate. Hhen the jury found the accused innocent this
acquittal evoked enthusiastic approval among a wide segment of the public.
Among Best European circles of sympathizers Vera Saseulitch was called the
new Judith or the Moscow Charlotte Corday. She was able to flee abroad
before she could be arrested again17.

Anoterh individual who attempted the assassination of Czar Alexander 11
singlehandedly was one Khaltuin, an artisan cabinet-alter with roots in the
peasantry. As a young man he wnated to aigrate to America, but missed the
boat. he joined a revolutionary organization and for him the thought that
the czar had to be killed by a man of the people became an idee fixe.

He conceived a plan of blaring up the winter palace. Since he was a skilled
worker, he obtained a job in the winter palace where he did maintenance work.
He had quarters in the basement of the building together with three other
carpenters; above his quarters was a security office and above that the

so-called yellow room, where as a rule the czar took his Deals with his
fanily.

Little by little, Khalturin smuggled small quantities of dynamite, disguised
as sugar, into the winter palace. Whenever the czar was in residence in the
Crimea. this was easy to do, since while the front gates were heavily guarded,
the rear entrance was open to the employees and to anyone they brought with
them. when toward the end of Rovember 1879 two maps of the winter palace
were found in the hands of an arrested terrorist on which the dining room
was marked with a red cross, security measures were tightened and a gendarme
moved in with the carpenters. But Khalturin was not to be deterred from his
preparations; he could move about freely within the palace. One day he
faund himself alone with the czar in the latter's study; he had a banner in
his hand and could have easily killed the cast from behind. But his courage
left him. He took a small object from the czar's desk and carefully put it
away as a souvenir.

0n 5 February 1880 Khalturin lit the fuse which was to explode about 100 lbs
of dynamite stored in a crate in a corner of his room. he then left the
palace. The explosion shook the huge building; ll people were killed and

56 wounded. But at the moment of the explosion the czar was not in the yellow

58

MWWONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

room; but even had he been there, nothing would have happened to him.
(Khalturin's attempt was similar to that of Blser against Hitler on 8
November 1939 at the Buergerbraeukeller in thich.)

About 2 years later an assassination attempt took place against General
Stelnikov in Odessa, who was hated by the revolutionaries as being a
particularly brutal prosecutor of the military court. Khalturin was waiting
nearby in a carriage to take the assassin to safety. However all participants
were arrested on the spot and were hanged lo days later under fictitious nales.
Khalturin's identity did not becme known until later; he had once again

shied away from an act of violence at close range“.

2. Assassination Attempts in Partnership

The most significant and eventually most successful assassinations by
Russian nihilists were committed by groups in which two onen participated
in important functions.

The first was Vera Figner. In justifying her terrorist activities she once
said: "If that part of society which is capable of enthusiasa cannot find

a sphere of activity in which it cannot activate its strength and its
enthusiasm for the benefit of the people, the situation becomes impossible

to bear and all the rage if directed at the bearer, owner and representative
of that power of the state which is isolated from the public: the monarch"19.

Vera Pigner was born in the Volga area on 210 June 1852. Her grandfather on
her mother's side had been a district judge. She spent her childhood on her
parents' estate; between the ages of 11 and 17 she attended an institute for
aristocratic girls in Kazan, from which she graduated at the top of her class.
In 1870 she married a man who later became an official in the ministry of
just ice. In 1872 she went to Zurich where she studied medicine. During

that period she became a revolutionary and socialist and separated from her
conservative-bourgeois husband. 0n returning to her country she worked as

a rural physician and joined the revolutionaries. Having later been
denounced by two former comrades, she received a death sentence which was
cos-muted to a 20-year prison sentence which she served in the cells of Key
Castle. She was one of the few active revolutionaries to survive the czsrist
enquire; thanks to her comprehensive meloirs we have gained considerable insight
into the planning of assassination sttemptes on Czar Alexander It“.

The other leading personality among fenale revolutionaries was Sofia
Perovskaya. She was a general's daughter, had also spent her youth on an
estate and later broke off all connections with Petersburg society to devote
herself exclusively to the revolutionary movement. The graceful and pretty
woman exerted great magnetism upon her environment. According to some of
her comrades, she was hard as steel and was not bothered by thoughts of
death and the gallows.

On 25 August 1879 the executive cot-ittee of the revolutionary organization
condemned the czar to death, and a series of assassination attenpts followed
in short order. The main effort was directed to blowing up the car's royal

59
summon“
MWLIBEONLV

train on the way back fron the Crinea to Petersburg. With trenendous
difficulty. organization nembers were housed in buildings near the tracks;
sone even found enploylent as train guards. In sole cases the sttenpts
consisted of digging a tunnel under the tracks and to put a landline in it.
One of these atteapts was unsuccessful because the route of the royal train
had been changed at the last minute. In a second attempt the electrodes

were wired wrong and no explosion occurred”. 0n the third attenpt the wrong
train was blown up, when the car, unlike his usual custon. rode on the first
train and not the second.

Hithin a few years there were six attenpts at the car's life; 21 would-be
assassins were condoned to death and hanged. As a result, the revolutionaries
doubled their efforts. A truly major blow was planned. One group led by

the Countess Perovskaya rented a shop in Sadovaya Street through which the
czar frequently rode on his way to the riding school. iron the basuaent of
that house a tunnel was dug to the center of the street and a nine isplanted.
The police found out about these preparations inasnrch as the renters of the
store apparently did not fit the neighbors' idea of small business people.
Under the pretext of a health inspection the police searched the praises.
but in such a casual way that the searchers found neither the hole leading
to theztunnel nor the barely hidden earth which had been removed from the
tunnel 2.

In order to finally use: with some success. Sofia Perovskaya had planned
four additional attenpta upon the car's life with bonbs and pistols in case
he should change his route again. In the early afternoon of 12 Harch 1881
the czar, acconpanied by only a few bodyguards, rode along the Catherine
Canal rather than through Sadovaya Street. The assassins were standing along
the route. their bonbs wrapped in anall parcels. None of then attracted

the attention of the police or the security guards. As the car's sled
passed one of the assassins, he threw his bomb; two cossacks were hurt. but
the czar was unharmed. Even though the driver was under orders in case of
an attack to drive home as quickly as possible, the car ordered him to

stop because he wanted to look after the wounded coseacks. As he descended
from the sled another of the assassins threw a bonb at his feet. The czar
died of his injuries a few hours later.

After the assassination, the police and the justice depart-eat worked
quickly and efficiently. Three weeks later five conspirators were condemed
to death and executed, Sofia Perovshaya anong then. In her final words at
the trial, she made this declaration: "My conscience told me what I had

to do, and I did it. I would do it again, and I await your verdict with
serenity."23

3. Ordered Assassinstions and Approved Murders

This chapter will deal with a few case of terrorisn by the state. Uncovering
such deeds is often difficult because government agencies are in the habit of
denying their participation and because there is many a gradation between a
clear order and a silent, halfhearted approval. Frequently it is therefore
possible only to deternine the final actual perpetrator, though this is often
quite unsatisfactory.

summon“
FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§E(IVLY

An attempt at assassinating Stalin was one of the examples of Third Reich state
terrorism. After the 20 July 19A4 uprising, the countries at war with Germany
were highly encouraged. The assassination of Stalin would possibly have
served to reverse this development. A Russian P0" who had been trained as

a killer and agent for 2 years, was delivered by airplane behind the Russian
lines along with his wife, a Russian woman whom he had met and married while

he was a prisoner of war. He was equipped with special weapons, was to occupy
an apartment in Moscow and to look for an opportunity of killing Stalin on

the way from the Kremlin to the headquarters of the Soviet general staff.

The enterprise had however become known d the world-be assassins were
arrested before they even reached Mosc . .

This category also covers what was probably the only spectacular action by
the so-called werewolf in the final phase of “Eli. A few SS-men and a female
Hitler Youth leader were dropped by parachute behind the America lines. The
woman scouted out the address of the mayor of Aachen who had been appointed
by the United States forces, and he was shot and killed in his apartment on
25 March 1945. In 1969, an Aachen court found two of the participating men
guilty and acquitted the womanzs.

The other side organized similar actions in Hull with greater success. The
regional comissar for White Russia. Gauleiter Kobe, had become a danger to
the Russians, especially the partisans operating in Hhite Russia, and became
a special object of hate for them. This was not because he oppressed Jews
and partisans with particular vehemence; on the contrary, he protected the
Jews in his area and thus became an obstacle to organizing the resistance
movement. A partisan woman was successful in being employed by Rube as

a maid and he was killed by a bomb during the night of 22 September 1963.
Himmler's reaction to this deed was that Kube's death was a blessing for
Germany, since "his treatment of Jews bordered on high treason"25.

Even before that and for the same reasons. Reinhard Heydrich, the deputy
Reich protector of Bohemia and Moravia, had become the victim of an assassin.
The Czechoslovak government in exile in London was worried about the unrest
manifesting itself in the protectorate and feared for its own position in
negotiating with the allied governments. The cabinet in exile decided
therefore to liquidate Heydrich so as to provoke German reprisals, which
were in turn to give a lift to the Czech resistance movement. Thus two
Czech noncommissioned officers were dropped by parachute and on 27 Hay 1962
they killed HWdfidlon his way to Prague .

The borderline between so-called commando actions and murder can be quite
vague: criminologista have always seen some connections and camaonalities
between soldiers and criminalsz .

Another area of state terror is the concentration camp. The Nazi system used
women as well as men as concentration camp supervisors to implement the
desired terror. Shortly after the end of "ﬁll a British military court
condemned supervisor Irma Crese to death for. among other things, two murders
at the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp29. Toward the end of 1975 a trial
concerning many murders at the Hajdanek concentration camp started in

61
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

messeldorf. Among the 16 accused there were 6 women. In the Hajdanek
documentation which was prepared for the Nuremberg military tribunal. we

find the following: "The female SS personnel cousitted particular acts of
cruelty. The co-ission deternined many facts which were based on incredible
acts of cruelty emitted by the female erecutioners of the camp. hunger,
unbearable overwork, torture, humiliation and murder were used with incredible
sadism as a means of mass extermination of the camp's detainees." The fuels
defendants were described as follows: "They are the type of disadvantaged.
frustrated failures which the criminologists had already come across in

other Nazi trials as occupying leading roles."30

These characteristics coincide with observations made by prisoners in
concentration camps. Hargarete Baber-Neunann, who was a prisoner in both
Russian and German concentration cusps, reported how quickly women prisoners
who were given authority, ”within a few days changed into different hum
beings; how a depressed, suffering, 'sinple' prisoner turned into a self-
confident, bossy, haughty tyrant who would not countenance disagreement,

let herself be flattered, dealt out punishment, and showed no scruples in
taking away property of other prisoners in her block. One such block leader
could make life miserable for several hundred people." One prisoner named
Gerda Quernheim, a nurse by profession, worked as such for an SS physician
and specifically assisted in killing all living newborns. When on one
occasion a death certificate was issued by mistake, Gerda Quernheim
"corrected" the nistake by having the still living infant killed.

The SS recruited female supervisors from among the German population, and
buber-Neumann reports how on their first day these newly recruited women
started at the passing prisoners with fear in their eyes. "Some of then
started to change as soon as they put on their uniforms. Once they wore
boots, their step became firner and the rekish tilt of their caps seemed to
give then inediate self-confidence." These women soon noticed that when
they could report brutalities to the 85 man they rose in their esteem. "One
could see the sorry spectacle of seeing these factory workers giving co-ands
after their first 16 days as if they had been raised on a barracks parade
ground and soon they threatened the prisoners with denunciation and beat
then with their fists, just like their seniors"31. Isa Vermehren described
the female supervisors similarly and said that in the human soul the uniform
replaces conscience under the moral guise of blind obedience and has a
diabolic effect”.

This chapter is the place as well for cases in which actual or supposed
traitors are liquidated on col-land of the terrorist organization. Between
July a December 1956, 66 "traitors" were killed by order of partisan leader
Grivas3 . Ireland's IRA is in the habit of condemning ”traitors" in so-called
cangaroo courts, shooting them in the knees then abandoning them.3

An explanation for this type of almost incomprehensibel obedience in torturing
and killing is to be found in the studies of psychology professor Stanley
Milgrml. Hilgram made experiments involving two subjects, one of whom was
the "student” and the other the ”teacher”. The student was seated inside a
chamber, attached to a chair; the teacher was seated outside with a switch-
board which enebled him-or so he thought—to give the student electric

62

mammovmr
FOI!0FFIJAI.USE(NVLY

shocks of varying intensity if the student gave the wrong answers. To begin
with, the teachers had no misgivings about giving the students alight shocks;
the conflict started when the student pretended to be in pain, protested the
shocks and demanded that the experiment be stopped. Despite these protests
and demands, 25 out of 40 teachers complied with the orders of the test
director and punished the students with the most severe electric shock
available. Prior to the experiment, psychiatrists had prognosticated that
only 5 percent of the "teacher" subjects would give strong electric shocks.
This forecast proved to be completely wrong. sixty percent of the Yale
students serving as subjects proved to be absolutely obedient.

Some of Hilgram's colleagues expressed the opinion that experimental subjects
drawn from the general population would react differently and would be
nowhere near as obedient. Thereupon subjects were recruited off the street.
and the result was exactly the same. Hilgrsm's experiments were later
replicated in Germany, Italy, South Africa and Australia; the precentage of
obedient subjects was even slightly higher than in the United States. The
highest percentage, 85 percent, was registered in Hunich. One of the
"victnms" wrote this about his ”teacher": "A young man of whom I had assumed
that he would discontinue the experiment. He went along up to almost 450
volts and demonstrated complete willingness. This frightened me and I felt
that I was participating in a sinister game. I realized that under these
conditions any of us would be capable to go to extreme lengths, even including
murder... What would I do? I don't dare answer this"35.

Later on Milgram modified the experiment in such a way that an additional
person was inserted between the "teacher" and the director of the
experiment; he was the one who ordered shocks to be administered. Ninety
percent of these persons, who were less directly involved with the
“suffering" students than the person who actually administered the shock,
were prepared to give the orders to do so.

Hilgran explains these results on the one hand with a tendency toward
aggression in every human being, which asks to be triggered at any time; on
the other hand, with the necessity. deeply imbedded in everybody, for being
obedient. without which an orderly existence within the conmunity is
impossible. "That is perhaps the most important finding of our experiment:
normal people who work in their jobs and have no particular hostility, can
become involved in a terribly destructive process. Even when beyond that

the destructive results of their activity is fully realized and when they

are asked to do tlings which are inconpatible with fundamental moral concepts,
only few people have the inner resistance to refuse to comply with such
orders." Added to this is the fact that if responsibility is shared, the
burden on the individual becomes lighter. "It is easy to shirk responsibility
if one is but a link in a chain"36. I will later on return to the problem

of distance which has been touched upon above.

In this context we might renember the methods used to indoctrinate soldiers
in training to lose their fear and inhibitions and to develop feelings of
hate for the eneny37.

63

FOUIOFFIJA1.USIIMVLY
mmmmv

lo . Boab Terror is-

Ireland, particularly Northern Ireland, nay serve as a particularly inprasiva
exaaple for continuous bonb terrorism. Many Irish people have the tendency
to regard bonbs as an old, proven "hone reledy.” Irish boob terrorisl is
nothing new either; on 25 August 1939 a both exploded in the rain business
thoroughfare of Coventry, England, which killed five people, injured about

60 and caused great eaterial danege. “No trial-en were condemed to death
and executed for this deed”.

In today's Ireland there exists a directed and undirected mall war between
l’rotestants and Catholics on the one hand and Irisl-en and hglisI-en on
the other. Since 1969, sore than 1,500 people have been eurdered there and
sore than 15,000 injured. Since early 1976 and until last April, 93 people
have been killed by terrorists in Ulsteruconsiderably lore than in a
coaparable period during the last few years. Minister for Northern Ireland
Rees used an act of terrorisn as the occasion for launching a bitter attack
upon the [female] vice president of the political wing of the "Provisional
Irish Republican Aray", cited her words that British soldiers should be
sent hone in coffins, and added that she ought to be very satisfied with
the last action.

Irish bonb terrorism has for sons years been exported to the nether country
as well; on 18 Decenber 1973 an explosion in the goverment district of
Whitehall in London injured 52 people. Within a period of 10 days a total
of 78 people were injured in London alone in 25 attacks using explosives.
In September 1975 a bonb exploded in the lobby of the London hilton hotel
which killed two people; 38 were near-fatally injured and my others less
severely. It was the fifth bonbing within 9 days. Police investigation
was concentrated especially on the 21-year old Irish wonan Margaret HcKearney.
whose warrant described her as being "probably the lost dangerous and nest
active fenale terrorist." The sane nonth saw the conviction in London of
three Irishen and one Englishman who in bushings had killed seven people
and injured 86. bong those convicted was 60-year old Anne Haguire who had
helped to eanufscture the boobs. ller guilt was proved by small deposits

of explosive under her dirty fingernails. her friends and relatives called
her an amiable and loving individual. She was kindhearted, helpful, and a
devoted mother. her husgand, her two sons aged 17 and lb and she herslef
were sentended to a total of 38 years in prison.

Toward the end of 1976 the British hone Secretary convinced the lower house
of parlianent to pass a special law directed against Irish terrorists which,
”008 other things, nakes possible the detention of supsected IRA nenbers

for up to 7 days without any arrest warrant. At the sane time, the lions
Secretary ordered an end to force feeding of Irish hunger strikers in British
jails. To date. no new prisoner has gone on hunger strike since then3 .

At the nonent there is no apparent way out of the Irish dilen-a; the contro-
versy between the two hostile groups goes such deeper than in other countries
and the Catholic or Protestant terrorists hide anong the populace and float
about like fish in water. Irishen have always been known as being ”habitually

outraged" (Bloecker) .

66
MWWONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Arson

Arson is an old terrorist weapon. In 1862 a number of conflagrations broke
out in Petersburg which public opinion ascribed to students and Poles. There
are also some theories according to which the police was involved in arson.
However, for the government these fires were a gift from heaven and an excuse
for severe repressive measures“).

In our days, this type of action invludes the Frankfurt department store
arson by German terrorists. The defendants, Gudrun Ensslin, Andreas Baader,
Thorwald Proll and Horst Soehnlein, who were sentence by the Frankfurt Land
court on 31 October 1968, had gotten together because they had identical
political goals. As stated in the verdict. they were "deeply convinced that
the existing societal order, capitalism, and especially the German legal
system, are merely an expression of the existing regime of repression which
must he radically overthrown. Defendant Baader especially quoted Stokely
Carmichael and Herbert Harcuse. After the four defendants had repeatedly
participated in demonstrations, they arrived at the decision that their
efforts to date could not succeed in view of 'the stupidity of a saturated
consumer society.‘ They now wanted to light a torch which would activate
the masses. These plans were firmed up in mnich: a department store fire
would be engineered in the center of Frankfurt/Main, where they were unknown."

0n 2 April 1968 the Schneider department store in Frankfurt was set on fire;
damages, paid for by the insurance company, amounted to DH 280,000. During
the trial Ensslin and Baader additionally justified their actions by citing
the "U.S. genocide in Vietnam" that alone, they said, was reason enough

for their resistance. in the verdict it was stated that there could he no
question about a resistance situation in the PRC. The FRO was said to have
the most liberal constitution in its history which guarantees a democratic
and social constitutional state with only slight defects. Even a convinced
activist, it continued, is aware of the fact that he is violating a norm of
the national community. In favor of the defendants it was said that during
the time prior to their arrest they had been living in socially sickly
conditions. "Contrary to the opinion of part of the defense pleadings,
personal conflicts are not exclusively the result and expression of societal
controversy; another deciding factor is the inherited psychological personalitv
trait: environment and genetic inheritance both play a role. The thought
cannot be excluded that the defendants seek to comprehend, explain and finally
to justify their situation, which is described in greater detail in the
verdict, on the basis of societal controversy in order to provide an alibi

for themselves in their own minds. This may provide an explanation as to

why the defendants let themselves be carried away to comit this act."

The reason for the great amount of attention given to the Frankfurt department
store tire was the fact that it was a preliminary step toward the forming of
the so-called "Red Army Faction," which is thought to have been born during
the late summer of 1970 when its leading members returned to Germany from the
Near East. The name was adapted from the extreme leftists, militant Japanese
underground organization "United Red Army." Directions and instructions for
the bombings to follow were taken from South American guerilla organizations,
from Palestinian underground organizations, or from the teachings of Mao Tse-
tung. Subsequent events are too well known to deserve detailed discussion

here“ .
65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY

6. Kidnaping

In January 1971 British Ambassador Sir Goeffrey Jackson was kidnaped in
hontevideo by Tupamaros. After spending almost 9 months in a so-called
people's prison he was set free. In this, as in other cases, the British

Government 23d declined the payment of ransom or even to make political
concessions .

After initial hesitation, the 0.8. Goverment adopted a similarly inflexible
stance; out of 27 kidnaped diplomats in several countries. 10 were killed.
"But many 11.8. Foreign Service officials agree that unless this firm policy
had been followed as well as the refusal to accede to the demands of kid-

napers and extortionists, a considerably greater number of diplomats would
have been kidnaped and k111ed"43.

7 . Skyjackings

The number of skyjackings, especially for political reasons, has declined
considerably during the last few years. Among Arab terrorists who engaged
in skyjacking, Leila baled was aost prominent. She had been driven into
the active resistance novement by the Six-Day Bar in 1967 and joined the PLO.
In her biographv entitled "My People Shall Live" she says that her first
skyjacking (she participated in two) was a manifesto of Palestininian
humanitarisnism‘ .

8 . Bank Robbery

In an attack on the Kerson branch of the Imperial Treasury in the sums: of
1879, Russian revolutionaries stole one and one half million rubles“. Since
that rise terrorists have always obtained their financial resources through
bank robbery and similar exploits. One of the last spectacular actions was
the robbery of a nail train 16 km south of Dublin by a bank of 12 masked men
who were most likely members of the IRA and who collected about 1 million
Irish pounds. Mention should also be nade of bank robberies perpetrated

by German anarchists“.

PART II
III. Crininological Evaluation

Summary: The July issue [Part1] provided a definition of the concept of
terrorism and an overview of its history and present status, as well as its
various manifestations. Part II will give a criminological evaluation, first
separately for Russia, Ireland, the United States. the PRC and other countries,
followed by a summary. After dealing with the problem of distance, there
follows an outline and recomendations for combatting terrorism, as well as
for its prevention.

Editor

66

MWWWLY
FINICIHH¢1AI.USEAONLN

In our attempts to explain and elucidate the terrorist's personality, we
must first note, from a purely criminological standpoint. that we know very
little about a person who has become a criminal. "In view of the great
variety in punishable offenses and their backgrounds, we cannot expect to
be able to generalize about the 'personality' of criminals. As a general
result of comparing officially designated major criminals with control
groups. the closest we can come is something like this: criminals appeared
more often, and to a greater extent than others, to suffer from an internal
disharmony and were beset by internal tensions; secondly, they were not
inclined to come to terms with themselves and to work out difficulties
themselves; but thirdly, more inclined to blame others and, through aggressive

acts, to abreact externally on the spot"‘7. He night recall here the studies
by Hilgram mentioned above.

Other criminological studies have shown that there are no basic differences
between the personality of a murderer and a noncrim a1. Under certain
external circumstances, any man can become a killer .

He might add here that especially where political murderers and terrorists
are concerned, facts and documentation are often sparse: in decades gone by,
such individuals were not examined by psychiatrists or psychologists, even

if that had been possible. Today terrorists as a rule resist this type of
examinations or, as in the case of San Francisco’s Patricia Hearst, the
experts arrive at conflicting conclusions. we must try therefore to use

tie small body of material with historic and criminologic insight so as to
obtain an insight into the personality of terrorists which “cannot be had

by objective and measurement methods" 9.

1. Russia

A police report provides the following characteristics: “She wears her hair
short. wears blue glasses, is sloppily dressed, disdains the use of comb and
soap and lives in civil marriage with one or more equally repulsive males."
This report was written in Russia in 186950. Elsewhere it states that men
and women who called themselves nihilists represented a great number of
different types. "They are an illustration of what Pascal called 'the
highest and the lowest of mankind' and of course also a mixture of the two.
also a mixture of cleverness and stupidity. Apart from fanatics and gamblers
there are a few insane persons and many naive ones. And these pages are
shadowed by a future inhuman trait. The last chapters feature idealists who
in some cases are prepared for the sake of attaining a goal to use any means
at all; people who no longer know compassion and who are ready to sacrifice
others as well as themselves for a cause which they consider just. The story
is tragic, but it has its funny aspects"5‘.

in the great Petersburg nihilist trial of 1877, the 198 defendants included

87 aristocrats, 19 high officials, eight office a, 33 members of the clergy,
ll merchants, 13 men of wealth and 17 peasants5 . In early 1875 arrest
warrants were issued for 770 propagandists for nihilism; 612 of them were male
and 158 female. It was estimated that these propagandists had converted

20-30 people to their teachings.

67

FOIUOFFHJAI.USE(NNLY
ETHICIWNCIAI.1!H§(N‘LY

One group of propegandists wanted to recruit urban workers, and several
young women accepted jobs in factories with forged passports. However,
within a few weeks they drew suspicion upon themselves and had to leave the
factories. A school was established in Moscow slum, where their doctrine
was taught in this way: a teacher told the students that the eagle was a
bird of prey and added that any government which used the eagle for an emblem
was just as greedy and bloodthirsty as that bird. Also, the children were
taught that the number 1 was smaller than 70 million, which the teacher
explained as follows: "We have one czar, and we are 70 million." Using
the motto ”students to the country." nihilists tried to enter the villages;
among other reasons, the experiment failed because the peasants were
suspicious and believed the strangers to be spies and thieves. The result
was that only a few intellectuals were recruited.

In other experiments, communes were formed and sewing shops were established.
The women of the commune worked while the men engaged in endless debates,
which did not sit well with the women. This reminds us of Simone de
Beauvior's saying: "The comrades are only paahas too." The communes were
dissolved very quickly and the women sometimes carried off the sewing machines
since they had been impressed with the fact that property constitutes theft.

In summary we can say that the various anarchist and nihilist organizations
consisted mainly of intellectuals or would—be intellectuals, the middle

class, the clergy and lowbrsnking members of the aristocracy53. In his book
“Man in the Revolution." Albert Camus talks about the "sensitiVe murderers"5‘.

Among the activist women. we have mentioned Vera Pigner and Sofia Perovakaya.
In her memoirs, Vera Pigner wrote this: "From the age of 26 on, gy life was
inextricably tied to the fate of the Russian revolutionary partys ." Sofia
Perovskaya was equally devoted to the common cause; while instinctually
interested in men, she would not devote herself to her own personal happiness
so long as comrades were in jail and the people were suffering despotism.

She too, like Vera Figaer, had worked as a nurse in the countryside. She
had to abandon her work when the police were looking for her.

Articles about the Russian nihilists frequently mention the fact that some
women were even greater fanatics than the men. Several criminological
studies have called attention to special cruelty on the part of women56.
Russian women were certainly no less talented as organizers than were men.

In trials with the death penalty as a possible outcome, Russian nihilists
generally behaved with courage and dignity57.

2. Ireland

In Dublin's Stephen's Green Park there stands a monument to Countess

Constance Harkievicz, sometimes called "Ireland's Joan of Arc." She was

a colorful, even eccentric personality and was in the front lines of the

1916 Easter Revolution against the English. She preferred to die rather than
to surrender and was the last to capitulste with her group. She was sentenced

68

FOItOIUICJAl.lEl!(HULY
F0!‘0FFHJAL.USE(NVLV

to death by the English, pardoned "only" because of her sex to life
imprisonment and set free already in 1917. she persisted in fighting for
Irish liberty and later on served two more years in prisonss.

Today's Irish terrorists who belong to the IRA or one of its factions are
less flamboyant and spectacular. We have already referred to young Margaret
McKearney; in Scotland Yard jargon she was referred to as "the blond bomber.”
She was educated in a convent and today works as a secretary to a tax advisor
in Dublin. She regularly travels across the border to Northern Ireland to
visit her parents, or to England to plant bombs. There is no extradition
treaty between Great Britain and Ireland.

A member of the IRA named Maris McGuire has left the organization and has
wirtten about her experiences59. She calls Sean HacStiofain, one of the
prominent IRA leaders, a murderer. He is, she says, as emotional as he

is given to tantrums and has no sense of humor. He is so staunch a Catholic
that he has always refused to import condoms from Northern Ireland to the
Irish Republic, which were used there to manufacture acid bombs. He would
rather be caught in a car with an automatic pistol than with such a means

of protection. Says Maris McGuire: "We were floating on a wave of senseless
acts of murder..., but they did not know on what other course of action they
should decide"5°. Maria's father was an official at a ministry of the

Irish Republic6l.

3. United States

He have more information about U.S. women than about Irish women who are
active terrorists. Back in 1954, Lolita Lebron, a 34-year old Puerto Rican
and mother of two children, participated with three men in an attack on the
House of Representatives in Hashington, DC. The assailants. supposedly
fighting for Puerto Rican independence, entered the public gallery of the
House and fired wildly into the chamber. It was a miracle that only five
House members were wounded. At her trial, Lolita Lebron said this: ”I
went to the capitol of the United States to offer my life for the
independence of my country. Great goals are attained only through great
sacrifices." As she was saying this on the witness stand, she held a rosary
and a prayerbook in her hands6 .

The strongest personality of the ideological scene of our times is, or was,
Angela Davis; she never left any doubt that as a black and a communist she
was hoping for a revolution in the United States. Her biography indicates
that she stands head and shoulders above other revolutionary women; on the
other hand it is clear that she is afflicted with exactly those limitations
which are the mark of an ideological fanatic63.

Diana Oughton, born in 1942, joined the Weathermen underground organization

by way of the student movement and the SDS. A 2-year stay in Guatemala made
a full-fledged revolutionary out of her. In March 1970 she was killed in an
explosion of home-made bombs in New York. She too came from an upper class

family, like most young women who want to change society through violence.

69

FIIR(IﬂﬂC1Al.lEI!(NNLY
FOItOFFIJAl.USE(NVLY

In November 1974, 27-year old Jane Alpert surrendered to the law in New York.
She had been accused fo bombings in 1969, was released on bail and then
disappeared in the underground. She stated that she had changed completely
during the intervening 6 years and had become a feminist; also, that she

now recognized male dominance in the leftwing organisations. Men, she said,
had forced her to commit terrorist acts for which she had not been prepared.
She considered her reappearance a positive step in her life“.

Susan Stern's life too was one of confusion. Her parents were divorced;'
she got married, had an abortion, was divorced, became an organizer and
demonstrator, was arrested, convincted, freed, and attempted suicide. At

the age of 29 she was a trained social worker but never practiced her
profession. Her life is one of exhaustion as a result of leftwing activities
and jail sentences55.

5. Federal Republic of Germany

The Rauball Archive contains short biographies of ‘3 German anarchists.
lntellectuals are the majority of this group. This becomes especially clear
in the recital of personal circumstances of the defendants in the Frankfurt
arson verdict. In a summary by Horchem we find that out of the 22 activists
constituting the nucleus of the "Red Army Faction" (RAF), 12 were women.
Eight out of 20 activists who later joined the RAP were women. "RAF concepts
and activities are also the result of an explosive emancipation of the
participating remale activists." Horchem believes that no precedent exists
for the personnel composition of the BA! and similar groups. "Women do not
merely act as helpers, informants and scouts, but as active fighters, who
carry in their overcoat pockets or in pocketbooks pistols of up to 9 mm
caliber which they use resolutely when threatened with capture. Some of
them act not only as equals, but as Ieadera--like Ulrike Heinhof in her
writings--like Gudrun Ensslin in her instructions from her cell." In
agreement with the results of criminologicsl research, norchem states that
the biographical data do not permit firm conclusions to the effect that an
individual is predisposed toward becoming an anarchist revolutionary66.

5. Other Countries

In the guerilla war of the Algerians against the French, the Algerians used
women and sympathetic Frenchmen to hide members of the resistance movement
and to maintain communications. In addition. young European and Algerian
women planted bombs57.

In Italy, 30-year old Hargherita Cagol was killed in a firefight with the
carabinieris. She came from a wealthy, conservative Catholic family from
Trient and had been for 5 years the wife and assistant of the leader and
theoretician of the extreme leftwing terrorist orgainzation "Red brigaggs,"
which is accused of engaging primarily in abductions and armed robbery .

Ambassador Jackson, kidnaped by the Tupamaros, spent many months carefully
observing his "jailers." Among his guards there were some female teachers.
He noted that in mathematical games and thos requiring the use of logic the

70

IOC1OIFIJAI.UEI(I‘LY
FOIlOFTICIAI.lINE(NHLV

the women were the better players; while the men appeared more aggressive

and emotional, the women were more cool and calculating. The women made only
small concessions to basic humanitarianism, "which at any moment could be
superseded by greater, predominant, ever-present and deadly practicality."

In another case, Jackson found out that a fellow captive had been found and
liberated by Uruguayan soldiers before his captors were able to shoot him.
Only one woman had. during the moment of liberation, insisted on executing
the order to kill the captive. Her male colleagues prevented her from doing
so and even restrained her so as to avoid a general bloodbath69.

6. Summary

From the many cases we have cited we can see the leading roles intellectuals,
and among them particularly women, have played in most terrorist organizations
over the last few decades. The political scientist Clutterbuck states in

his survey that most guerilla fighters have had a relatively cultural and
agreeable childhood. More than 90 percent of 55 guerilla leaders had an
above—average education and came from families with a middle class income

or even above-average wealth. Clutterbuck partially explains these young
peoples' ideological and terrorist activities y6th guilt feelings due to

their sheltered childhood and their privileges . '

He must ask ourselves what came first with these people: frustration, e.g.,
disturbed family ties which then led to terrorism, or terrorism which caused
frustration, i.e., which destroyed family ties. Arno Plsck wrote in his

hook "A Plea for the Abolition of Criminal Law," that a destructive character
manifests itslef first, and this character would then always enable the
activist to find a worthy cause in behalf of which he could give his
aggressions free rein. The high idelas, he says, are interchangeable; the
flag being waved is mrerly a symbol for confrontation. "A motive for violence
free of destructive moment should become transparent through pragmatic
insight. Anyone who is motivated toward violence from a purely rational
standpoint should have to worry that the violent means he proposes to use
have a recognizable relationship with the objective being sought. Only an
intellect suffering from strong pressures of aggression can delude itself
into being unaware of the fact that it is entirely hopeless to topple the
existing order with a few bombs." 1

in reading the biographies of former and present-day female terrorists, we
note how little is written about their private lives, and how little they
have to say about it themselves. Primary emphasis is devoted to their
struggle. their party or group and their political work toward improving
world conditions, thus neglecting their close and personal relationships,
especially those with their families.

Elsewhcre we have mentioned the close relationships between terrorism and
revolution. In 1935, psychiatrist Alfred Hoche wrote: "It is no coincidence
that in all minor or major revolutionary activities there is always
participation by psychopaths with their instiable need for sensation and

for 'action'."7

71
FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE¢”HLY
MOFHCIALIJBEONLY

A close relationship exists also between terrorists. revolutionaries and
"normal" crininsls. Von lientig has shown these relationships in describing
the personality of Saint-Just, when he called a crininal Utopian". Vera
Figner wrote in her nenoirs that violence as a weapon of political struggle
leads to brutality, evokes the instincts of a predator, and gives rise to

base breaches of confidence. "In fact, things went so far that they led to
horror of one's fellow nan"7’°.

Historical experience shows that as a rule a revolution is successful only
when the revolutionaries consist of a nixture of intellectuals and

unscrupulous and uncaring criminals who destroy any kind of resistance.
The efforts at overthrowing the regime by the [basin Docs-her revolutionaries

serves as an exanple for the fact that decent staff officers were not equipped
for a violent overthrow with the necessary prerequisites”.

Ilistory shows that nurderers can become heroes and heroes can hecone murderers.
Politics occasionally forces colonial powers to deal on equal terns with those
whoa they had prehaps perviously condemned to death. Colonel Grivss
permitted his EOKA partisans in Cyprus to kill at randon. In his nenoris he
wrote: "At 1800 hours they saw an Englislnan who watered his lawn with a
garden hose. Pavlou advanced to the garden wall and shot him at point blank
range; when he screened and fell, Pavlou fired three nore shots into the

dead body and fled...I sent his- sy congratulations for that ettack"76.
Elsewhere Grivas describes his dispatch of "groups of executioners". In
Greece Grivas was presented with nedals and pronoted to lieutenant general.
Later he returned to Cyprus and permitted his followers to continue killing--
this time their for-er conrades in arms.

As renowned a historian as Frans Georg Haier wrote that the church's
participation in BOKA terrorisn is "a dark page in history." The clergy
refused on principle to condenn terrorisn. even when a Cypriot was killed
by an BOKA comando raid during a prayer service“.

7. The Problen of Distance

The prohlen of distance is as inportant as its neglect by crininological
research to date. The following will exanine the personality of the
terrorist, especially the female terrorist, fron three aspects:

-the extent of inhibition against killing depends upon the distance fro-
the victim.

-Split responsibility lightens the burden of conscience of individual
participants.

-The crininsl's power of inagination of the consequences of his action is
often surprisingly snall.

Behavioral research has described the existence and the nodus operandi of
inhibition against killing. The greatest action energy occurs in an individual

killer who confronts his victim at s nini-un distance. he nust overcone the
greatest mount of resistance. Charlotte Corday nay serve as an exanple,

72

mammowu
FOR OFFICIAL L88 ONLY

who stabbed Marat to death, or Hornard, who killed Trotskyi with an ice ax.
Some political killers or terrorists shy away fras that type of deed. Re
are here reminded once again of Khslturin, who despite his fervent hatred
of the czar did not attack him when he was alone with him and could have
done so without difficulty; he preferred to loan his conscience with an
indeterminate number of victims of a bomb explosion without assurance of
success. This of course gave his a better chance for a getaway, though

terrorists like Khalturin were on the other hand always ready to lay down
their lives.

The distance increases somewhat when the killer shoots his victim within
range of sight with a pistol or similar weapon. We know that Stashynakyi,

who killed two Ukrainian politicians in exile. passed up an excellent
opportunity for humane reasons”.

In concentration camps of the Third Reich killings were perpetrated at
minimum distance. In those cases the factor of cos-and or approval from
above was added, which relieved the killers at least partially of their
responsibility; also a factor of hihituation which plays a big part in all
criminal acts as well as in life generally. Additionally, these victims
had been purposely estranged from the killer through propaganda, by having
for many years been depicted as sub-human“).

Bombings can serve as the best examples for demonstrating the effects and
consequences of distance. The individual who plants bombs does not as a rule
see the immediate consequences of his deed. The Irishwoman Maria McGuire
writes that only long after the start of her terrorist activity did the
thought of cripples and widows occur to her and that she had earlier and
otherwise sublimated this knowledge in the course of events“. One of her
predecessors, the famous revolutionary Maud Gonne McBride, considered the
possibility during the Boer list of impeding Irish participation in this war
on the side of England by sneding one or two troop transport ships to the
bottom of the sea by planting bombs in them". It is a likely assumption
that she hardly realized the actual consequences of such a plan.

it is a generalized phenomenon with all criminals, especially simple murderers.
that very frequently they do not give consideration to the consequences of

their planned actions, and/or are unable or lack sufficient imagination to
do so.

Max Prisch wrote something in his "diary" which occurred to him during a
flight and which is of general validity: "flying above a small town, which
looked like one of our architects' models, I suddenly realised that I would
he perfectly capable of dropping bombs. It would not even take a
chauvinistic rage, not even an incitement of many years' standing. All that
is needed is a small rail station, a factory with smokestacks, a small stream
boat at its gang plank. There is an itch to throw down a series of black
and brown geysers, and already one is gone;... you don't see any blood. hear
no gasps for air; everything is wits clean, from an inhuman distance, almost
funny...l am thinking of the difference between dropping bombs and opening my
pocket knife and approaching a man, the only one whose face I can see... I
don't believe I am capable of that. With the bonbs, that is different--I'm
not certain at a11"82.

73
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lNDI.(Iﬂﬂ(1Al.UGI2(H'LV

Another factor must be considered in bombings especially: the victims'
anonymity.

Killers in a group share their responsibility and thus fare better to a certain
extent. This is even more true for helpers; their distance fron the victim
is often much greater than that from the actual killer.

The coenander of an action is often the most remote free the victim. In this
context, Jaeger mentions Bichmann, of when Bannah Arendt says that he, like
all other long-distance killers, have "an absolute lack of power of imaginab
tion"3‘. Lenin too, according to his biographer Payne, had never seen a
killer commando at work and had never observed the consequences of terrorist
actions which he had ordered”.

The lines of demarcation between commander to killer to helper to sympathizer
can be vague. It will for instance never be clearly established whether
for instance Trotskyi's nurderer was nerely a tool of his nother86.

Horchem has written in detail about the circle of sympathizers of the German
terrorists: without a close and a wider circle of sympathirers, the RA!
could hardly have been effective. Anarchists frequently were given support
without the supporter's detailed knowledge about their identity and
activities. Rorchem estimated that in the PEG 2,500 to 3,000 sympathir rs
are prepared to aid activists by providing hideouts and identity papers 7.

In individual cases it would be difficult to establish to what extent this

is caused also by a lack of imagination or by conscious purposeful ignorance.

Finally, we night ask how aany people are responsible for terrorist killings,
at least morally, who innocently or free ideological motivation make funds
available to terrorist organizations which are supposedly destined for
humanitarian purposes but whose use can hardly be controlled. It is well
known for instance that Lybia's head of state finances terrorist organizations
throughout the worldes. '

v. Control and Prevention
1. An Eye for an Eye?

Historically, efforts have been made in the fight against terrorisn to
retaliate in kind. One hundred years ago the Russian government protected

a semi-secret society of militant monarchists which called itself the "holy
League." Its nenbers were to protect the czar, spy on the terrorists,
demoralize then and kill their leaders. "33 other words, the idea was to
beat the underground with its own weapons" . The League initated the
secrecy of a group of conspirators and adopted a ritual similar to that of

a freemasons' lodge. Its aembers cam free high officialdoa. the aristocracy
and financial circles. hoodlums and secret policemen were recruited. There
was no lack of money; nevertheless the venture was not very successful.

”The League's enterprises reninded one of an operetta. Needless to say,

its existence was an opgn secret even though the press was forbidden to
make any mention of it" 0.

FOI‘OFFIJMI.USI|INLY
FOI‘OFFICIAI.U§IZ(M‘LY

In fighting Kenya's Hau-Mau. the British were more successful with similar,

but less civilized methods. Since it had been impossible to force the Han-Han
to capitulate by using regular troops and the regular police force, the nucleus
of the Hau-Hau leadership was destroyed by so-called pseudo-terrorists.

These pseudoterrorists were under teh command of a British police officer;

the group consisted of Europeans who had blackened their faces and captured
Hsu-Hau who had been "turned." The pseudo-terrorists used exactly the same
methods as the Hau-Hsu, until the latters' terrorism was destroyed. The

British police officer received a high decoration from his queen for his
achievement91.

Earlier on the English had after World Her I in Ireland established a special
auxiliary organization, consisting of hired former soldiers, who fought the
Irish with their own terrorist methods. Both sides escalated their acts of
violence and competed with one another in senseless mrders”. This met with
little success. Churchill justified the frequent reprisals in his book ”The
world Crisis--The Aftermath"93.

The legal basis for special measures to combat terrorists in Britain and in
most countries using traditional English law are lwas similar to the Internal
Security Act. The English represent the view that comprehensive legal means
must be available for every possible emergency, but that in actual practice
these measures must be used sparingly. It must not be the function of a
constitutional state to castrate itself.

2. Trend Toward Inflexibility

He can discern a trend toward inflexibility against terrorist demands in the
entire Western world today. Too many things have been learned the hard way
because one of Bismarck's principles was either unknown or ignored. ”The
bleeding-heart sentimentality of our century, which sees in every fanatical
rebel and in every hired barricade fighter a martyr, will lead to more blook-
shed than a fizm and resolute justice. if it had been used from the
beginning..."9 a

Hardly anything has been more detrimental to the esteem of the PRC as a
constitutional state than the capitulation in the Lorenz case. Marcus
criticizes the reaction by the German authorities by saying that the citizen
becomes disconcerted when "he sees that the highest representatives of the
state look like a flock of slarmedthiCkens as soon as a handful of anarchists
go into action. Thus he sees less of a danger in the increasing number of
crimes than in the inability of government officials to control this develop-
ment and to keep it within tolerable limits"95. We can speculate as to
whether the attack on the German Embassy in Stockholm would have ever taken
place, if some resoluteness had been shown in the Lorenz case. especially
since it is by no means certain that in case of a refusal Lorenz would have
been killed. Re have a sufficient number of examples wherein after blackmail
had failed the victims were set free“.

75

IIIIIHWICIAI.USIGMULY
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In cases of hostage taking in prisons the whole world nowadays sakes it a
fire practice never to give in, since otherwise there would be no end to it.
Whenever there are autinies in prisons today, the objective is hardly escape
any aore; primarily it is the quest for inprovelaent of living conditions in
the institutions.

we have already stated that the United States no longer pays reason for its
diplonats. This policy too has shown sons success. The a-bera of hazardous
occupational groups have so far always agreed to rennin "unprotected" which
is, in effect, their best protection. Thus for instance the unions of penal
institution workers in the United States and France have always been in favor
of resolute inflexibility. Other countries. anong then Israel, Canada and
Turkey have long been known for never giving in, even in shyjackings.

During the kidneping of Netherlands industrialist Bette-a the Irish governlent
never left any doubt free: the very beginning that it would never give in, "even
if a washer of the cabinet were to be taken hostage." The wife of the victia
approved of this attitude by the governnsnt. As a natter of fact, the
kldnapers. in planning their set. had believed llerrena to be a German and

that they would therefore have few problems.

Current practice in Italy is for the public prosecutor to proceed against the
faailies of kidnap victins by confiscating ranson noney being held in
readiness, thus preventing additional kidnapings. Contacts between kidnapers
and the failies of their victias are prevented as a latter of principle.

The Venezuelan govern-ent is inflexible on principle and has for instance
always refused to publish nanifestos by the terrorists. when a 0.8. fir-
whose nanager had been abducted published the kidnapers aanifesto in foreign
newspapers on denand by the guerillas, the Venezuelan governnent impounded
the entire enterprise.

3. Prevent the Creation of Sanctuaries

One of the require-onto for naintaining the constitutional state is the
inadnissibility a priori of the creation of sanctuaries fron pursuit: that
squatters are tolerated in unoccupied houses or that wanted anarchists narch
at the head of a denmstration or, as happened in Hamburg. that anarchists
participate in e deeonstration together with highly placed nenbers of the
govern-eat. If such things are tolerated. nore danage is done to the
constitutional state than would be by resolute action against then. Horchem
has correctly indicated that the developnent of a terrorist starts in small
matters, e.g., with occupying houses. and can then under certain circumstances
end with bonbings97.

We have 2 tendencies to take the wrong direction in furthering the
constitutional state. I can for instance inigine no other legal system
in the world in which it would be possible that at a trial 65 notions of
prejudice (to date) he made. Juridical logic has the fatal inclination
to degenerate into absurdity.

76

”MEMO!!!”
iNIIA0l11CLAL USIZ<NVLY

A. Police Functions Must Be Upgraded

As far as police functions are concerned. they must be upgraded in the public
and published opinion. It is significant, for instance. that in the British
and U.S. press the legal system and the police are both called "the law." You
can read for example that a criminal was arrested "by the law." In other
words, police actions in Anglo-American countries are as a rule strongly
considered to be legal. while in our country there is a tendency to look for

a wrong in the first place on the part of the police rather than its
opponents.

The question arises additionally whether in fighting terrorism the police
should not use women to a greater extent than heretofore. "hen a security
agent confiscated one of the two pistols carried by President Ford's
assailant Sara Moore and checked her identity. this was apparently done in
a fairly benevolent manner. After the assassination attempt. there was
speculation in the U.S. press whether the agent would have immediately made
an arrest if instead of Sara Moore he had been dealing with a male. The
same thing would probably have happened if Sara Moore had been checked out
by a woman. She might have been a bit more thorough and suspicious and
might have sensed something which the man didn't. According to an old
Latin saying, a man's wisdom is located deep in a woman's heart.

in Britain and the United States greater use has already been made than in
this country of a woman's greater insight into the nature of other women by
increased placement of women in police work; thus in london for instance
women are members of the special mobile command which deals with problems of
national security98.

In today's Israeli police force one out of every six officers is female and
women do exactly the same work as men. The use of women in police work makes
even more sense since we may expect that in the future the number of women
members of terrorist organizations will grow in the some measure as is the
case with emancipated female criminality 9.

Generally speaking. terrorist activity will increase, at least in the Uestern
world. Here we must differentiate between those organizations which work on

a national or regional basis and those linked only by a general ideological
tendency, such as the urban guerillas in Western democracies. Terrorists
linked by a strong ethnic or mtional and/or religious common cause may have
some success against the states which they oppose. Whether or not terrorists
in the FRG or other Western democracies will have success depends upon the
strength of resistance against them. Duerrenmatt has put it bluntly: "Arafat
has already come into his own at the UN; Heinhof will be next to make speeches
there."

5. Preventive Measures
This brings us to the extremely important problem of prevention, especially

the danger posed by the sympathizera who mostly come from the ranks of the
intellectuals. He might think that Zehm exaggerates when he says that the

77

IND-.OFIHCJAI.USI:(ﬂVLY
MWLUSEONLY

predominant portion of the Gernan intelligentsia is basically disloyal to
the state. But the political scientist Sontheimer. in his book "The Hisery
of our lntellectuals", has very seriously pointed to the dangers fron that
group. He defines the intellectual as a person who stands at a sore or less
critical distance from the society around him. Sontheimer deplores the

fact that leftwing intellectuals are working for the destruction of societal
values for which the West has created its libertarian institutions. But

increased powers of resistance can arise only from an increased feeling of
co-onality and strong cannon values.

We cannot deny the fact that m-bers of certain professions are nore prone
to succunb to th- theory and practice of terrorism than are others. e.g.,
social workers and theologians. It is all too easy to confuse "conplete
understanding" with "conplete forgiveness.”

Legal limits for sympathiaers lust be drawn by law and Justice. Law
professor Schroeder. in an article in the mam wmma 231m
of 12 April 1976, criticized the excessively lenient sentences given to
Professor Brueckner in Hanover and Father Kaiser in Oldenburg.

The intellectual borderline toward the synpathizers is even sore difficult
to dran than the legal one. an it is easy to cone into conflict with freedoa
of expression. After the assassination attupt on President Ford there was
vehenent criticisn in the United States of the fact that Lynette Prone, of
all people, was featured in teh cover pictures of themost ipnortant weekly
news nagazines. In this way, it was said, she obtained exactly what she
wanted and certainly had not merited. In the United States too the lack of
cannon values was deplored on that occasion and the great denand for than
was emphasized.

He must draw a sharp dividing line between public opinion and published
opinion. When the police fired shots during the first spectacular taking
of hostages in which in 1971. 80 percent of all publications criticised
that order to fire, while on the other hand 85 percent of the 1,100 letters
addressed to the Unich police approved of that action. There is hope in
those figures.

FOOTNOTES
1. Uiesbaden 1973, p 578.
2. Gieseking, Bielefeld 1972.
3. Edmund Hezger. Criminology, beck, hmich 1951 p 8 et seq.
4. In memoriam Emil Ludwig. Hoscia 1959. pp 21-22.
S. FRANKFURT!!! ALLOWINE, 27 Hatch 1976.

6. FRANKFURT“ ALLGKNEINB, 17 March 1976.

78

mmrusaouur
9.

10.

11.

12.

I3.
14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

MOFFICIALWEONLY

See Constantin de Gruenwald, At the Roots of the Revolution, Paul Raff,
Vienna, p 157 et seq., Egon Cesar Conte Corti, Under the Cars and
Crowned Hosea, Anton Pustet. Graz 19109, p 300 et seq.

Avran Yarnolinsky, Czars and Terrorists, Varlag fuer Literatur und
Zeitgeschehen, Hanover 1957, pp 189-191.

Andre Castelot, The Great Hours of Paris, Paul Raff, Vienna 1961,
p 68 et seq.

Anny Latour, Cultural History of Woman, Fischer, Frankfurt 1965,
p 167 et seq.

Hans von Hentig, The Nolan Revolutionary, SCMIZERISCHB ZEIGSCHRIFT
FUER STRAFRECHT, 1923. p 29

Trevor Lloyd, Suffragettes, The Emancipation of Honen in the Beaten
World, Editions Recontre, Lausanne 1970, p 83.

Suhrkaap, Frankfurt 1974.
Holden. Vienna 1976.
See Johan Galtung, Structural Violence, Rowohlt, Reinbek 1975.

Former Russian Major Lev Kopelev describes in his autobiography the
goals of coununisn with the following words: "The fanatic followers
of the most noble ideals promise eternal happiness to their successors.
but destroy their fellow nen without pity—or they offer paradise to
the dead, but kill and nail the living while considering themselves
virtuous heroes. They are convinced that they do bad things only for
the sake of the eventual good; that they lie in the interest of eternal
truths."

Yarmolinaky, pp 259-261.
Yarnolinsky, pp 301—301. and 357.

Note the good description of the revolutionaries in Yuri Trifonov's
novel "The Tine of Inpatience," Scherz, unnich 1975.

Vera Figner, ﬂight over Russia, Halik, Berlin 1928; see also Paleologue,
pp 456-455, experiences by Vera Figner after the revolution. She died
in 1942.

Later it was said that one of the assilants had purposely aborted the
explosion. He entered into the service of the police and faced a
Soviet court after the revolution. Yarnolinsky, p 296.

Ibid ., p 319.

”MWWLY
23.

26.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

36.

35.
36.
37.

38.

39.
60.

61.

POI OFFIGAI. USE ONLY

Harry Hilde, Political Harder, Hestia, Bayreuth 1962, p 109; Yarnolinaky,
p 330; about subsequent assassinations, see Hiddsndorff, Political mrder,
a contribution to historic crininology, Publication series of the m:
Federal Criminal Police Bureau, ﬂiesbaden 1968, p 65.

The Third Reich, "9 11, No ‘6, 1975, p 284.

Ibid., No 52, 1975, p 558.

Heinz Boehne, The Death's Bead Order, The History of the Batten-SS,
Vol 2, Fischer, Frankfurt 1969, pp 389-390; and Gerlad Reitlinger, The
Final Solution, The Extermination of the Jews of Europe 1935-1945,
Kindler. mnich 1966, pp 259-260.

Middendorff, Political mrder, p 93.

Hiddendorff, Soldier and Crine, WMTSSCHRIPT run KRIHIIOLOGIB UNI)
SMRECHTSRBFORM, 1971, p 30.

Edgar Lustgarten. The Business of Harder, Charles Scribnsr'a Sons,
New York 1968, p 85.

DER SPIBGEL, No 49/1975.

Hargarete Buber-Neunann, A Prisoner of Stalin and Hitler, Munich 1962,
pp 192, 230, 252-253.

Travel Tlnrmgh the Last Act, Christian Uegner, Ruhr; 1968, p 62.

Charles Thayer, Cuerillss and Partisans, Ruetten and Loenins, Munich
1964, p 157.

See also Middendorff, Political Harder, pp 196-195, about political
nurders by the German Pree Corps.

2211 Magazine, 2 October 1970.

Stanley Hilsrm, The Perils of Obedience, DIALOGUE, 3/6, 1975, p 16.
Hiddendorff, Soldier and Crime. pp 63?“.

The Trial of Peter Barnes and Others, The IRA Coventry Explosion of
1939, edited by Letitia Pairfield. Killian Hodge and Company,
Edinburgh 1953.

mm snzczt, No 69/1976.

Yarnolinsky, pp 162-103.

See "The Basder-Heinhof Group", assembled by Dr Reinhard Bauball, de

Gruyter. Berlin 1973, which also contains the text of the Frankfurt
verdict.

MWLIJSEONLY
42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.
SO.
51.
52.
53.
S4.

55.

57.

58.

59.
60.
61.
62.

63.

FIHF(HHNCJA1.USEINVLV

Ambassador Geoffrey Jackson, Kidnaped by the Tupamaros, Herder, Preiburg
1974.

Richard Clutterbuck, Terrorism Without a Future, Seevald, Stuttgart
1975, p 203.

See Hideendorff. Violent Criminality, p 45.
Yarmolinsky, p 265.

See Middendorff, Bankrobbers and Their Victims, DIS POLIZBIBLATT, Land
Baden-Huerttemberg, April 1976, p 51.

Anne-Eva Brauneck, General Criminology, Rouohlt, Reinbek 1974, p 268.

Hiddendorff, Crimes of Violence in the United States, de Gruyter,
Berlin 1970, p 86.

Detlev von Uslar, Psychology and Horld, Kohlha-mer, Stuttgart 1972, p 9.
Yarmolinsky, p 152.

Ibid., p 10.

Vilde, p 76.

Yarmolinsky, p 275-276.

Rowohlt, Reinbek 1974, p 134.

Night Over Russia, p 68.

See Hiddendorff. Crininologic Prognosis, Luchterhand, Neuwied 1967,
pp 130-131; and Trifonov, p 355.

See Vera Figner's epilogue in "Night Over Russia," p 230.

Elizabeth Coxhead. Daughters of Erin, the New English Library, London
1968, p 55.

To Take Arms, Quartet Books. London 1973.

DIE 2311, 8 September 1972.

See also the portrait of Rose Dugdale in KRIHINALISTIK, 1975, p 24.
Robert J. Donovan, The Assassins, Popular Library, New York 1962, p 162.
Angela Davis, My heart wanted Freedom, Hanser, Munich 1975.

PRANKFURTBR ALLGEHEINE, 19 November 1974.

FOI40I11C1AI.USEGMWLY
65.

66.

67.

68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.

76.

75.

76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.
82.
83.
86.
85.

86.

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suaan Stern, um. the Heather-en, The Personal Journal of a Revolutionary
"can, Doubleday, lav York 1975.

J. Augstein et a1., Terroriaa Against the Constitutional Stats, edited
by Rudolf Hasurlunn, Luchtsrhsnd, lauviad 1976, pp 93-96.

Roland Gauchet, Sabotsurs and Aasaaaina, Kispanhauat 6 Hitsch, Cologne
1967, p 270.

mm ALLGDBINE, 11 June 1975.

Jackson, pp 169 and 172.

Clutterbuck, p 178.

List, Hmich 1976, pp 56-58.

Prom the Shop, Lebanon Verlag, Munich 1935, p 68.

Saint-Just, scannmsscna zanscnnm mm W. 1920, p 80.

The Attempt on the Life of Car Alexander 11, Halik, Berlin 1926,
pp 76-76.

See D.J. Goodspeed, Conspiracy and Revolution, Ruattsn 6 Loenins,
Hunich 1963.

DIE “BLT, 29 January 1976.

Ceorgioe Grivaa-Dighenia, Hodern Partisan Var, Bernard and Graefe,
Frankfurt 1966, p 100.

Cyprus, KOBLHAHIBR, Stuttgart 1966, p 165.
Kiddendorff, Political ﬁnder, p 52.

Herbert Jaeger, Criae in a “totalitarian Syataa, Halter-Verna, Olten
and Preiburg 1967, p 286.

p 168.

Coxhead, p 31.

Diary 1966-1969, Suhrkanp, Frankfurt 1958, pp 52-53.
Jaeger, p 296.

Payne, p 357.

McConnell, p 205.

mammal“
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.

96.

96.

97.

98.

99.

9273
C80:

FOI'0FFKJA1.USE(IULY

Terrorism Against the Constitutional State, pp 106-120.

Summary in DIE "BLT, 10 April 1976.

Yarnolinsky. pp 367-349.

Ibid., p 349.

Dennis Roman, Manhunt, Bechtle. Munich 1966.

Richard Bennett, The Blacks and Tans, A Four Square Book. London 1966.

See Hiddendorff, Abduction, Skyjackinge, Hostage Taking, Kidnsping;
Cieseking, Bielefeld 1972.

osurscaumn mean, 2, 1976, p 25.

Hermann Marcus, Anyone Who Ever Stands Before a Judge, Droste,
Duesseldorf. 1976, p 190.

Hiddendorff. Abduction, Skyjackings, Hostage Taking, Kidnaping;
pp 33-34.

Terrorism and Violent Crime, edited by Eugen Kogon, Aepekte-Verlag,
Frankfurt 1975, p 61.

See: The Police, 1975, p 392; and: FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin,
September 1975, p 2.

See: Freda Adler, Sisters in Crime. Hooray-Hill. New York 1975.

6100/0006

83

F0.‘0FFIJAI.UGI¢IULY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

13mm EPIBLIC 0? mm

STlﬂlkﬂﬂT BY REVOLUTIONARY CELL EXPLAINS ATTACK
REVOLUNTIONAERER 2038 (Zeitung der Revolutionaeren Zelle) in Ger-an Hay 75 p 5

[Text] here is the full text of the statement by the Revolutionary Cell
previously published in the press only in an abridged version:

0n the occasion of 1 May the Revolutionary Cell has put some holes in the
nests of the Federation of German Industries (SDI). the Confederation of
German Employers Associations (RDA). the Chamber of Industry and Conerce
(III!) in Rain: and Ludwigshafen and the Aliens Police in Heat Berlin.

The capitalist associations are responsible for the crises this lousy system
keeps producing at ever shorter intervals—sharing the responsibility, we mean,
for the fact that the big ones use these crises to push and restore their
health. such as the oil concerns. the banks and the automobile industry.
Where one pushes to restore his health. the other has to pay for it. The ones
who have to pay always are we. the young. the workers and employees. the
wonen. the foreigners, the Aunt Ena's with their little shops. What we are
supposed to pay for is the chaos being caused by that noney-grabbing pack of
big wheels who have no use for people—pay for not only with less and less
money in the purse, with ever higher prices, but above all with fear for our
existence. Because fear makes people pliable. fear breaks their backbone.
fear is to nip any resistance in the bud. And many start to keep their
nouths shut. start railing at the foreigners. call in sick less often. arrive
more punctually. work acre and hope that not they but the other person will be
hit. They want to break our backbone by forcing us to tremble for our jobs.
and we tremble not because we find that work so nice. because we cannot stand
being without it. but because they have not left us anything but our strength
to work. Work in this lousy system does not honor one. however. but finishes
one physically and mentally. makes one ugly. nakes one old. stupefies one.
causes abilities to go to seed. "The young are not against the old but
against what has made then old." a Renault worker has said.

And with laws and regulations tailored for us. they take away from us all
possibilities of deternining our own fate. whether they are the special laws

for aliens. of article 218. in order to subject us women to their will. or
the innumerable laws which are meant to prevent any effective form of opposi-

tion and to turn us into criminals if we occupy our plant. like the cenent
workers of Brwitte. if we fight against the environment-polluting nuclear
plants like the people in Hyhl. Schweinfurt and elsewhere. So as to suppress
particularly the foreign workers who are caused to come to this country and
chased away again just as it happens to fit into the plans of the capitalist

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

puck—-who in fact realize best that we down here belong together and must not
let people play one against the other--the special institution of Aliens
Police has been created. These blackmail and spy and quite often. through
deportation. put foreign workers and students in the prisons and concentration
camps of their home countries. The Aliens Police are an organ of direct
suppression. the first kind of a force of fuss directed especially against
workers.

Early this year the economic mafia of the 301. BDA. DIET [Federation of
Chambers of German Industry and Commerce] (as the central organ of the 18!).
the Central Association of German Craftsmen, the Main Association of German
Retail Trade tried to make millions of youth knuckle under and additionally
to pull the teeth of the apprentices movement. After first having produced
a million of young unemployed. they offered to create 150.000 new apprentices'
positions tied to numerousconditionswhich are not only to prevent the wobbly
professional training reform but also to cancel the things the apprentices'
movement has gained in a laborious struggle. And the whole thing, on top of
it. is to be financed with our tax monies. Us. on top of it. are to pay for
their letting lS-year-olds work on their own. for 15-year olds being told
off: Work. shut up and be thankful!

we launched attacks on the occasion of 1 May because it is the day of struggle
of the working class. It was the fascist Hitler who made it the day "of
labor." with the trade unions adhering to that change in name and meaning
after 1945. We have something against these events of peace. joy and sponge
cnke if only because one cannot notice anything at all in the way of joy.
How can one enjoy oneself if at best one is allowed to make boring marches
with a red carnation in the buttonhole, if one then has to listen to people
saying that there is nothing left in the way of struggle any longer. that
the economic difficulties simply exist and that we "all" have to make sacri-
fices. if we see the union bosses on the V" Supervisory Board themselves
taking part in forging plans which put thousands of coworkers in the street
and has [sic] an active share in helping to camouflage this and embellish it.
If today everything is quite different from what it used to be. as the
speakers on the occasion of 1 May try to make us believe. how is it that we
have the feeling that we are not really living but only work ourselves
stupid? If everything is quite different, why don't we feel at ease but
lonely and unhappy? Why is it then that the work increases all the time.
getting faster. louder and duller all the time? th do we have to shut our
mouths and become ass kissers although we despise ourselves doing so?

There is no "Day of Labor" because there is nothing to celebrate about any
labor unless we completely determine it ourselves and do it on our own. The
only thing to do about that labor is to fight it. The history of the workers
movement is a history of the struggle against such work with every available
means, with calling in sick. with slowing down. with small and large strikes.
with demonstrations. with occupying plants. with barricades. sabotage. armed
actions. resistance at all levels. in all fields. with every means at our
disposal. [That] is the only way for us to remain human beings. to become
human beings. The comrades who occupied the German Embassy in Stockholm in
order to free the political prisoners in the PRC concluded their statement
with this sentence: "He will be human beings."

8790

C50: 6100 1067
I 85

I‘ll(ﬂﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NNLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Imam BPLBLIC 0? (am

REVOLUTIONARY (ILL $383 (Ii 13! 0F VIOLENCE

REVOLUIIONABRKR m (Zeitung der Revolutionaeren Zelle) in Ger-an May 75
pp 6-8

[Interview with the Revolutionary Cell Huber]

[Text] Several nonths ago we gave an interview to an
Austrian underground paper. Re are publishing here
sons extracts from it. The whole interview would be
too long, but we hope to be able to publish it soon
elsewhere.

[Question] In Austria the debate about the "urban guerrilla" concept is
being conducted exclusively with reference to publications from the PRC. In
the following questions I want to refer prinrily to the criticism against
you by leftist groups and organs in the F36 and ask you about relations
between the legal left and the urban guerrillas in your country. ﬂhy don't
you tell us something about how you happened to join the guerrillas. what
your group is doing and how long it has been in existence. so that one knows
how sonething like that actually comes about.

[Answer] I an a ne‘er of the Revolutionary Cell. which cane into being s
few years ago at a tine when the IA? and the 2 June Hovenent were already in
existence. we began with the knowledge about those two groups--in other words,
with what we learned froa the press and so forth. And there were a few
conrades who thought it was proper also to put the question of arned struggle
on the agenda here and now. with us being able to draw on experience from
political work with the assses. Hell. what are such a handful of people to do
who say that the propagation and practical taking up of arsed struggle is
proper but who have no concrete and practical experience it it? who said to
themselves, "The way we have done work with the sauce so far is not enough"?
Rho say, "What the RAP does, or 2 June—that's not the way we want it either"?
Hho only always were able to draw a line in a negative way? We were not in a
position to new something new in a positive and concrete way. The comrades
then said to thenselves. "Let's us give it a try." The only strategic del ib-
erations (and they were fairly concrete after all) in fact were only that one
should tie in to social conflicts. If previously we had staged demos and
organized teach-in'a, we now thought it was right and necessary to go beyond
those fates of struggle. also beyond flinging rocks. throwing Molotov cock-
tails. and also to go beyond the uperiences with deaos. agitation. the
frustration of constantly being denoralired by the fun. when we got bashed.

when squatting did not work. when only a few people use to a dean and so on.

86
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Actually that is what also happened to the others and to me. For me too the
wholly subjective experience in the work with the masses was the basic
element in the question. "What actually is the struggle to look like from
here on in. and what might a new revolutionary strategy look like?“

As far as I was concerned, the Vietnam conflict had been crucial. It was a
new stimulus—-particu1ar1y the mining of ports by the United States at the
time--with my actually feeling to kinds of new things. The first was that I
instantly understood that our forms of struggle are not sufficient for in
fact being able to take up new positions, for establishing something like a
counterforce. The other was to at last want to be the fighter in this
struggle. That means that for many years I fought with the feeling. the
awareness, in the respective areas in which I found myself. of having to and
being able to agitate. while what one actually is oneself, what one wants to
liberate in oneself. what one wants to put into action--that all that drops
out in the phase during which one quite intensively conducts work with the
masses. This does not mean that we are not obliged to continue doing that
tun but we ourselves must always change as well in this struggle and avoid
the enormous danger in work with the masses--to leave oneself out in the
process.

[Question] Let us now deal with an argument employed by liberal circles and
also various leftist factions: "The class enemy too is a human being, and
how can one develop a human struggle?" what this sentence probably contains
is the question as to whether the forms of struggle, the contents of
struggle and the methods of struggle are not determined by capital and
therefore likewise are authority oriented, power oriented. infected by
violence, inhuman. terrorist.

Connected with this there then is always also the assertion that the masses
reject your actions; in fact by your struggle and by this way of conducting
the struggle. you are bound to become more and more isolated from the masses.

and on a very current basis you are held responsible for solidarity movements.
having come to a standstill--as, for instance. the hunger strike of the RAF

comrades. In other words, where the entire left at that very time wanted to
unfold its solidarity movement in a real broad way. and just then the urban

guerrillas killed van Drenkmann. And that is not the first case. On compar-
able occasions. arguments have been put forward that the appeals to the

public, etc. are not there. that they submerge completely in light of the
terror actions staged in the meantime by extreme leftists.

lAn>wcrl First. about the possible prevention of solidarity demonstrations
through our practice: Surely the ones who prevent demos and campaigns are
not we but those who use the argument. If there is an occasion for a cam-
pnign (for instance. because of the death of Holger Mains and against prison
conditions)--a campaign in public--this occasion is not gone just because the
urban guerrillas kill von Drenkmann. The leftists who hide behind this

argument do not want to be lumped together with us--in the press and in
public opinion. They have not waged a hunger strike campaign before that

either. or they wish for a campaign based on a moral and humanitarian self-
imnge without anything happening to them and without somehow too much unrest

87
FOI»0FFKJA1.USIZCNVLY
FOI‘OFIJC]AI.USE¢MNLY

developing. In addition there are of course also people who reject the class
struggle altogether--in other words. reformists of all shades. for instance
the leaders of the DIP or of Socialist Bureau 2000. people concerning whom an
action like that of the urban guerrillas in the case of von Drenkmann has a
positive function to the extent that this speeds up a polarization within the
left. with the result that one can see more quickly and more clearly who has
a revolutionary claim and who has long since departed on the reformist
steamer.

As for the question of means. of ”methods of violence“: One can say. for one
thing. that what I have said earlier shows that urban guerrillas of course are
not a military fetishisation of violence. a Red Army. but that guerrillas are
a quite comprehensive thing. As regards violent forms. however. it is of
course clear that we too employ weapons such as are employed by the other
side and have to work with handguns and bombs and blackmail and kidnaping.
But if the phrase "Learn from Chile” is to have any meaning. among a number
of other things of course. it is that all examples to which we somehow have
access have shown this: The rulers in countries such as ours or in countries
kept underdeveloped. cannot be spirited away through fond wishes. or made to
disappear through campaigns of refusal and strikes; nor can they be removed
by building a counterculture. through a countermilieu.

That much fool's freedom they are prepared to grant anyway as long as the
foundations of their system are not shaken.

It turns out. however. that as soon as a form of resistance starts to become
dangerous for them—-regardless of whether those resisting are armed or not

armed. are children or adult or whatever--this resistance is broken with every
means at their disposal. including the most brutal violent means.

And when it does happen through enlightenment of the masses and a further
developed state of awareness about their conditions and of the causes and
through elections. as for instance in Chile. then every attempt is indeed
made to prevent the implementation of their wishes and ideas and programs and
their parties and representatives [sentence as published]. And if all that is
not possible with more or less peaceful. diplomatic and scheming means. quite
brutal action is taken. with the most unimaginable slaughter of people.

He therefore consider the argument as to whether terrorism boomerangs against
those offering violent resistance to be a philosophical one in light of the
reality we confront. in light of the cruel ssthods of power in the hands of
people who are in power which are applied and which we have to resist and
which we can eliminate once and for all only with violence.

By "we" we mean not the urban guerrillas--litt1e groups-~but of course a
guerrilla force employed by the masses.

Besides. I do not want to prophesy. or sale such. what the forms of confronta-
tion will look like tens of years from now. That may turn out to be quite
different from what we can imagine today. But this does not change anything
about the present zssessnent and the conclusions. which we necessarily must
draw from it now and ever anew.

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJIICHHWCJAl.lﬂ5EZ(MVLY

the comfortable bourgeois pattern of behavior. This whole contribution only
was intended to point out how much the relevant reproaches against us urban
guerrillas miss the mark-to whom precisely the imputed modes of behavior are

completely alien.

[Question] As far as I know. none of you so far has landed in the clink.
l--How come? 2--Hhat happens if it does occur?

[Answer] Of course the clink is a question that is very important to us. I
have alreadypsaid how the question of traitors is quite different from what is

generally imtgined. The same way. great security also in the execution of
dangerous actions is feasible only with such a group structure, such a mutual
relationship of comrades. Nevertheless it is possible for some of us to be
nabbed by the fuzz. Of course. the fear of prison exists. but it can be
overcome and takes a back seat to what we want.

Since there is complete identity of life and struggle (I can't think of a way
to put it in a less highflown way at the moment). or the trend is there of its
being implemented. one has to employ all that one has and is and can do. Only
then is each struggle at the same time something like a steptoward liberating
oneself. And. you see, in the clink the struggle is not over; on the con-
trary, innumerable people in prison have demonstrated to us all along that the
there too the matter continues-whether we think of Max Boelz, of Santa
Notarricola. of the political prisoners in the PRC today or of the Tupamaros.
The hunger strike of the PRC prisoners has not achieved its purpose--that is.
the cancellation of all annihilation measures. the torture of isolation--but
it has also made it clear that even in isolation you can continue to wage a
united struggle in the clink with the last means that remain at the disposal
of an utterly defenseless person. And it showed (something not known before)
that the last tenant of moral substance which the addressees of the hunger
strike must have if they are to be moved to take the desired action--that it
no longer is there as far as the rulers in this country are concerned.

Therefore in the future other. new. militant forms of struggle in the clink
and from outside are the means needed. This realization and experience is the

result, above all. of the murder of Comrade Holger; most people did not expect
the rulers to go that far, here and now. Such a wrong estimate we will not
let happen again on our part; a murder such as that of Holger. we will not
allow to happen again. And we will do everything possible to turn into
reality what Comrade Harighella said appropriately: "As far as guerrillas
are concerned. there is no such thingas‘hapenetrable prison walls."

The mutual awareness that the clink is not the end of the line. not a blind
alley, that then too we are joined with all those fighting outside and that

liberation from the clink too is a priority task for all those outside-all
this makes it possible for us to approach the thought, "what am I going to
do if I should happen to go there?" in a cool and calm manner.

[Question] The ideas you have been developing so far in your various

answers show a great deal in the way of differences in position compared with
other guerrilla groups. Perhaps you can sum up in conclusion what distin-
guishes you from other urban guerrilla groups in the PRO.

89
IN)! OFIWCJAL.USEZCMVLY
IN)I*0FF1(]AJ.IJSI1(M‘LV

[Answer] I have already said that in the case of urban guerrillas it is not
a question of ”politics" such as are conducted by virtually all other groups.
To be an urban guerrilla does not mean attending conferences. writing papers.
implementing individual actions. installing theoretical committees; rather.
it means identifying completely with this kind of existence. it means complete
identity of life and politics. That shows i-ediately how insane it is to
make the charge against us that we are reducing the confrontation to a mili-
tary level. that we are not emancipstory. that we are not trying piece by
piece to turn theoretical and practical experience and insights regarding
realities into action. On the contrary. we think that the comprehensive

war against the system of the rule of people over people at the sane time

and with equal weight includes the fight against the capitalist system in
ourselves. The one would be nothing without the other. An urban guerrilla
force with the best weaponry and military tactics is doomed to failure if it
has not taken up the comprehensive struggle mentioned. It is taken care of
at the latest by informers of the Federal Criminal Police Bureau. The same
way. a self-experience group which exclusively tries to comprehend and get to
know itself. without the fight for liberation in the 1ead-such a group gets
stuck. It may manage to erect some scope for its insiders. but it will land
in the impotent. in the helpless. ghetto without becoming dangerous to those
in power. If it could not be integrated or at least sealed off its freedom
of movement would soon be gone. He try both-to promote the worsening of
social contradictions. to begin guerrilla warfare against the ruling system
and at the same time a change of ourselves.... In concrete terms. that means.
for instance. prevention of the development of new hierarchical structures.
Precisely this is difficult in illegal work. because for a thousand kind of
reasons. for example. solutions of problems through division of labor keep
offering themselves. which then can have fatal results in the development of
operators and the rank and file. Through our constant efforts for all of us
to develop omnilaterally. through our discussions and conversations. through
the fighting of old wrong attitudes. by avoiding the error of relegating to a
backseat problems among us because of allegedly urgent tasks--as a result of
all of that we always tend to cooperate and deal with one another with equal
rights. self-determined and with absolute trust. This is also a determining
factor. for example, in preparing and executing each individual activity of
the urban guerrillas. the Cell. we talk about our fear. we stage an action as
a test of courage or on the orders of a commander. We try to analyze. to
reduce intellectual arrogance. To prevent any kind of instrumentalization

of other people by us. to see then as individuals, as persons. and to behave
accordingly. A successful struggle (meaning. for example. the greatest
possible probability of not being arrested soon. not being betrayed) is
feasible only if the members of an autonomous nucleus in some town or other
know each other 100 percent. If through joint practice. through conversations.
through an existence which does not view any problem. from the question of
reproduction to the love relations of individuals with others. as one to be
solved individually. [word or words presumably dropped] is insured. The fact
that one can behave in a completely open manner toward each other will
prevent dozens of mistakes one might otherwise make and is much more likely
to prevent the infiltration of fuzz. All that of course sounds better than
it is ever carried out. that's for sure. but no one will claim that we achieve
it all casually. We have to see to it constantly that we don't relapse into

90
Itllfﬂﬂﬂ(1AL USIZCHULY
FORIDFFK]A[.USE(MNLY

In other words. there are two kinds of violence and two kinds of dead. One
aspect of violence is the violence of those in power. for insuring their
power, for suppressing the masses of the exploited. 0n the other hand there
is the resistance of small parts of the people. the resistance of the masses.
resistance at various levels and in every conceivable sector of society.

with every conceivable means. In other words. any more than one can say that
the body of von Drenkmann and the body of Holger Heine are both victims of
senseless use of violence or in both cases are grounds for closing ranks or
taking a stand against violence "as such." one cannot say that the adoption
of the "same" mesns--that is violence, pistols. revolvers--automatica11y
reproduce lsic] system-supporting attitudes. What would be inhumane is to
want to forgo taking up the struggle or postpone the taking up of the struggle
with a big theoretical ado and shift it to other people in the knowledge. but
with the aid, of such phony arguments.

[Question] Another quotation: "Class rule in normal times is maintained by
the economic relationship of violence. not by the fuzz. by the military. by
the judiciary. There is no direct suppression in this country such as existed
centuries ago. but a depersonalized objective power and bondage relationship."

This leads to the reproach that the erasing of politicians or high judicial
officials, the blowing up of public buildings and altogether the attack on

institutions and persons does not make any contribution to class struggles.
but that in the case of institutions it is a question of reparable damage.

and in the case of people a question of exchangeable masks.

[Answer] The depersonalized power and bondage relationship cannot be taken

as grounds for the bombing and killing being wrong. The means and possibili-
ties of intervention depend on the current state of confrontations and one‘s
evaluation of them. Of course. buildings. cars. etc.. are repairable. but
when it comes to ideology, it is more difficult to repair it again. Of
course. persons are replaceable. but it is not all that easy to do away with
unrest again. Occupied buildings are also vacated again. strikes also cease
again. quite often without anything having been accomplished. street actions
also cease again. with a few exceptions without anything having been accom-
pllshed. whoever comes up with such a stupid argument ought not to have got
out of bed. Then nothing has to be repaired. and those in power don't get
angry. Hith our struggle. which comprises all forms of struggle in the
respective appropriate situation-—from sabotage in the plant to disappropria-
tiun.nulkidnaping--we want to hit this state where it hurts most and expose it
for what it is. to fight and gain positions of power and to be successful.

All members of the ruling class are to feel insecure in their houses; they
have been sleeping peacefully long enough. They are to be forced to protect
cvcrv single asset with their fuzz. We want the urban guerrillas to become

a mass perspective and not a matter of a few people. Anything else would then
really be only an end in itself.

[Question] You have now taken a stand. with quite a number of individual
examples, on charges by the left or the bourgeois. and in part one can see what
kind of understanding is connected with ideas such as the armed struggle of
urban guerrillas. Perhaps you can now describe it in great detail as it

relates to your group and your practice.

9Q
FOI.0FFKJAI.USE!DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Well. we. the Revolutionary Cell. cannot clain that we will becone
a party or a Red Army. We are very cautious there; we are no movement but
only a part of it. "hat we want is to organise a counterforce in saall
nuclei which operate. fight. intervene. protect autonomously in the various
sectors of society. which are a part of the political work with the nasses.
And at sane time or other. when we will have become a great many nuclei. the
direction of advance for the urban guerrillas will have been created. That
takes tine. but we are prepared for a long struggle. ﬂow that is to be done?
Hell. first of all only in the way we have done it so far. with all the
existing contradictions; at the moment we are still entirely geared to
political work with the masses. That can and will change only to the extent
that the objective and econonic living conditions get worse. when class
contradictions become more acute and the struggles increase. and of course
[depending on] whether we are in the proper position with our politics-that
is. being substantial participants in these struggles. promoting then.

We do not clsin to have a complete revolutionary theory. We have difficulties.
of course. but there are parts of this strategy which in practice have already
proved right. We do. however. demand that the left. both verbally and prac-
ticslly. have it out with us. that it at long last start to implement its
taking sides with the MIR and the Red Brigades in such a way as to ask itself
what the struggle could look like here. in this country (which is such more
important). Instead of only erupting in gushes over the class struggles

in ltaly or in other renote places. To implement this demand means that we
are obliged tine and again to confront the left with the question of arned
struggle.

(The interview was conducted in February 1975. We have nade slight changes

at sone places compared with a complete version circulating in the ERG and
Best Berlin.)

8790
CSO: 6100/1067

9%
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

WEST BERLIN LEPTIST DAILY PUBLISHBS RAF MANIFESTO
DH080909 west Berlin DIE TAGESZEITUNG in Ger-an 2 Jul 82 pp 12-13

["Slightly abridged version" of Red Arny faction Hay 1982 "Position Paper":
passages within slantlines denote boldface as published]

[Text] We talk about what we have experienced in recent years and what we
want to do about it. This naturally must be confined here to general defini-
tions.

//we say it is now possible and necessary to develop a new phase of the
revolutionary strategy in the center of inperialisn.//

As a precondition for this, we want to take sole of what has accululated in
the past 2 - 3 years in discussions, tests and real steps to fore the ground-
work on which satters can proceed.

He can proceed from the fact that the ides and the concept have been a
success. The practical beginnings show that it is possible and apt:
guerrillas and resistance-a front.

We Have Defined 1977 As the Transition Fran the First to the Next Stage of
the Guerrilla

The clash between guerrillas and the state in 1977 was a catalyst for a
sudden change in the political situation here. The conditions of the
struggle have changed within the dialectics of attack and reaction, and
as conditions change, the ferns of our struggle can and aunt change, too.

After 1977 nothing was the sasev-neither the state nor the left nor the
FRc's role in international politics nor the position of armed struggle
in the center within the scope of the international class struggle.

We made nistakes in 1977 and the offensive bees-e our sost serious defeat.
We will talk about this in note detail later.

The situation today--that the effect of the confrontation has nade us stronger
than we were before-shows that our nistakes and defeat were not the decisive

matter.

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Basically, the 1977 offensive was a cullination of and decisive for our
struggle since 1970. The entire phase of the struggles for the fornation

and develop-eat of the RAF was focused on the one question of power, nanely,
whether these prisoners would be released when the state connected with the
RAF and the raison d'etat-just like the struggle in general for the enforce-
nent of the urban guerrilla's concept. Hhether arsed policy would really
becone fixed in the PRO and thus open up revolutionary prospects was the
first basic question of power which in the years before and until 1977 was
the centerpiece of all actions. encounters, searches and nedia calpsigns.

Therefore, the governaent announced our "failure" a hundred tines; therefore.
the clanor of a large part of the left created the ilpression a thousand
tines of the "futility" of arned struggle. Solitary confine-ant. prison
security wings and the show trial in Sta-ahein were supposed to wipe out
what had energed. Finally, 1977.

He are sure today that they decided in favor of Schleyer's death and of the
possibility of letting alnost 100 people be blown up in Mogadishu and that
they were resolved to liquidate the Stan-hail prisoners because they really
hoped and believed this would put an end to it once and for all or at least
for the following years.

The dialectics of developnents, which now sake everything look entirely
different, clearly show what guerrillas are. what the state is and how the
struggle is going.

They were alnost successful; however, the irony is that they created a
situation which enabled us to continue our struggle under changed and
consequently better conditions.

In undertaking the huge and boundless efforts to bring about our end by
smashing our 1977 offensive. which took then by the throat like nothing
before, they were forced to becone a pure strong state, enforce the subjuga-
tion of the entire spectrun of the opposition, crush every critical gesture
and confront all segnents of society as an inescapable apparatus.

In this way in the fall of 1977 they created new relationships and conditions
for existence for the basic opposition-as an innediate experience and as a
perspective of future struggles forcing everyone to establish a basically
new relationship with power or give up.

At this point this objective situation. reduced to the very simple question
of whether the guerrillas were possibly really finished now. subjectively
becane the nonent of existential experience for nany who no longer had any
prospects so that if this really was the way things were, all their hopes
and ideas for a new life were finished, too.

There can be hope only as long as there is a struggle.

9b

FOR‘OFTICJAI.USE¢DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They want and need guerrillas; our defeat is their defeat.

From this new experience of the necessity for guerrillas, the leap to a new
awareness is easy: if the guerrilla struggle is their own cause, imple-
senting this cause can only mean for them placing themselves politically
and practically in the framework of the guerrilla strategy-on whatever
level.

This leap is the inner. active element embodied by real persons, the element
of changed conditions regarding the struggle here //for the development of
the revolutionary front in the cities.//

The point for 7 years was to bring the spirit and morality, the practice
and political orientation of an irrevocable breakdown and destruction of
the system into this political desert of appearances. goods, packaging,
lies and deception. Guerrillas.

Based on the connection and identity with the struggles in Southeast Asia,
Africa and Latin America, the point was to forcibly go into and gain a
foothold in the system.

what 0w termed a phase of survival and solidification was the phase of
implementing our concept here. a concept which will survive and he imple-
nented even if the illegal armed groups that exist at a certain moment were
to be annihilated.

A concept implemented by force, of course. In every respect and instance.
Not only against a historically unprecedented apparatus of repression but

also against the idea of people whom we would have preferred to meet under
different circumstances.

In this landscape, flattened and levelled for generations. the idea of
liberation has hardly been able to reach the hearts and minds through the
thick layers of corruption, estrangement and deformation.

Now the question of whether an armed struggle must and will be fought in
the PRC and West Europe is settled.

IL is evident.

This does not mean that the guerrillas are safe. That has never been the
case. However. the existence of the guerrilla policy is now the basis on
which the struggle will be developed.

In the International Class Struggle the Development of an Authentic Revolu—
tionary Strategy in the Imperialist Center is of Immediate Interest

In the present conflict the international liberation struggle is no longer
an isolated guerrilla activity but has become concrete reality. At this
point the situation here must be fully grasped so as to direct resistance

95
Ft“l()FF1(1Al.lﬂ5ElDNLN
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(MNLY

in the cities into the opposite direction. namely, from here to the front
in the international class struggle.

This will form the strategy which has its roots here; in the existential
hunger for a different life; in the experience of the totality of the
imperialist center; in the necessity of resistance hers llwhich the revolu-
tionary front asst-es in the center as another sector in addition to the
struggles in Asia. Africa, Latin America.l/

This means turning oneself radically into the starting point of the develop-
ment of the anti-imperialist struggle wherever one is allied with guerrillas.
with the struggle for liberation. .

l/It means struggling under an open strategic concept where everyone is
part of the revolutionary front here who-through the common goal of the
destruction of the imperialist system and the revolutionary transformation
of society. and as a result of the seriousness of his own situation, and of
his history and subjective development-p1aces himself into the concrete
struggle and into the framework of guerrilla policy.

//And it means that from the very first moment it is his concern-just as
it is ours-that the front in the center develop; that it is his concern
in which direction it develops.//

This is what we mean when we say: fighting together; one front.

If you will, our.line of action until 1977 differs from the current line
inasmuch as the important thing until 1977 was always direct armed struggle
or what prepared for that step, whereas the important thing now is for
guerrilla, militant and political struggles to merge as integral components
in the prospective escape point for strategy for cities which is to be
developed.

He say this: Even if an armed and illegal organisation forms the core of
this strategy. the strategy gains its full necessary strength only when
armed policy is merged into //one// aware and purposeful attack against

the hinges of the imperialist center with militant attacks, with the
struggles from the entire breadth of oppression and alienation, and with
the political campaign to convey its process. We place our focus on the
subjective facet of the development from the dialectics of l977-«the possi-
bility for the front in the center. It is always in the center here. It
represents the decisive element in the struggle in the imperialist centers
free which inevitably-if only because of the evolving objective contradic-
tions and conditions under this mode of rule of crisis management and trans-
formation of any social development into an instrument of domination-no
revolutionary conditions can emerge but only'destruction and decay.

However, it goes without saying that nobody pulls himself onto a new stage
by his own bootstrsps. The qualitatively changed situation at this tine

96
FOR GIVICJAI.USIZCNHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has energed from the objective development of the international class struggle
and can be conprehended only in this struggle.

IIAfter Vietnan the conflict shifted from a situation of confrontation-~the
center of the liberation war, the front and the hinterland-to a line which

on a worldwide scale runs clear across every sector. every continent and every
country because each sector. due to its intertwining and significance in the
overall system, night becone the trigger for the collapse of the power
ratio-and thus hecone purposefully [tendenaiell] the frontline of the
liberation war.//

What this scans for the anti-imperialist struggle is that the canpaigna
against this unity of imperialist reaction lust now be waged in parallel
on all fronts.

This involves various segments of one single frontlins.

And being formed by campaigns waged side by side. each segnent-and thus
also the West European aector--can become a real front capable of shaking
inperialisn only through its own strength and its specific topical and
historical conditions.

Thus the leap from the dialectics of confrontation in 1977 to the qualita-
tivcly changed, subjective conditions of the struggle here, and our step

to the basis of the process of contradiction in the interior of this center.
have been fully integrated in the develop-eat and the necessity of and the
opportunities lor the international class struggle. This cane just in
time. so to speak.

The state did in fact act in keeping with this interrelation in 1977.

Near the end of the first phase of the formation of a U.S. chain of states.
by our defeat the state boasted that it was that very superior power which
wanted to appear as though its bounds were not at all in the national
state but within the dinensions of the global counterrevolutionary project;
by virtue of its mission for the 0.8. state system. this leading European
power proposes to enforce the internal state power and the internal West
European political power against any fern of resistance so as to be able
to wage the attack internationally.

However, they thereby pushed the conflict forward in two directions along
whose lines the decisive battles will certainly take place: laterally for
the purpose of conbatting guerrillas as a standardized West European state
policy, against which the prospects of the Best European front of guerrillas
has become real; and into the depth of society, from which the most radical
polarization and the most severe tearing away in the rat's history of society
from this state and from its logic and laws ensured--and thus the opportunity
for a revolutionary front.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY

It is pointless to analyze the internal changes here in detail because the
attitude and the practice of life of those who have been struggling since
then contain the changed situation and sisply proceed free it.

we sisply state: As never before. the fundamental opposition is absolutely
through with this syten; this opposition is cold. devoid of all illusions,
and no longer approachable by the state.

There is nothing left of a ”change in the systen" and ”alternative nodels"
in the state. They are silply ludicrous.

It's all done and finished-and only after the desise of the systes will
prospects for life becowe imaginable.

Inperialisl no longer has a positive, productive future left; it only was
a future of destruction.

This is the core of the experience which for-a the root of the new wilitant
attitude in all spheres of life.

This new nilitant attitude is reflected saterially in the foundations of

econonic life. in arnanent and war plans. in the basis of the natural and
social living conditions, and in individuals thenselves where alienation

and oppression have turned into sasaive defornation and nortification of

individual richness of thinking, feeling and the personality structure.

Host people despair about this. lsperialiss has perfected and systesstized
its rule in the centers to a point where people cannot find the strength

to resist. Rapidly increasing suicide rates, escape into sickness,
alcoholiss, sisuse of sedicine and drugs-this is the reaction to the
reality that has eserged fron the history of defeats, suffering and sorrow,
and fro. a depoliticizing for which external violence can no longer be
regarded as the cause.

However, it is this dilension of misery from which the existential depth
of the fighting and the hate now spring.

This is no longer the spontaneous, brief rage, that has been burned up
over the years.

This is the soil free which the revolutionary front is now developing in
the center.

Anti-lsperialist Front

In the past 2 years, there has been a lot of leaflets and actions spreading
the slogan "one front with the RAP," and we are aware that the need for,
and receptiveness to, this extends through all politicized spheres.

98
FOI<0FFKJAI.USB(NVLY
FOR10FFHJAI.USE(NVLY

Yet, there is still an enormous discrepancy between whatever exists poten-
tially as a front in the way of need. readiness or beginnings and its imple-
mentation in the form of a development process. organization and development.

The front will not be set up automatically through parallel struggles and
their proclamation.

The front deteriorates with its proclamation, and the mobilization for it
will again disintegrate unless this concept is seized more than before as
the practical question of how it might work and ensuring that it will work.
and this must be done not just by ourselves alone.

The front will become reality only if everyone. regardless of where he is.
makes it his own cause to find out in practice the aspects and forms of
unity of the illegal armed struggle and the legal political-militant resis-
tance. including their instruments, tactics and structure-meaning their
sphere of action and development which is illegal--and to consciously
’promote them within the strategic process.

l/Our front either stands for the development of the political and practical
interconnection of the attack against the imperialist power, or it is
nothing.//

Our experience from the past 2 years, in which we managed to form the
initial nucleus of this new guerrilla structure. shows us how easily the
interconnection forms spontaneously. how strong it is in the subjective

and objective-material respect as an option for attack, and how difficult

it is, on the other hand. to get the process of strategy going as a con-
tinuous process beyond individual political initiatives, actions and limited
practical interconnections.

This is the knot that must now be severed.

what is at stake in this connection is not morale. zeal and performance.

It is important to gain with complete consistencyo-once the decision for

this struggle has been made-the realistic concept of how the system here
can really be cracked, and to determine one‘s own place in this.

The following is what we once experienced ourselves and what we are experi-
cncing now with those we directly know:

//The decisive factor for the breakthrough on which our progress depends

is the struggle of those who have begun, or intend to begin, the struggle
under this concept to comprehend themselves as subjects of the anti-imperi-
alist front; to foresee this front in and with themselves; to devise political
initiatives and actions for its sake; and to visualize themselves as involved
in everything they have started, including the front of attack.//

Since the initial discussions in 1979 on the unity of the anti-imperialist
struggle. it has time and again been practically the same obstructions

99
FOIIOFIWCIAI.USE¢MVLY
FaltlﬂﬂI1A1.USB|NULY

within and between the individual anti-imperialist groups which have prevented
what could have been attained long ago-the acting front.

He have no use for sham fights over the militant action fetish or over the
conjuging up of the "alliance with the masses." Struggling to arrive at
an ovowal of us or. vice versa. cautiously waiting to see if any connection
with us would be discovered during the conflict are likewise superfluous.

It is a fact that the only result is that the simplest subsequent steps are
not being taken.

//l’ront// means more than actions.

Front, that is. fights which in their common aim merge into one fight and
//thus// can be united politically and practically will exist in many forne
in the Rest European center. The anti-imperialist front in the PRE--that
is military attacks. uniform, coordinated military operations aimed at
failing imperialist strategy; this scene taking political initiatives to
pursue policies and initiatives which support current resistance; this
means a structural and organizational fight for the ability to act; this
means in every moment of its development a fight for the possibility and
practical purpose of discussions and communicatirus for the process of
strategy.

//Front// means something other than moving the guerrillas one structure
farther away from legality.

He have said that a ”legal arm of the RAF" does not and cannot exist.
Naturally, we have connections to all kinds of people. and naturally we
pursue a concrete guerrilla policy-anti-imperialist resistance. however,
can become only as an independent. specific development in this field, a
part of the anti-imperialist front with regard to the common aim, and
only there the separation will be overcome. [Sentence as published]

Only in this way can the fight on this terrain become politically effective
and gain continuity and atrenngwandbasicallyself-deternination and full
responsibility at every point of the fight of revolutionary policy in the
West European center is substantial.

Always discussing the ease point where isolated standpoints and convictions
are held against each other. the narrowness of the individual thinking of
groups. the lack of determination to become active oneself--all this simply
disappears where the assessment of the situation prevails to the effect that
the anti-imperialist front is urgently needed although it is weakly developed.
It can, however. hold a potentially strong position in the West European
center and have enormous possibilities in the international liberation
struggle.

//The relevant fighting front against the imperialist strategy nust be the
next direct aim.//

l0. OFFIC1A1.UEI:(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All the knowledge about imperialism and its plans. emerging from all the
documents, and the determination and fire of militant actions are in vain

if a decision does not result in establishing cohesion in fighting each single
development.

//Uhat characterizes the current resistance and the conditions of the fight

in the cities. namely the political, structural and practical elements and
lines of the attack against the core of capitalist pouer--the PR6 state and
NATon-must be extracted and offensively developed.//

The situation is as follows:

The anti-imperialist fight is lagging behind the offensive of the contra-
dictory but still unified imperialist machinery. The beginnings of the
anti-imperialist mobilization were not directed against inperialist recon-
struction after Vietnam and the beginning of the crisis and the preparation
and beginning of its offensive-resistance was in disarray in this phase
and was eventually paralysed by the collapse of the 1968 leftists-but

against the reactionary attacks which had been continuing for quite some
time on all levels.

the offensive by the imperialist machinery is under way. there is great

spontaneous resistance. but anti-imperialist policy is providing no effective
orientation within this resistance.

//In order to do this, this policy must be an initiating and relevant factor
in the discussions about and against imperialist schemes vhich are deter-
mining the course of current history://

".5. war strategy in Europe--
The internal reactionary offensive of the state--

The international roll-back strategy of the imperialist chain of states
against the liberation movements. young national states and socialist states.

The situation is such that it is really unknown how history will develop
now. In its historic crisis--for the first time in 60 years it must fear
tor its existence--U.S. imperialism can apply extreme means. and it will

do so if the system slides toward an unpredictable crisis and if that cannot
be prevented.

In view of its nuclear destruction potential there is a catastrophic aspect
which ue. the internationally suppressed and exploited. have no reason to
fear because this would mean in any case the end of imperialism. However.
imperialism in any case means our end. Our approach to the prospect of

nuclear destruction is, first, that we will not fear it and. second, that
up can and will prevent it only through revolutionary war.

101
FOI10FFKJA1.USC(NULY
FOI1OFIICIAI.lEIECHULY

Developsents in Hestern Europe Have Become a Crucial Point of the Worldwide
Dispute

Due to the novement of the international class struggle it has become logical,
on the one hand. for the imperialist strategy to launch an offensive in and
from western Europe, with the PRC as the crucial state in this sttelpt to
secure for itself predominance and capital reproduction as a functioning
world systes. Frol our point of view, on the other hand, the develop-ant

of the front in the center is a pure necessity as a prerequisite to overcome
the stagnation tendency by the international liberation process in the East-
west contradiction and through developments in nationally liberated states.
The centers the-selves and western Europe as the point of intersection of
the lines running East-West and North-South as well as the line between
state and society in particular, are the starting points and the core of
their restructuring project.

It is here that they must try to gain silitary power to exert pressure on
the socialist states and against the national liberation struggle and to get
the economic power, the rolling economic and social crisis in the country
under control. to dominate and annex the young developing states and-as a
prerequisite for all this-to forcibly impose an internal political homoge-
neity, if not as a consensus, at least for tranquillity in their own house.

In this sense they depend on the centers. They must and will try on all
levels and with all their might to aggressively enforce the reactionary
overall concept in the center.

Medium-range sissiles, neutron bombs, stepped-up conventional armasent, the
concentration and centralization of capital, rationalization, planned mass
unemployaent, asking nan an instrument of machines; forcing an energy policy
which is indispensable for them as a means of war on the world market; the
destruction of social structures in the interests of the police and big
capital; the exploitation of workers trying to earn a living, training as

a factory of workers; the pigs, judiciary and the clink; and so on llare
moves of this militarily conceived offensive and an iron clasp surrounding
all sections of the urban society which has long ceased to leave us the
choice of whether we want the front in the center or not. There is war.
The question is only whether or not there will be a revolutionary front
against the reactionary offensive.//

It is against this background that the anti-imperialist front in the center
emerges. Its effect cannot be gauged alone by the prevention or nonpreven-
tion of current individual isperislist projects here. All its achievesents
are attained by it and for it as a segment of the struggle of the inter-
national front and it is only from this totality of confrontation between
inperialism and liberation that the ratio of forces can be created which
makes the social revolution possible here.

102

FOR1OIINCIAI.IEIE(MVLY
IKIICHﬂHCIAl.USIICMVLY

//Resistance against the imperialist machinery striking out here-this is
also our definition of guerrilla action and the development of an anti-
imperialist front-is the offensive and development of the revolutionary
front in the center within the scope of its worldwide struggle.//

In the light of the general situation such an offensive is necessary now
and must be launched from here.

Internationally, the two blocs face each other, armed to the teeth and
petrified by their overkill capacity. Liberation movements have become
states. and those which do not yet have a state act as quasi states in
their struggle to become one. The main terrain of the liberation movements
and the young states has become the sphere of international politics and
international relations--between the East-Vest conflict which is reproduced
in these countries. the world market on which and against which they are
forced to develop and the new political strength of the liberated national
states in the international bodies which give them some leeway of action.
This is the logical development. an expression of the strength the national
liberation struggle has gained. and an expression of the weak point that
the foundation is still the system of states laid down by imperialism.

In this situation the development of a country entails for the political
leadership of the young states a dual contradiction-the people's deepening
misery and poverty, their underdevelopment and resultant demands for radical
solutions as opposed to the inevitability of their struggle for the necessary
means which are almost entirely in the possession of the imperialist states.
In addition. they have to come to terms with imperialism imposing on them
growing obligations which can lead to their catastrophic destruction in
civil wars. famine. despair, repression and intervention.

However. they did not choose these contradictions. They are above all a
result of colonial history. Eventhough it has long been ousted from these
countries. imperialism profits even from the destruction it left behind.

The guerrillas in the cities and the militant struggle today are the results
of a dynamicism the liberation movements have triggered. If as a result of
their struggle a movement has emerged here at all after 30 years, the current
situation there is primarily marked by the fact that the struggles here are
so little developed.

The Struggle for Liberation

As necessary as resistance and the revolutionary offensive are regarding
our own situation, this is also our-and only our-opportunity to open up
this prospect of the end of the system, a prospect which //in// its function
of destroying imperialist power goes beyond this function.

Proceeding from the ripeness for destruction of the metropolis where produc-
tive social developments have begun, the revolutionary struggle in its

103
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOIICINNCIAI.IIIE(IULY

goals and in the structure of every combat front point to a social future
beyond the historical frontiers of the existing systen of states.

In this historical phase of imperialisa. which has been forced back to the
outer lines and is disintegrating internally in the general crisis. the
ripeness of the metropolis to be revolutionised is also its ripeness for

the struggle which is radically oriented toward a change of the social
conditions into a con-unist systen.

In this systes life is not conceived as being in another transitional
period or victory as meaning that the state is taken over; this systea

is the unified process of resistance. counterpower and transforaation ained
at liberation.

IIRevolutionary policy here is the strategy which considers resistance in
everyday reality here as a process of the liberation struggle as well as a
part. segment and function of the worldwide struggles by which the goal
can be reached only when they are conbined.//

This policy has nothing to do with ideology. It does not establish another
of these ideological models which supersede each other and which allegedly
will be implesented later. It can only be a real process.

As a signal of utopia, it is a long-term and direct strategy-it can also
be terned a way of life--where the strategic goal of the destruction of
inperialist power is connected with a real change now-

A process, as the front develops which destroys the state's occupation of
the political terrain and the individual--

A process which by the production of a counterpower creates the respective
conditions of a political-nilitary offensive and as a production and
naterial developsent involves the restoration of man's full dimension in
the relations of the coabatsnts. [The following renark appears at this

point in brackets: "Boys and girls. who the hell is supposed to under-
stand that?-D.S."]

lanediete changes, liberated territories and revolutions are entirely inte-
grated in the process of resistance-and they are true only in this way.

The revolutionary strategy here is simply a strategy against their strategy
llwhich attacks their strategic plan in their concrete projects and. by
launching aaterial attacks, breaks the imperialist offensive in and outside
the country politically and thereby creates an awareness which nationally
as well as internationally produces a new process of resistance by the
front which blocks their plans before they can carry then out.

//A strategy which as the relevant fighting front here disrupts the consensus
in the center of iaperialisa and by spreading this internal disruption

106
IOR40FIIJAI.UBI(INLV
F0.‘0FFMJA1.USE(HVLY

internationally deprives them of the legitimacy and attractiveness of
reproducing in a new phasethesystem based on money. manipulation and
destruction. In a new phase.

//A strategy which as a radical change of the situation in the metropolis
shows the possibility of an end to imperialist power and its existence
among the people as well as ripeness for a liberated society.//

Concerning 1977

The problem which had an adverse effect on us during the Schleyer kidnapping
was that we-concentrating on our concrete objective of liberating the
prisoners--failed to tackle the development of the political goal in the
entire offensive, namely, deepening the contradictions in the crisis.

Even though the action had hurt the state to the quick, we failed to act
on the political level of the challenge.

In the summer of 1977 the situation of the prisoners had intensified to a
point where we could no longer take our time for a liberation action. The
prisoners were on thirst strike, and Gudrun was dying.

He knew that we would venture the attack at that time from a state of rela-
tive political weakness, but we did want that attack because war does not
exist merely as a state of affairs between ourselves and them, but solely
if it is being materially developed as a question of power.

Since Stockholm the struggle over the prisoners has become a crucial issue
in the conflict between the guerrillas and the state, a crucial issue in
whose claim on the prisoners both elements converge as in a crystallization
point:

The relationship of a guerrilla with his captured comrades, what kind of
terms they are on with each other--a function of this struggle-and the
significance of every individual to the whole;

And the power ratio in general because guerrillas in this respect directly
and materially pose the question of power to the state because their attack
Is aimed purposefully at the political crisis since it directly pulls a
pillar of their power from under their feet as in the case of Schleyer
(only then does a realistic chance exist) and thus makes visible, and
simultaneously tears apart, the structure of power by forcing a reaction.

It was our idea to pose to the SPD the question concerning an exchange of
the two figures who directly embodied the economic world power of PRC
capital to a degree that no more than 10 others might:

Ponto for their international finance policy (and in this the full meaning
of the role of the German banks in general and his. the Dresdner bank, in

105
INJIJOFFICIAI.IEIEIMQIJV
INJI‘OFFiCJAl.IISEI(H'LY

particular for the reactionary regimes in the developing countries, and for

the PRC monetary policy as a means of the institutional strategy under which
European integration proceeds);

And Schleyer for the national economic policy (the rich combines; concerted
action [conferences of government. employer and trade union leaders at
regular intervals], the P36 as an international model for social peace.

In other words, the power in the state for which the SPD as a government
party must make allowances if it wishes to stay in government.

The contradiction at which the action was aimed was the tension between the
strategy of 0.8. capital. by which the SPD's state image and each of its
reactionary maneuvers in domestic and foreign policy since 1945 has been

determined. and the banks and concerns or. if you will, the national
capital.

National capital certainly cannot devise a policy of its own against the
hegemonic--that is U.S.-line, unless you wish to consider the provincially
narrowminded variants of Kohl, Albrecht and so forth. or the grand design
of Strauss which has come to naught for more than 20 years now to be such
a policy definition; yet the power with which it competes and expands
within the vertical structure of the entire capitalist mechanism is natu-
rally an expression of a consensus and a self-awareness of the national
elites. a self-awareness which Schmidt has to prosote upward and downward
in both the international and the national context. For the first time
the political escalation of the action had been defused by the failure of
the Ponto abduction and thus by the absence of one of the supports for the
entire tactical and political objective.

However. the decisive mistake we made was not to revise the whole action
from the beginning after the federal government had let the first ultimatum
expire and it thus became clear that they had given Schleyer up for dead;

a revision should have provided the action with quick consolidation.

He had seen from Schleyer's efforts to achieve an exchange that his connec-
tions and his influence were not worth a damn against the power of the
consolidated imperialist strategy, which proceeded along the lines of the
tactics and the psychology of the BKA [Federal Office for Criminal Investi-
gation].

These tactics of avoiding an official government decision. drawing out the
action through pretended negotiations so as to end the action as far as the
police were concerned, ruling public pressure out from the outset by means
of a news blackout, and intending to use the example of these prisoners to
gain international "rejection of terrorism" through Hischnewski's trip to
the so-called host countries [aufnahmelaender]-this objectively gave us
the opportunity and the time to work with this situation politically.

106

IN)! OIIWCJA1.1EIE(HVLY
l-‘OI OMCIAL USE ONLY

What this work would have amounted to was immediately using the talks with
Schleyer to be able to actually push to extremes the contradictions which
meanwhile had again caused the "unity of all democrats" to disintegrate.

These were contradictions that extended to a point where, for example the
CSU attempted to deprive Schmidt of the government by suggesting the release
of the prisoners and the subsequent promulgation of a state of emergency.
This would have spelled the end of all SPD political standing [politim] by

the open admission of the state crisis-something which the SPD had to pre-
vent by all means.

it was in this escalated situation where our defensive situation had become
evident that the martyr Halimeh commando decided to intervene, to the extent
this was possible under objective pressures.

This was the first time that a liberation movement commando intervened
directly in the conflict here and made the struggle in the city its own
cause.

A great deal has been said about the tactically and strategically erroneous
direction of this action which simply gave the PRC the chance to start a
counteroffensive of its own.

The responsibility for this is entirely ours.

It was our mistake not to seek a decision in the city itself, a decision
which can result only from the power ratio here because the matter at issue
is the prisoners representing the struggle here and because it was important
to isolate the PRC: instead the escalation was shifted to one of the young
national states.

When viewed in the context of an action from the city aimed at the polariza-
tion in the city. namely. a breach between the people and the state. the
instrument applied--airp1ane hijacking--was bound to backfire against the
attack //as a whole// because it inevitably put the airplane passengers

into the same class as objects which is how the imperialist state has

always treated the people. In this way the objective of revolutionary
action was foiled.

The erroneous planning of the action formed the pincers against the commando
which allowed the federal government to operate with the calculation that

the commando would naturally try everything. and would continue to negotiate.
as 1ong as it still saw some hope that the PRC would release the prisoners.

As far as the SPD was concerned the massacre. like in Stockholm earlier,
was the solution because the SPD rejects a popular image whenever U.S.
interests—-insuring the domination in the center-are under attack. "It
was unknown whether the Outcome would be tolerable." Schmidt said at the
time.

107
F0!‘0FFNJAI.US£1MVLY
FOI‘OFFHJAI.USE(NULY

it was the decision in favor of a nilitary solution at a tile when a victory
of the guerrillas in the PRC, the crucial country of the reactionary inte-
gration of the Heat European states, would have decisively thrown back the
FRc's entire concept of i-perialist reconstruction.

This decision was a leap to the head of the reactionary counteroffensive

to standardize the internal security apparatuses in western Europe; yet

a central coaponent of social denocratic policy also collapsed in Stannheia
and Mogadishu, naaely, covert warfare.

The iaperialist state stood there. acting openly in a reactionary manner,
sn imperialist state which no longer was afraid of being likened to its
fascist past. but extolled this past: the desert foxes of Mogadishu as

a nodel for the Gernan youth.

By the sane token this state has demonstrated as never before the political
weakness of the metropolis states. the internal brittleness of the whole
structure which looks so potent free the outside.

Red Army Faction. Hay 1982

C80: 6131/520

108

ROI¢OFFKJAI.USI2€I'LY
R8" GROUP SEEKS POLITICAL. NGIRBPIESSIVB TERRORISM PM?
Paris LE MINE OBSERVATIUR in French 22 May 82 PP 52-53
[Articlez "Political Dissuasion" by Marcelle Padovani]

[Text] Would it be possible to coebat terrorisn--past,
present. and future-«sore effectively through persuasion
than through repression? This question is raised.

A group of French officials and specialists have secretly. sci-clandestincly
forned a study group on "antiterrorist dissuaaion." Hith no official status,
of course. ‘l'heir ail? To launch a "preventive antiterrorisl operation"
addressed at possible candidates for the "er-ed struggle" in France; to
encourage the dynamics of "dissociation" or "repudiation of weapons" aaong
terrorists fraa abroad who have taken refuge in our country: Ger-ans,
Spanish Basques. and especially lore then 200 Italians (sole for-er members
of the Red Brigades, a nucleus of Fri-a Linea, and nunerous "independents") .

However, none of these French officials pretend to believe that these
voluntary exiles are necessarily "white sheep" who fled unjust persecution.
No, their viewpoint is coepletely different. Convinced that police repression
is neither satisfactory not adequate; convinced that extradition should be
reserved basically for canon law crines, they hope to gradually replace then
with a system of political dissuasion. discussed and accepted on the European
level. Positive discussions have already taken place with GerIan officials.
Others will take place with the Italians. with the Spanish, it see-s. it is
difficult to have a dialogue at this tine.

what is the reasoning of this type of "discussion group"? As of 10 Hay 1981,
France is leftwing. To accelerate change, it is proper that it give different
signals, even to those who have chosen the wrong path. with P.38 in hand.
France will never suggest to countries who are victins of terrorists that they
abandon the struggle against it, but rather that they integrate a political
approach to the phenoeenon into their struggle. and therefore conceive of
European cooperation differently on these grounds.

Four Suggestions

This is an original proposal, and also a courageous one—at a tine when French
public opinion is close to giving way to obsessive terror, and Ger-an and

109

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llnllnn public opinion close to being convinced that France is a made-in-
Hurope sanctuary for terrorism. There is no lack of presumptions: "repentant"
Italians are currently marching before judges and revealing. as Antonio Savasta
did, that the military leaders of the Red Brigades had correspondents in Paris
to supply weapons; others speak of fall-back bases in Paris for terrorists in
trouble.

The "dissuasion group" is not unaware of any of these accusations. It even
knows that some of them are not entirely unfounded: the files of General
Intelligence speak volumes in this regard. But, the group thinks it is
necessary to go beyond this.

Specifically. what will the group suggest to the French government?

(I) To recognize that many terrorists have found refuge in this country:

(2) to negotiate with the refugees for their "dissociation,“ perhaps in the
form of a solemn letter renouncing the armed struggle. which still doesn't
rule out regular police checks; (3) to offer political asylum, and therefore
the right to a legal existence, to those who would request it and would
present adequate guarantees; (4) finally. to resort to deportation rather
than extradition for those who hesitate to "dissociate."

The "dissuasion group" recognizes that these proposals are meaningful only if
the governments of the countries involved also agree to launch a big
conciliation effort: for the moment, aren't the Germans and especially the
Italians in better control of the terrorist phenomenon than previously?

What do they reply. for example. in Italy? They advance political and
technical considerations. (1) He are not in Latin America, say the harshest.
Someone who has committed a crime that he calls "political" against the
democracy, who has fired on unarmed men and assassinated people. while
convincing himself that he was struggling against the state, must be
extradited and pay for his mistakes in prison. (2) How, say the "technicians"
in turn, will the French government separate the wheat from the chaff? "hat
criteria will it choose: a declaration of non-hostility to provide "peace
for the assassins"? Hill it also grant political asylum to murderers?

(3) Finally, ask the most practical, is the French police force capable of
handling a matter which is so complex and unpopular even in France? Isn't
there a chance of sabotage, or of a settling of accounts within the world

of refugees, between the "hard" and the "soft." between those who "repent"
and those who stick to their position? In any case. add these practical

people, as in Italy they have managed to make a distinction between small
and large "repenters," between the "dissociated" and the experienced killers;

so it is good to seek varied solutions for those who have taken refuge
abroad; they must be allowed choices other than simply resorting to the
benefits of the "law on repeaters."

An Interesting Case

Besides, let us take a closer look at this Italian law on "repenters." Of
course it encourages the repentant to cooperate with the court and compensates

110

FOR‘OFFHJAI.UBEGINLY
F0. ‘WVN'MI. NSF "NI V

the: through significant reductions of sentences. And this to the extent
than an Antonio Savasta, with 17 nurders on his conscience, lay get off with
10 years in prison because he talked a lot: no lore than a liner terrorist
who has little to he blaned for and little to tell. Not to mention those
who don't want to say anything. despite their self-criticise.

An interesting case could perhaps push the Italians-~whether "hard” or
"technical”-toward a sore flexible and more varied attitude.

This is the case of Hassino Prsndi. alias Ivan of Brescia. age 28. for-er
leader of the terrorist group Prina Linea. Two hold-ups on hie conscience.
No "knee-cappings" or assassinations. for participation in the arsed group,
he has been sentenced to 7 years hard labor. In France. where he lives
clandestinely, he gets along by earning less than 2.000 francs per month on
the black nnrket. he is soneone who does not refuse to recognize his
responsibilities. while adnitting that he is afraid of prison if he goes back
to Italy. Can the Italian officials content themselves with only providing
two options for hin--throwing his into prison or letting hin vegetate in

the dustbins of terrorisn--just as as for those who have killed or who refuse
any self-criticism?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 "1e Nouvel Observsteur“

9693
cso: 6131/512

111

IOIIOIFIJMI.UBIGIULY
Ftﬂlflﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂ‘LV

FRANCE

FORMER PRIHA LINEA MEMBER DBSCRIBES CAREER
Paris LE NOUVBL OBSERVAIBUR in French 22 May 82 pp 52-54
[Interview with "Ivan of Brescia" by Marcelle Padovsni]

[Text] Taking refuge in Paris. a former Prina Linea
activist tells his long story.

”There were 10 of us. He crossed the French border secretly, at night. in
snow up to our waists. That was alnost 2 years ago. Did we flee iron
repression? of course. but we fled especially from ourselves and the
aberration of arned struggle. we had no other choice than to leave Italy.

He were cornered. Cornered not so auch by the police or Della Chieaa's
forces as by our forner conrades: they didn't understand anything anynore;
they did not perceive the absurdity of our "struggle"; they had become a sect
and they were thinking more about shooting and killing than about fighting
for the working class."

"Our story, ny story. is a long one. I would like one thing to be well
understood: I an not particularly proud of it. I do not believe that you
can leave the arsed struggle in any other way than with your head bowed.
slinking along the wall. and apologizing to the working class; so as to try
then to rebuild an identity bit by bit-a strictly personal identity. of
course. You see, I don't believe in a 'network of the repentant' at all.

I would also like it to be known that I would prefer today to have no memory--
to no longer think about what has been done, or at least to be able to replace
the nenory of these 10 years of terrorisn with the nenory of the history of
the workers' novenent. All things considered. it lust surely be more
authentic than our own." >

"I would like that so nuch. But I hesitate to return to Italy and I
absolutely refuse to give them nanes--the last few nanes which the prosecutors
may still not know. "hat purpose would it serve? The arned struggle is

over. I ask these Judges and the state in general: hasn't the tine cone to
lend us a hand in getting out of this rotten situation and forning lore

hunan relationships with those who have abandoned arned violence?"

"Ivan”--this is an asst-ed nalenstops for a recent. he is a tall young nan,
6feetand 3 1/2 inches tall. thin and anguished-looking. Traces of

112

InliﬂlUKJA1.UBI(INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

self-irony flash in his very restless black eyes-«as, for example, when he
explains that he has not been able to eat chicken since as a child he saw his
grandmother slit one's throat. He has retained the lilting accent of his
native Emilia. His speech is politically oriented and cultivated. He became
a terrorist just before defending a doctoral thesis on money.

"I was born in Reggio, Emilia, a ‘red' region. in 195‘. My family were
partisans, socialists. and anarchists. My uncle. who was a co-snder in the
Garibaldi Brigades, fled Italy after the war because, according to him, the
revolution had been betrayed. It was an environment of disappointed
revolutionaries. an atnosphere of overall disillusior-ent, wasn't it? No
doubt: at hone when they spoke of politics. it was in negative terms. Hy
father used to say: 'He've been had. ' Whatever the case, when I leave Red
Reggie for Brescia. hone of the Beretta pistols and of Pope Paul VI, a very
Catholic city in any case, I an inediately sized up. In school, a Fascist
professor nicknames me ‘I’almiro.'1 As for me, I discover the Church in all
its triuaphant horror. And I an literally forced to try myself against
religion. I get through by developing a fixation on Che Guevara. At the tine.
I even were a beret with a star like his: his aartyr's attitude and
revolutionary orientation temporarily helped me to resolve ay conflicts.

At the age of 11., I begin at the lycee. I convince myself of the virtues of
militant antifgscisa. It aust be said that after the Fascist atteapt in
Milan in 1969. we were all living in terror of a coup by the extre-e Right."

"When did I enter the armed struggle? Free 1970 on. we were living in an
atmosphere of preventive war. Violence was our daily bread. One exaaple is
the forces of order within the extreme Left moveaents. They taught you how
to bash sonaone's face in scientifically, how to hit which specific part of
the tibia to break a leg. You have never heard of beating someone up with a
hammer? Nor of neofascists reduced to a pulp with a 60-centineter-long
aonkey wrench weighing around 3 kilos and held with two hands? I have seen
guys, Fascists, whose eyes they were tearing out with a hook. believe ac,

at the beginning of the 70's. there was violence which was much worse than
the ”jenbisations."3 this is just to explain to you that 1: would be difficult
for me to pinpoint the exact noment when a militant in the extreme Left passes
from violence to organized armed struggle. I an obviously speaking of the
years fron 1970 to 1975. After that. it is an entirely different story."

"My entry into the armed struggle. first through the paper 'Senza Tregua.’
then the Pri-a Linea group, therefore doesn‘t change anything in my life or
ay practice of militancy. It is only a natural extension of it. Besides,
when the Prise Lines is formed in 1976. it declares that it wants to be an
'armed ailitery structure' in the service of workers. In other words, the
workers were supposed to be able to call upon it to execute attacks on persons
or property within the context of their sore general struggle against
exploitation. Obviously, this has never been the case. I understand that

the idea nay seen bizarre to you; at the time it seemed wise to us, and apt

to encourage some revolutionary 'shortcuts."'

”I am saying 'us' to represent solidarity. and so as not to appear to be
evading Iy responsibility. The court considers that I was among the leaders

113
'0. mt I.“ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Prima Linen and that I therefore could not be unaware of what was going on:
from the assassination of Brigadier General Ciotta to the assassination of
Judge Emilio Alessandrini. In fact, I was already on the fringes of the
organization. In reality, I began not to be in agreement with it in 1977, for
it was at this time that the fringes of the so-called "youth movement." who
had no political training, entered organizations such as the Red Brigades or
Prima Linea. Prima Linea increases meaningless attacks. The little guys

set out. totally feeble-minded, rubbing their hands and asking every night:
'So. what military action are we taking tauerrow7' Pine. As for me, I

would have preferred to continue my studies devoted to financial capital.

But the organization didn't want any worthless research. It asked us for

cards and people's names. saying: 'Comrades, we must be productive and
effective.'"

"Thus we come to my departure from Prime Lines in September 1979 after the
Bordighera Congress. The armed struggle had shown its true face: a private
war between the apparatus of state and the armed groups. He had lost all
contact first with the big plants, and then with the small ones. He no
longer had a single militant worker. I began to tell myself that our
analysis of the situation had probably not been right and that it was
necessary to go back to the mass movements as they were and as the working
class had chosen them. Only, look: when I told the others of my intention
to leave, they asked me to perform a '1ast act' to show everyone that I was
part of the organization and that I didn't intend to betray it. It involved
a 'knee-capping.’ I refused."

"Did I participate in armed activities? Yes, but not in this one. A few
Molotov cocktails, two hold-ups intended to finance our group."

Outcasts Like Us

"I fled. I needed some space to try to understand the failure of Prime
Linea, the failure of the armed struggle, our mistakes. and also the mistakes
of others. So I thought a lot about repression. It has become extremely
effective in Italy, but it will not be enough. I believe more in reforms
which bring freedom than in those which take it away. I should be ashamed,

you are saying to yourself, to make such remarks; I, who at the time 'covered'
armed actions which hardly increased freedom. Perhaps. I do not know.

i only know that I am seeing clearly today. that I recognize our failure, but
that repression alone would not be able to stop terrorism."

"Of course. now you are going to tell me: 'But then, y0u must talk. You
must tell the courts everything. You must turn yourself in and pay for your
mistakes. Terrorism has still caused close to 100 deaths. Tell everything.‘
But 1 continue to have nothing in common with this state, which is still the
employers' state, and under current circumstances I an only seeking to halt
a machine which is crushing 2,000 people: all those who are in prison or
have fled abroad. Let's stop the machine, limit the waste. This is why,
although I am against informing, on the other hand, I am convinced of the need
for a public 'dissociation' effort, a vast attempt at explanation. As for
turning myself in. do you really believe in the redeeming nature of prison,
of systems based on paying off sentences?"

116 '

FORIDFFKJA1.UBICMNLV
l-‘OI 0PM“. USE ONLY

"Beoidee. let's be eerioua. I have nothing to negotiate with the etate.

As I said at the beginning, I left the arled etruggle with ay head bowed,
elinking along the walls. Terrori- hae deetroyed a politically and eocially
i-ature generation. The tine hae cone for outcaete like on to return. or

to turn, to reading end to etudy. For ample. to huhly mderetand the
worker'e world today. But don't infer tron thia that I now belong to the
‘hietoric beft.‘ The Left too hae node aietekee. Obviously, you are right;
it hasn't killed anyone. Thie is very hportant indeed. But, can it

rennin” aloof fro. thoee who now recognize their aberration?"

comrcm': 1982 "la Nowel Oheerveteur"

POOMS

1. Palniro Togliatti, for-er secretary general of the Italian Co-uniu Party.

2. 12 Deco-her 1969: 16 deaths.

3. "Knee-cappings": shooting in the legs.

9693
cso: 6131/512

11.5

lawman!
SMY 0? mm IN 1981

Edi-id SW10 DB BOMBAS ANO 1981 in Spanish 1982 pp 1, 2, lo. 5. 6, 8, 9, 16,
19. 20, 23

[Booklet published by the Office of the Bxplooivu Ductivntion Squad]
[Text] Index
"Introduction
«Terminology
"Periodical Activity of the 303's [Explosives [Inactivation Squad]
-lhp of Bombing Incidents in 1981
~Chcrt of Incidents in 1981, by both.
-Chart by Day. of Heck
-Chart Comparing 1977 With 1981

"Categories of Bombing Incidents in 1981 (Rul, Fclu Alanna, Simulated, Bomb
Threat. and Reventive Search“)

~Chnrt Giving Total: for 1981, Rich Percentage-
-Chartl by Cities
"Types of Devicel, (bjectivu and Resulting Effects

-Dictribution of Real Devices by Objective: end Categoriu
dual Device. in 1981

~Bxplooive mteriel Recoverod in 1980

~Bxplooive hterial Recovered in 1981
-DPactivated Devices or Those Which Exploded

-Damnge Caused by Devices and Honey Saved by the 308's of the National
Police

--Conclusion

Introduction

0f the three principal methods whereby terrorist activity is carried out
(psychological action, armed action and action with explosives), action with
explos ves is basically combetted in Spain by the Explosives Deactivation
SquadstUDB's)of the National Police.

This terrorist activity and its response by the 003's in 1981 is what we are
graphically trying to show in this SUM“ OF BONDINGS IN 1981. A thorough
examination of the information presented reveals phenomena already known,

on the one hand, and, on the other, a clear picture of interesting and, at
first glance, unusual aspects for one who is not a qualified specialist in
antibomb combat.

To make it easier to read and aid in a rapid understanding of its contents
and the significance of the appropriate and necessary comparisons, the SD"-

MARY 0P BONDINGS IN 1981 consists basically of graphs and diagrams. How-
ever, this method of presenting data does not preclude a rather broad analy-

sis of the situation despite the brevity of the contents.

The conclusions will be obvious to the reader, but certain ones merit special
attention. In this method of combating crime, we note a substantial increase
in the effectiveness of the police; the curve of terrorist action with ex-
plosives has clearly dropped in the past 3 years. This is due to political
and social factors whose analysis is not a part of this summary and also--as
we have just said--to a substantial improvement in police action; in this
respect, it should be pointed out that, in a nutshell, the UDB's have
achieved noteworthy perfection in their operative methods. This high degree
of success is certainly due to the experience they acquired during 7 very dif-
ficult years in which they had to pay a bloody tribute in the form of five
dead and three disr’ied in the line of duty.

Terminology

Real Device

This is a set of components arranged in such a manner that. under certain

conditions, it can produce an explosion. The components are: a detonator
and an explosive.

:eover, if the device is pyrotechnic, it needs a fuse; if it is electric,
it requires a source of energy.

117
when, instead of an explosive, the device contains an infla-able arrange-
unt, it is converted into an incendiary bomb. And the device may contain a
combination of the two arrangements.

Bomb Threat

This is a threat which, for various reasons, may be transmitted orally, in
writing or by telephone. When it is real, it may result in daaage to pe'r-

sons and property. When it is false, it may produce panic and alarm on the
part of the one who receives it.

Pa lse Aler-

This is a circumstance in which, due to a threat or the discovery of an un-
known object, an alarm is sounded which subsequently proves to be unjustified.

Simulated Device

1n the strictest sense, this is a device which contains all the components of
a real device except the explosive.

However, the term "simlated" 'is also applied to a bundle or package which is
arranged and placed in such a under that its objective is to deceive and
cause the same alarm which would be produced by a real device.

Preventive Search

A preventive measure taken to assure that no explosive or incendiary device

is in the place being searched, even though no threat or other cause for
suspicion has been received.

The greatest nuaber of incidents occurs in Guipuecoa which has a drastic in-
crease in the nuabcr of such crimes compared with 1980.

with regard to the various aonthsuas shown on the following page-we see how

the "long hot sun" presents a "hotter" panorama, particularly in July. 0!:
the other hand, January is the most tranquil month.

The days of the week-also shown on the following page-«hows that Monday is
the most "active," while Sunday is almost a day of rest. It is curious how
this aspect has changed in the past few years; in 1977, the nost active day
was Thursday; and it slowly changed, going successively from Wednesday to

Tuesday and, finally, to Monday. That is to say, it changed from a Buropean
pattern to an American pattern.

Finally, the comparative charts for the last 5 years shows us the spectacular

increase in terrorist action during the 1977-1979 period and the gradual de-
cline in the last 2 years.

118
.00
0.0
0 00
"O

80°
390

200
no

I00
no

 

Lam am» In". Jun- View. “MOO-mp.
Chart by Day: of Week-4981

(Monday through Sunday)

119
Chart by bubs-4981
(January through December)

“(1)
0.0

8.000
L000
moo

(2) .g '319; '- ~ ,,
‘9. L0" to" Lsn use
Cot-putative Graphs

 

can u
at

120
Comparative Graphs
(January through December)

Counentary

The proportion of real devices to total incidents-"10.36 percenturenaine at
similar levels to those of previous years.

As for bomb threate--generally by telephone-which amount to about 11.8 per-
cent of the total, it should be pointed out that many of them are made in
education centers and, significantly, more frequently in May and June.

With reference to cities. we see that the neat conflictive is San Sebastian,
with the number of real devices reaching the astonishing figure of 60 in 1981.
Then come Bilbao with 68, lhdrid with 42 and Barcelona with 37. Despite its
being a part of the Basque Country, Vitoria has a low incidence"? real de-
vicee--aimilar to the provinces of Alicante, Seville and Palma de lhllorca,
and lower than Oviedo, Valencia and Pontevedra (Vigo).

As for the lowest point in real devices, we have Ceuta with none and Bedajoz
with only one.

121
MM“

 

   

ausamu: ( 9)
mama '

(5) mum

(7) 1m»
5:)?-

FILQJ’

Jun“: (10)

m

122
leltaty

lbst of the real devices have appeared in the streets of our cities, well
placed near terrorist objectives, or in placards.

Significantly, the use of military materiel in these crimes has considerably

increased. Generally speaking, its point of origin is Soviet or American.
In some instances, French.

Industrial installations and, more especially, the Iberduaro Company also
show up with a high level of real devices, occupying third place.

Fortunately, postal terror has had a minimum number of incidents.

with regard to explosives, we see in the tables and circular charts (pages
19 and 20) that in 1981 a greater quantity was recovered than in 1980. He
notice in 1981 the absence of the Czechoslovak explosive, Semtex-ll, used

almost exclusively by Armenian groups operating in Spain. and the small

amount recovered in 1980. He also note a definite decrease in the use of
Amonal, normally of French origin, and a spectacular increase in powders.
The latter is correlated in point 7 of the CONCLUSION (page 23), where we
see an increase in activity by radical minority groups which generally use

explosives of low shattering power, such as gunpowders used for hunting,
homemade powders, etc.

123
..AuouAL (73

'OLVORA (8)

   

COCYILtt mmv
(9')
RECOVERED EXPLOSIVBS 1980

 
 
  
    
  

com.“ (S)

(Drawn—1 , ~ counts (5)

notwov
(2 )uovuL-s

(3 )potvou-J .

NONI! TA

(ﬂaunt v ctouro ton: (7)
. It
‘ey: mum (8)
l. Nagoltta S. Gonna-2e
2. Mama]. 6. Molotov cocktails
3. Powder: 7. Hydra-1t.
lo. Sulfur and potassium 8. TM
chlorate
Item Quantity Ital
Nagollta 0.2 kg .‘blotov cocktails
Annual a 18.0 kg Pyrotechnic charges
Coma-28 433.0 k; Electric charges
Sulfur and potassium m grenade:
chlorate 9.6 kg
Military projectiles
Pouulcrs 18.0 kg
Gas bottles
TNT 10.0 kg
Sulfuric acid
Hydromltc 30.0 kg
Dctonattng rope
Cyanide 1.0 kg

S [00 Ease

125
Conc lua ion

Compared with previous years, we can draw the following very simple con-
clusions:

l. Considerable decrease in terrorist activity. 1981 showing the lowest in-
cidence of the past 3 years.

2. Significant increase in the nuber of bombing incidents in Guipuacoa.

3. Decrease in the number of real devices in Mrid.

lo. Increase in the recovery of explosive material and detonators.

5. Growing use of military materiel by terrorist groups.

6. Also growing use of systems for activating devices at some distance
through radio-control apparatuses. This is a cause for great concern on the
pert of the Office of the Explosives Deactivation Squad (Juan).

7. Apprecieble increase in the alder of reel devices of an elemental
structure and of lower power (homemade powders, etc.) by terrorist groups
of little apparent significance (urn Lliure, threm my“. etc.).

8. Low incidence, compared with previous years, of devices placed by the
cum [First of October Armed Revolutionary Groups].

080

6000/002 l

126
FUR Vi‘l‘lklﬂh 0-,.- VI‘LI

SPAIN

TERRORISi IN SPAIN
Barcelona EL TERRORISGO EN ESPANA in Spmish 1982 pp 51-98

[Chapter 2 of the book "Terrorism in Spain" by Alejandro Munoz Alonso, Plenete
Publishers, Inc.; translations of the table of contents end chapters 1, 3, 6
and 5 of the book were published in previous issues of the HORIMDB REPORT:
Tm0RISH--pssssges enclosed in slstlines were printed in italics in the
original]

[Text] Chapter II: The Challerge

"He cannot accept activities other than those that have extermination as their
objective but we do recognize that those activities can make use of the most
varied procedures: poison, a knife, rope, etc. In this stnggle, the revolu-
tion sanctifies all means, no matter how violent." Sergio Nechaev, "Prirci-
ples of the Revolution,"1869

mastery

The Arias-Raga :5th (December 1975-July 1976)

Rebirth and baptism of GRAPO

ETA: between truce and internal problems; the “Pertur” case
GRAPO and the far right against the reform: winter of 1977-78
The trqic week: the Atocha massacre

Fran provocatim to amesty

Case of ma'ginal terrorism the MPAIAC

The Arias-Frags Stage (December 1975-July 1976)

With Franco's death, the democratic expectations of the innense majority of
the citizens in Spain rose. No one believed in the continuity of H'mcoisn

in spite of tie fact that the old dictata' had stated that he had left every-
thing "tied and well tied." However, fears persisted since no one was igna'ant
of the enormous possibilities of the minority but powerful sectors that wanted
to prolong, the authoritarian system. It was true that the first gestures of
the kin; had wakened many hopes but it remained to be seen how they would be
carried out. The inclusion of conservative men with reformist leanings like
Raga or Areilza in the first government of the mmmchy, still headed by
Arias who rad been confirmed, fed these hopes. Sane thought that the inexact
and still remote democratic horizons made terrorisn meaningless. In fact,

the idea was widesxread that terrorist: was the extrane and spontaneous reaztim
against the dictatorship and that when this disappeared, terrorisn would fade
like a nightmare, the aberrant fruit of the lxk of freedom.

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[’0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This optimistic viewpoint was abetted by the fact that ETA [Basque Fatherland
and Liberty amp], the most dagerous terrorist organization, seemed to have
establist a truce from the very first signs of the seriousness of Franco's
illness. Ha'diy mycne realized that this F'truce" might be due to the fact
that both branches of the ETA had received the most devastating blows in all
its history from July to September as we explained in the previous chapter
rather than to a prudent hope of the members of the ETA. Some of the most
prominent ETA leaders tad fallen into the hmds of the police. Under these con-
ditions, the immediate continuation of this Basque organization's terrorist

. mtivity was not easy.

However, if the ETA seemed to taco a treatha‘ in crder to resume its terrorist
activity in a more systematic md extensive way—as would be seen lateruthe
organizations of the far right cmied out attacks in the Spanish Basque Coun-
try and in MI"! zones near the Rider. Cars belorgim to Basque reﬂgees
and to French citizens were damned or destroyed in Hendaya, Bia'ritz, San Juan
de Luz aid Bayma. Even in Paris a bookstore belongixg to the Anarchist Fe-
deration was destroyed by the OCR [Guerrillas of Cirist the King]. This or-
ganizatim and tie ATE [Anti-Terrorist Group of ETA] claimed responsibility
for the attacks. Different establishnents like ba‘s, hisinesses or lawyers'
offices were also destroyed or damaged in $31 Sebastian aid Bilbao. Leaflets
were distributed in Ouipuscoa in which ATE and the OCR med the clients of
Wench insinesses of the danger of beizg cmmsed with ETA confidantes. They
threatened: "You ca: be mrt or your car bumed." Some minor attacks against
property were reccrded in Cataluna.

ETA's unwillirgness to maintain the truce was revealed in January 1976. A
group of Basque independents sounded out the Basque refugees in France-40n-
cretely, members of the ETA—about their positim if the kirg was asked to
grant a ”lroad amesty." ETA made it Imam that "it could not stop its activi-
ties" and that it needed "signs of goodwill to consider the ngotiations (of the
independents) seriously." beizaola, the Ilendaka‘i/ of the Basque gwernment
in exile, tried to add moderation but he was not heard by the ETA leaders. In
am interview with the special correspondent of CAMBIO 16, Ander Landabum,

they insisted that "basically thims have not charged (aid) struggle will tring
freedom for Duskadi." In spite of this, tiny indicated that "facirg the armed
struggle, the tasks are not the same under a situation of repressim as they
are at a time like the present." In short, they were willing to revise their
tactics but not tkair "strategic Opticns.“

The subject of amesty began to appear. Bleryone spoke of the "amnesty" but
there was no agreement on its extension or the time aid context in which it
should be granted. To the ETA, the subject was clear; only a total amesty
("let the Jails be empt1ed forever") could be acceptable to ttem. Their peti-
tions included mother long series of polit a1 conditims like self-
determination for Euskadi inoludixg Navarra. These statements meant any

ayeement was impossible and, therefa'e, implied the cmtinuation of terrorism.
Proof of the determination of ETA to continue "the armed struggle" cane in the

same month. 01 Nesday, 13 Janua‘y, ETA (p-m) [ETA (political-military] kid-
napped industrialist Jose Luis Arrasate in Berriz (Viacaya), treaking into

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his home at almt 9:30 pm. Apparently they were looking for his 72-yew-old
father who had the same name and was owner of Forjas de Berriz but they ac-
cepted the substitution of the 26-year-old son. The kidnappers left a letter
demanding a ransom of 100 million pesetas "in exchange for his life."

It had been exactly 3 years since ETA had kidnapped anyone, the last being in
marte in Jmua‘y 1973. This action against Arrasate who did not have any po-
litical affiliations caused great tension in ETA (p-m) between the leadership
who had not decided on this type of action and the base coumands, the /bere-
ziak/, who apprently did the kidnapping spontaneously. The Basque refugee
circles called the kidnapping a "serious political mistak ." The kichappim
lasted until 19 Feb-uary with complex ngotiatiOns hindered by the internal
dissensiOn in the ETA (p-m).

A few days later, On 18 Felruary, a civil guard (Manuel Verga‘a Jimenez) died
in Villafranca de Ordicia (Ouipuacoa) when he tried to remove a Basque flag or
likurrina/ that had a bomb behind it. ETA (m) [ETA (milita'yll claimed re-
spmsibility for the attack. It was necessa‘y to yield to the evidence that
the truce, whether voluntary or forced. had ended and that a new terru'ist
escalatiorz had beam. The timid measures taken by the government to confront
the Basque problem were not going to comince anyone, especially the ETA. At
the end of Jmuary, a coumittee to study a special government for the provinces
of Vizcaya and Guipuzcoa was formed. A Carlist member of the Francoist Cortes,
Gabriel Zubiaga, even resigned as spokesnan of tint comittee to which he had
just been appointed in protest of what he felt was an inademate proposal.

0n 9 February, ETA (m) assassinated the mayor of Galdaano, Victor Legorburu,
gunning him down in the street in Cizurquil (Guipuzcoa). The next day a yOuth.
Julian Galarza, was also wdered, apparently by mistake. Tm terrorist. ac-
tions spread, expaidin; the range of possible victims. The young Galarza,

against civilians in local administrations. It was lea'ned that several months
before many mayors, deputation presidents and provincial deputies had received
letters signed by tie ETA. ttreatening them with reprisal if they did not re-
sim from their political positions.

Meanwhile, the government had repealed several articles of the Decree-Law on
Prevention of Terrorism of 26 August 1975. According to penologist Merino
riarbero Santos, the repealed articles were "real legal aberrations." This
amendment that meant the primacy of ordina'y courts over military courts was
considered "the green light for the first political reform" by INFOMACIONES.
'I‘o MUNDL) DIARIO, "the attempted effects of the Law (on Prevention of Terrorism)
were not achieved and terrorism left an egen lorger trail of blood after pro-
mlrgating the harsh repressive measures."

'dould meedan 31d less harshness decrease terrorism? At least tread sectors
of the people believed that. In a survey by the Consulting Institute in the
Basque Country and Navarre, 39 percent felt that terrorism increased with the
Law on Prevention of Terrorism. Only 8 percent believed that terrorism de-
creased while about 48 percent felt that it remained the same. Also 52 percent
believed that more terrorist acts occur with limited political freedom.

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The mat hope of almost all the Spaniards beat on. when ﬁ‘eedcm and democracy
were achieved, terrorisn would disappear. unfortunately, almost daily the
news revealed the terrorist epidemic. Although g‘eater freedan was Method

in the Spanish atmosphere and Jornalists, politicians of the still illegal
opposition and citizens in general lfelt/ freer, the laws had not changed.

It was preferable to speak of tolerance rather tron freedom. Rom time to
time, the authorities gave reminders of this, making the harshness of tte ex-
isting Hancoist laws felt.

ETA (m) which had harshly criticized Arrasate's kidnapping continued to expand
its terrorist tagets. 0n 1 March, Elnilio Guezara Aranburu, a has inspector,
was shot to death in Dem while walking with a relative who was also womded.
The victim tad been trreatened before and was considered a police infa'mer.

It was no longer a matter of men in uniform or civilians in official positions.
Any type of ideological proximity with the "incunnbent" sufficed for the ETA (m)
to find Justification to act.

This March was going to be the bloodiest month since ﬁance‘s death. an

3 March, a general strike that had been smoldering for sane time because of
labor conflicts paralyzed the city of Vitcria. The police brutally forced
their way into San Frmcisco de Asia Chnrch where some 5,000 people were meet-
ing. Teargas grenades were tlrom and the terrified crowd ran out into the
street. The police fired and killed four people and wounded a hundred. The
impact of the news was indescribable. The react lm produced a general strike
tn‘oughout the Basque Country. There were demonstrations and riots and, as a
result of the incidents, a youth, Vicente Antmio Ferraro, was shot in the
head and died in Basairi.

The Vitoria incidents were a sign of the failure of the pseudorefcrmist policy
of the Arias gwerment. ﬁgs, minister of govemment, was out of the coun-
try when tlese events occurred but 108; his credibility. His reformist image
that showed him as the only man who could bring democracy to Spain faded day
after day. It was replaced by the image of a harsh politician, obsessed with
order and incapable of starting the indispensable dialogue to lay the founda-
tioas for democracy in Spain.

Terrorism of the far right also continued with a series of attacks which were
almost never claimed. The press and journalists were the preferred ta'gets
of these comands. 0n 2 March, Jose Antonio Katine: Soier, editcr of the
magazine DOBLON, was kidnapped by four hooded men who took him out in the
country and treated him savgely. First he was subjected to an "indoctrina-
tion" interrogation. Finally, he was ordered to leave the country within 3
days under pain of death. .

The weekly CMBIO 16 received a package containing a bomb that fortunately
did not explode. Victor Cardoso, Vitoria correspondent of the newspaper
PUEBLO, also was the target of physical ggression. It was obvious that the
continuist sectors perceived tin function tint the press fulfilled in the de-
mocratization process and proposed to cut it off at its roots.

130
FOR OITICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In that sane month of March which we have already called very bloody, ETA (m)
rendered a taxi driver from Ouetaria (Guipuzcoa), Fennel Albiza, on 14 March.
ETA (m) continued its policy to expand its selective terrorism.

The new political situatim seemed to have changed the objectives of ETA (m).
If we use Robert Moss' terminology distingiishirg twee types of terrain--
repressive, defensive and offensive--ETA (m) went from the last ("used against
a political regime or system") to a variant of /rerressive terrorism], "doing
away with 'traitors' and silencing critics."3 The nurders of people who did
not belong to the POP [Public o'der Forces] but were considered police "in-
formers" or "Hispanists" no doubt cane under this objective.

The mirders of mayors and other local administrators obeyed the idea of view-
ing them as "denationalization agents" and representatives of "Hispanism."
Also let us not forget that Krutwig, in his VASWIA, sggested the creation
of "parallel hierarchies" cmsidered "the spinal colum m which the entire
subversive organization rests." Possibly ETA also had in mind another experi-
ence in the destruction of a local government structure. In Cyprus during the
struggle for lenosis/ or union with Greece in the second half of the 1950's,
local authorities were one of the favorite targets of the terrorist organiza-
tion EOKA [National (rganization of Cypriot Fighters]. 01 28 October 1955,
Archbishop Makarios, one of the leaders of the fight gainst the kitish oocu-
pation, asked all the Imukhtars/ or mayors of the (reek-Cypriot toms to re-
sign. Since only one-fifth had resigned by the end of the year, EOKA assassi-
nated th‘ee who stock out for their pro-Bitish tendencies. within a month,
80 percent resigned and there were no mcre problems with the lmkhtarsl. Then
the EOKA launched a campaign against the police. As can be seen, the ETA fol-
lowed the reverse order.

On 18 Math, ETA (p-m) kidnapped Argel Berazadi, managing director of Sigma,
the most important enterprise in Elgoibar (Ouipumoa). The terrorist organi-
zation did not claim responsibility for the kidnapping until 22 March; sane
days later, it was learned that ETA (p-m) was asking 200 million in rmsom.
The purely Basque family which abounded in nationalists carried out negotia-
tions with great discretion. .

0n the day before this kidnappirg, ETA (m) had attacked Eloy Ruiz Ccrtadi in
Portugalete (Viacaya). He was wounded and died a few days later. Apparently
he was close to the far right. These organizations, concretely the one called
ATE, did not relent in violent replies, answering the ETA terrorisn with their
om terrorist acts. On 21 March, in the French tom of San Juan de Luz, a
member of the ETA, Tomas Perez Revilla, was shot as he drove hOnB. His wife
was seriously wounded and he was slightly wounded in the head. 01 23 March,

a chalet near Guernica omed by Jesus B'ezuna was destroyed by a banb. Appar-
ently it was a mistake but a few days later another nearby chalet omed by
Domingo Anzalu, a member of the Guernica unmicipal government who was indicted
for alleged aid to ETA, was destroyed. Other establisments of persons con-
sidered close to ETA were danaged. ‘.nere were also many threats like those
received by Bandres who complained that, in spite of having reported them,
there was no investigation. A’lE took responsibility in all these cases and,
on occasion, left its "signature” painted on the debris of the danaged or

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

destroyed mildirgs. m at least one occasion--ttreats received by a Vitoria
psychiatrist, Jose Miguel Aguirrena new, unknom organization appeared: HAS
[expansion unknown]. In Madrid several of the threatening letters tint book-
stores received were signed by a Committee for National Salvation. Tlroghout
the month of March, the ttreats to the press or to people known for tteir li-
beral tmdencies did not stop. 5L CORREI) DE ANDALUCIA md its editcr were in-
timidated, reminding them of the treatment received by Martinez Soler, editor
of DOBLDN. In Valencia the joumalists were ttreatened ("You will not give
yourselves up as victims") by GADVI [Antipolitical (roup for the Defense of
True Information]. Doctor Carreras of Barcelona who moved in professional
circles was beaten and playwright mero Vallejo, author of "En la ardiente
oscuridad," a) allegory of life in jail, was threatened: "Your eyes are in
danger."

Meanwhile, the first Pro-Amesty Groups that aspired to become associatims
under the law appeared. Ttus, on 15 March, the Guipuazoa group delivered its
statutes to the civil government and introduced itself to the public. &ich
well-know people as Bandres, Castells and the sculptor Chillida belorged to
them.

Also reports of torture or "bad treatment" began. One example was Perurena
Lizalazu arrested on 27 August 1975. The next day she had to be hospitalized
and the doctor attributed her conditiOn to "bad treatment received at the Com-
missa'iat." Some months earlier, the press rad reported on the case of Jose
Matute Fernmdez, the chief inspector assigned to Tenerife, who was tried for
the mmicide of a student, Antonio szalez Ramos. The indictment acknowledged
torture. A few weeks later, many newspapers reproduced tie photograph of a
Navarra worker, Amparo Arangoa. According to a medical certificate, she had
many contusions on her buttocks, legs and the soles of her feet and kidney and
bowel failure with a poor prqgnosis.

All these thirgs demonstrated that somethirg was beginning to change, albeit
very slowly. Weedoms were won inch by inch by the uncontainable pressure of
tie political forces still not legalized, the press and the demands of a so-
ciety that aspired to complete emancipation. It was still thought that tt. ”.r-
ism would diminish as freedom expanded. This was preasely one of the gu-
ments that was trandished to ask that the political reform, which was practi-
cally paralyzed, be started up at once.

At the bginnim of April, the subject of ETA terrorism became big new: , occu-
pying the largest headlines in the newspapers since the events started piling
up. On Monday, 5 April, the most spectaCular group prison break j ‘ the memory
of Spain occurred: 29 political prisoners exaped from the Segovia .- .11
though the water pipes. of these, 24 belonged to the different trenches of
ETA; the other 5 belonged to FRAP [People's Actim Revolutimary Wont] and
MIL [Iberian Liberation Movement]. The escape was perfectly planned although
apparently it was moved up since a transfer of prisoners to Soria was ex-
pected. With vehicles waiting f<r them outside, the fugities managed to
practically reach the Wench border near Valcarlos. The FOP organized an
emally spectacular dregnet and managed to arrest almost all the fugitives as

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well as members of the outside comand who had collaba‘ated in the escape.

One Catalai mgitive, {riol Sole, died in the confrontations between the Civil
Guard and the fugitives. Only few of the prisoners and one of the menbers of
the outside cammd managed to escape. It was said that they went to ﬂame
but some days later, on 15 April, they were found in a chalet in Espinal by
its omer, Jose Varia Rodriguez Azarate. Tte ftgitives gagged M" Rockiguez
Amarate and his companion, took his aitcmobile and fled to Race. Later they
were banished to the island of Yeu.

01 8 April when the dramet fcr the Segovia mgitives still continued, a new
incident confused the situatim even more. Angel Berazadi, the industrialist
kidnapped on 18 Ma'ch, was fond dead on a secmda'y highaay near Elgoibar
from a shot in the back of his head. The news was received with disbelief
since no one thought it would reach such a fatal outcome. The negotiations
between the family and the kidnappers had centinued in spite of the fact that
the government revealed that it was opposed to the payment of ransm and would
not permit the 200 million pesetas demanded by the ETA to go to France. It
was impressive to learn that one of the sons-in-law of the victim had an ap-
pointment in ﬁance that sane mornixg to finalize details of the aresment.

The reaction was unanimous. No other terrorist attack had roused such a wide-
spread mwement of candeunation. The Basque government in exile cendemed the
deed as did all the Basque opposition parties. ENen the Omist Movemem of
Ehskadi called it an "act lacking political meming."

The government trrough Raga, its vice president and min‘ster of government,
stated: "The government fully assumes the responsibility of its decisions. . .
but the terrorists should know that since they want war, they will have it with
all its censequences." There was also a definitim-descriptim of ETA as seen
by the government: "The true nature of ETA, fanatic minority of weaklings that
-—in a declared war with the Basque peeple and Spainnshows its contempt for
the most elementary sense of hmanity aid its determination to resort to the
cruelest means in its desire to subdue a caununity ttrough terror."

The press generally and catega'ically condemed the nurder. INFOMCIONES
though. that "the cold-blooded mrder by ETA mst spur m the rate of imple-
mentation of the democratic formulas and atmosphere in Spain desired by the
majority of the Spaniards. Irrational violence will be overcome by the desire
for peaceful coexistence. Tge rextiOn against those who mrder cold-bloodedly
must also be in cold blood."

CMISIO 16 headlined an editorial "Against ETA, h‘eedcm" and began by stating:
"if ETA loses the tacit support of a large part of the Basque peopleuex‘ressed
by the clandestine political parties in the region, anong others-oits prompt
disintegratiOn is inevitable. The implacable nurder of Argel Berazadi, a
cruelty aid stupidity beyond all limits, might constitute tint point of no re-
turn... .The main factor leading to the disintegration of ETA is General Fran-
co's death and the promises—only pranises--that the dictata'ship will be re-
placed by democracy." In line with what was considered oinOus by very tread
sectors of the public, it indicated archer: "The problem of ETA is not a
police problem but a political problem." It ended saying that, once there was

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
p the fugitives from
der and also to hm. dam Berandi's kidnaprfrs-mmdws.
"The Great Roundup" was the headline an the cover of CAMBIO 16
felt that, it. was "the first.
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

befcre a Basque aztivist (Imanol Garmendia) had died in a conﬁ-cntatim with
the Civil Curd. In this situation, it was not strange that political pros-
pects dimmed and a new hardening was evident in the government. In state-
ments to the NEW YORK TIMES m 1 Janua‘y, Raga had admitted the possibility
of an amesty, once the Penal Code and the Antiterrorist Law were mended.

(h 30 March, he told GIORNAE D'ITALIA: "There is no possibility of an an-
nesty because there is no reason for it or my legal basis." The clanor for
amesty, mum/er, did not stop. Won the most diverse sectors of the country,
voices were raised, feeling that the amesty was indispensable to construct a
Future of peace. It was also believed that when the amesty returned all the

a group of far rightists under the comand of Carlos Hugo's bother, Sixto,
well know: Hr his fascist positions. The Far rightists who included the OCR
and apparently former Fortiguese "Pides" and Argentine members of the AAA
[Anti-Qumnist Apostolic Alliance] kept Carlos Hugo's followers from reach-
ing, the peak by firing at them. One person stood out in the shoot-out, "the
man in the gaberdine" who turned out to be Army Coumander Marin Verde. me
youth, Ricardo Garcia Pellejero, was killed in the shoot-out. Tkree people
were seriOusly wounded and many were slightly wounded. One of those seriously
wounded, Aniano Gimenez Santos, died lo days later. The Carlist Party pre-
sented a report accusing the government of not havizg prevented what indica-
tions several days earlier showed would be a pitched battle. The mobilization
of the far right had been apparent in Madrid and in the Hmtejurra area.

There were arrests but the gova'nment never explained the obscure points of
those incidents nor cleared up its responsibility. As in the trgedy in V1-
toria at the beginning of March, Raga, the vice president for domestic af-
fairs and minister of the government, was not in Spain. As he repeated many
times in the following nmths concerning Vitoria as well as Montejurra, in

his absence the secreta'y general of the Movement, Adolfo Suarez, was in
chrge of his department.

Although there were still attacks, ETA terrorist activity did not become in-
tense again until October 1976. ﬁring the search t‘cr Berazadi and the same
day as the escape from Segovia (5 April), ETA murdered Dr Jose Ma‘ia Garrido
Lazaro in Smturce. 0n 3 May, a corporal in the Civil Guard, Antmio de Fru-
tos Sualdea, died in begazpia when a bomb exploded. The bomb, xtivated t‘ran
a distance, exploded when the civil guard's car went down a road near Legazpia
(Guipuacoa).

m the followirg day, 1, May, the newspaper EL PAIS appeared for the first time.
Reporting the above attack, it used it to ”make an express condemnation of

1 35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

this criminal act and a: mequivocal expression of its rejection of violence

as a way to resolve political and ideological differences." It continued:

"We hold the cmviction that a danocratic state with complete gurmtees of
individual rights and freedoms will be an effective curb to terra‘isn. Also we
believe tint, slag with the action of the faces of a-da' to canbat the armed
groups that operate in the Basque Comtry, only a political solutim can end
the situation there."

As is seen, with the exception of the far right and Wmcoist sectors, the
news media almost mimously felt that the best remedy for terrorism was de-
mocratic freedoms. Political solutions rather that police measures would be
able to end terrorism Some yews later when the "political solutions" becane
reality in the fan of freedans, a cmstitution, autonomy and statutes, these
hopes would cry up. The problan of terrorisn did not obey such simple and op-
timistic plans. They would insist then on the need fcr appropriate lgal in-
struments, greata‘ police effectiveness, strictness in the Judicial Each
and even exceptimal measures. They would unda‘stand, then, the internatiaial
dimension of terrorian and even declare "dirty w" in order to eradicate it.

In June, ETA ca'ried out one fatal attmk. The victim was wis Ca‘los Albo
Llamosa, local leader of the Basauri Hovement (Viacaya) who was whine-gunned
while waiting at a stop sign. A few days later, ETA distributed a commime

in which it tlreatened: "Albo has been executed. He will do the sane to all
who we opposed to our people freely decidirg their national and social destiny."

The scent ETA tarmist mtivity was the to the fast that durixg this period the
political-milita‘y lramh especially was reorganizing. It must not be forgotten
that already, at the end of 1975, a: inta'nal report dexribed "the bad crgm-
izational situation of ETA (p-m)": "Sane 500 members tare imzrisoned, reftgees
packed the few houses available in northern mskadi and were persecuted by the
Wench state, the internal infrastructure was seriously hurt and onl at the
milita'y lwel was there a complete command in operating cmdition. Later

we will concern ourselves with this recrgsnizational stage of ETA (p-m) .

If the ETA terrorism went ttrwgh a period of dcrmmcy, the same did not occur
with the attacks of the far right mich became epidemic in several parts of
national territory.

On 24 June, the newspaper EL PAIS published an account of the acts of "white
terra‘isn" in the Basque Country so fr that yea', listing almost 50 attacks
from attempted kidnapping to explosions and ttreats. The newspaper pointed
out that such acts endargered lives 31d "have som terrcr in [road areas."

It also emphasized that "until now, it is not know: if my of the alleged per-
petrators of these deeds has been treated." Acca'ding to the mdrid newspa-
per, the far rightist groups appeared ”wide the most diverse initials." It
cited the already know: mes of ATE and OCR and the recent OVA [Organization
of Antiten'crist Volunteers] and CUD [expansion unlmown].

A special target of the far riglt was the Antigua district in San Sebastian.
The Neighborhood Association in that district wrote a report that it presented

to the mayor, askirg for more protection and requestirg that "as many inquiries

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

istic criminal actions that a gr p of enemies of society is perpetratirg un-
der the nane of Christ the K113."

However, the far right did not make its presence felt Just in the Basme Cam-
try. At 2:10 an on 16 June, two men destroyed the Club Juvenil Beato in the
Madrid district of Users. Parish groups, neighbtrhood associatims and rela-
tives published notes alluding to the "ckain of attacks and trreats" mffered
in the district.

Arwnd the sane time a group called CAS [Smtander Antiporncgraphic Canpaign]
appeared in Santander. It ttreatened the kiosks that sold certain magazines.
There was also a wave of letter-banbs in Madrid, many of them addressed to the-
ater critics like Amoros, Garcia Rico and Gassent and signed by the OCR. EL
PAIS stated: "‘I‘ne explosive letters are the most recent method that the un-

On 1 July, the president of tie governmmt, Arias Navarro, Has summed to the
Palacio de clients by the king. Tm meetirg ended with tie resignatim of tin
veteran EY-ancoist politician. This ended a political situation that had become
indefensible in recent months. Arias had shom himself to be absolutely inca-
pable of pilotirg the necessa'y and desired political refcrm. In statements
to Amaud de Borctgrave for NEHSNEEK, the king himself had called Arias an
"mmitigated disaster." Under these circumstances, it was obvious that the
days of the Arias government were numbered.

Once the president of the govermmt resigned, the mechanics planned by the
FY-ancoist laws still in effect beg . Accwdimly, the Comcil of the Kirgdom
«where some of the most intransigent Waneoists like Giron had saght reftge
«had to give the kirg a slate of nanes n'om which the chief of state would
select the president of the government. With all these steps carried out, the
name picked by King Juan Carlos I was annomced m the aiternoon of Saturday,
3 July. Fhom the slate containirg the names of (reed-i0 Lopez B-avo, Federico
Silva Hmoz and Adolfo Suan Gonzalez, the king chose the last. Adolfo Suarez
was the yourgest and most obscure of those named. A typical havement mm. he
had spent his entire political career in its razks, followixg the strictest
Frencoist orthodoxy. In the Arias gaverment, he had been secreta'y geneal
of the Movement, last stronghold of classic alangisn. Therefore, it was not
szrprising that his appointment fell like a cold smwer on many sectors. An
article in EL PAIS by Ricardo de la Cierva became fanous. It had the signi-
ficant title: "What a Mistake, What an Enormous Mistake!"

However, others valued his youth and recent political deeds like his speech
to the Cortes at the end of June, presentixg the Political Associations Law.
That speech coatained prrases like: "If we contemplate the national reality
with any sincerity, we nust agree that there is not only a theoretical plural-
ism but also organized political forces. ﬁnse forces, whether or not called
pa'ties, exist as a public fact."

137

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcut‘ use ONLY”

hold the key to the future of Spain. For the new govemnent it was the test
that, in the Opinim of all the democratic ponies, would show the sincerity
of its proposals md pranises. hm Gerona to BadaJoz, from Seville to La
(Jonas. from Bibar to Las Palms in the Canay Islands, thousmds of Spmia'ds
went out into the streets aadzg for anneety. Sometimes authorized, usually
banned, these demmstratims expessed a shale desire rm total annesty.

a "basic cmditim for national reconciliation and the constmction of demo-
cracy." It repeated its Hell-Imam point of View: "Pacification of the Basme

As was expected, after its meetizg on Widey, 16 July, the govenment issued
a pragmatic statement that was received favorably tut with reserve. The

opposition reccgnized that it was a step forward mt felt that it did not go
beymd good intentions and wand wait to see it fulfilled. (he of the points
in the statement was that the cabinet would ask the kit: "in exercise or his
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Hours later, new explosims occurred at the mamment to the dead in El Ferrol,
at mother union building in Ba'celona, at the Falange delegation, in the
Sants district of Barcelona, at the regional union delegation of Barazaldo, at
another union site on the (ran Via in Bilbao, at the Ministry of Justice and
the Palacio de Justicia in redrid and at the mmument to Onesimo Redondo in
Labajos (Segovia). About 30 bombs exploded in all in what evidently was a
well organized plan. In Madrid near the Segovia triage, a youth, Carlos Her-
nandez Exposito, was shot and killed by the Civil Gua'd who suspected a group
that fled after being told to stop. "who placed the bombs?" asked the cover
of CAMBIO 16. In its editorial with the same title, the weekly stated: "Each
time we are about to advmce with great difficulty alorg the path to normalcy
and democracy, da'k fcrces want to shatter natiOnal agreement with shots cr
bombings." It also pointed out that "the bombs were against amnesty" and noted
the "'beneficiaries' were all those driving fcrces that wﬂt nothing to charge
here cr, rather, want every charge here to go batkwards."

EL PAIS also discussed the smnce and, after mestioning that it was far left-
ist groups, said in reference to the far right: "We are not saying 31th
new if we say that the man in the street blames the youps under this sign, so
active with impunity in the Basme Country in recent mouths, fer these deeds."
It ended in canplete doubt, stating: "Rather, it is me of two choices:

either we are facing a new far leftist group of such dimensions that it must be
asked how it was not detected to some degree before the bombs exploded or we
are facirg the sage far rightist youps as always, a case in which any consent
is superfluous.“

Certain coumuniques attributed the attacks to a heretofore totally unknown cr-
5anization: GRAPO llst October Armed Revolutionary Groups]. Since

no one knew anything about this organization, the mestions spread. Couldn't
it be a mask for the perpetual powerml sectcrs of the fa‘ right? To the po-
lice, the deeds attacked of ME [Marxist-tennis: (rganization of Spain] or
"far leftist youps related to FRAP." mt CARI [International Revolutima‘y
Action Group] and FRAP denied paticipation.

in this atmosphere of confusion, the police made about 5 arrests. (h 23 July,
in the regular press conference that followed the Council of Ministers meeting,
Minister of Infa'mation Reguera gave the first official information. He in-
sisted that the far right had nothing to do with the explosions and repeated
that the blame fell on CRAPO "which nurdered four armed police precisely m

I October 1975." It was the first time that the responsibility fa~ those at-
tacks more than 9 months earlier had been attributed to a particular grmp.
The minister of information also said that GRAPO was related to the PCB (r)
[Spmish Coumnist Party (reformedn. itself a treakaway from (NLE. In a

note published by the general directcr of security, this statement was re-
peated, imputing the attacks to one of the many Marxist-Leninist groups that
directly or indirectly proceeded from the schisms in the orthodox PCB since

1961..
When the Comcil of Ministers met in La Coruna en 30 July, the cmcession of

amesty became a reality. According to Journalistic calculations, the amesty
would benefit 500 people and exclude about 94 condemed for crimes of blood.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next day the reborn GRAPO which had already wen considered "disa‘ticu-
lated" by the police after 20 arrests in previous days reappeared. Similar to
the bombings on 18 July, new bombs exploded in Hamid, Bacelona, Bilbao, Se-
villa and Pontevea'a. Two terrorists were killed in Sevilla when the banbs
they were preprinng to plxe exploded.

GRAPO beoanne one of the strangest enigmas in democratic Spain. As we will see,
its attacks always coinncided with times of p‘ogress in democratization. Its
ptraseology was leftist tut its actionns only semd to benefit advocates of
involution. Its men seemed crude but its well edited publications were incom-
pa'ably more elaborate than those of other clandestine groups. Several times
the police announced the complete disarticulation of GRAPO but, time and

gain, it was reborn from its ashes liloe a sinister phoenix. Later we will
analyze GRAPO's significance in the Spanish democratic transition.

ETA: Between Truce and Internal Problans; "Pertur" Case

The atmosphere by the end of July 1976 was euphoric because of the amnesty
but concerned about the appea‘a'nce of the GRAPO phencnnenon. Che thing at-
tracted attention, especially annong those who followed the evolution of ter-
rorism: the situation of ETA. an h‘iday, 23 July, one of the top leaders of
ETA (p—m), Eduardo Moreno Bergareche alias IPerturl, disappeared without leav-
ing a tram. Accompanied by two other Basque refugees, lPertur/ went to Be-
hovia near the Spanish border. He said goodbye to his companiorns annd nothing

The first suspicion naturally fell on sane of the far rigrcist grcups that
were acting in the Hench Basque Country. The fat that the "Spanish Basque
Batallion, Elnilio Guezala Comand" sent a communique to the Bilbao newspaper
EL oonnso BSPANOL-EL PUEBLO vasoo a few days later stating tint /Pertur/ "has
been executed and buried in a town in Nava'ra" contributed to this idea. Also
the AAA, of Argentine origin tut unknown until then in Spain, claimed respm-
sibility for the deed in a note sent to BEE. It identified itself as a "guer-
rilla group trained militarily fan guerrilla wwfare with the objective of
containing Ma'nnist international terrorian supported by the KGB."

Blaming far rigntist sectors for the kidnapping continued in the joint conn-
municpe signed by six Basque political organizations raging Dram ETA (p-m)

to tie PSOE [Spanish Socialist workers Pa‘ty] annd the PCB. EL PAIS empha-
sized: "Putting aside the content of the docunnent, this is possibly the first
time in recent months that Basqne national groups of the left have signed a
joint counniqne with organizations which they call IHispannistl." The note
stated that the kidnapping of tin "Basque socialist patriot /Pertur/ is part
of a systematic canpaign of fascist repression being carried out with absolute

impunit y. "

Another versim appeared in the press 190 days after /Pa'tur's/ disappea'ance
that attribnted the deed to the ETA (p-m) itself, corncretely to Miguel Angel
Apaldegui, /Apala/. According to the San Sebastian newspaper LA VOZ DB

ESPANA of the Movement Press chain, the two ﬁiands who accompanied IPertur/
to his mysterious appointment near the Spanish border saw him get into a car

140
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

driven by /Apala/. There were trree other people in the back seat. The news-
paper continued: "Apparently they covered IPertur's/ head with a sack and
/Apala/ himself fireg two shots at the back of his head, killing Mcreno Ber-
ga‘eche instantly."

Acccrding to this versicn, /Pertur's/ murder was to settle azcounts within ETA
between advocates of all-out "a'med str'ugle" like IApala/ aid others like
IPerttr/ who proclaimed a more political soluticn on the level of mass mobili-
zation that assumed the abmdmment (r relegation of the "awed struggle."
ETA reacted indignantly to this version, pointirg out that the ETA internal
situation was nuch more complex and dynamic than sggested by the simplistic
scheme of "political" and "militaryﬂ'

Howeve, the idea of settling accounts persisted. As Letamendia wrote: "Abwt
1-1/2 years later, a letter from distant relatives of /Pertur/ asked that in-
vestigations be opened in all directions, including refigees who were compan-
ions at that time." The only infmnatim the family gave the press was a let-
ter /Pertur/ wrote to a friend 12 days before his disappearance in which he
said: "These beasts have created such a climate within the organization that
they have transformed ETA in northern Buskadi into a police state instead of a
collective of revolutimaries where each me suspects his neighbor md vice
versa." Also he said: "I do not escape frou this infernal dynamics of cm-
spiracies, slander, lies, etc., dynamics trat tend to eliminate political ri-
vals not ttrough political dgbate but usizg dirty maneuvers in the name of
'discipline,‘ 'security.'."

In spite of the above, Letamendia believes that there is no basis to mouse
/Pertur's/ old comrades for his disappearance and accuses "the press of Macrid
(Which) aridly latches onto revelations like these...of bad faith." He con-
tinued: "In any case, at least in the labertzale/ left, the ma'e thought that
these disgreements cculd turn into tie intention to physically eliminate a
political adverst would have caused laughter." betanendia said later: "To
the author, verification that the men of the /abertzale/ left have neva'
killed eazh other would suffice but this (/I'ertur's/ effcrts toward the reuni-
fication of ETA) confirms even we his absolute conviction that /Pertur/ died
at the hands of the far right."

betamendia's argelical view of ETA would contrast with the facts that we have
on the internal fights of an a-ganization very simila' to ETA in so my ways
--the Irish IRA. Robert Moss wrote: "The IRA, like the majority of clmdes-
tine orgmizations, had a canplicated history of internal diwemts, be-
trayals aid changes in political line behind it. The leadership continually
wavered between a military orientation and a political orientation, between
nationalist aid socialist doctrines."18 As can be seen, this is very similar
to the history of ETA itself outlined in the previous chapter. Moss ccnti~
nued, recalling how the IRA "fcrmally divided into the Official wing and the
H'ovisional wing. The latter, conside‘ed rebels,...are very traditional in
two senses: they want a united but nonsocialist (or commist) Ireland and
they firmly believe in the use of force to achieve their objectives....'1‘he
Official wirg and its political arm, Sinn Fein, proclaim a revolutionary so-
cialist ideolcgy aid feel as little sympathy for the Dublin government as for

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the seiraat mimists."19 It mm not take much work to establish parallel:
betwem the trachea of the IRA and the trenches of the ETA axd even the ex-
istence of "political arms." He made this reference because Moss himself
mote that "although both bmds Joined forces to can out sane isolated opera-
tions in Ulster, begimirg in 1970 they would fig“; each other in a bloody
battle to obtain leadership of the prw s. This cost them as many deaths

as ddrmiehes with the security faces." Moss thm related in detail sane
of these pmitive raids between the two branches of the organization.

Halte- Laqueur stated: "In View of the historical elidence, it wound be false
to contrast the 'runaiita'iaa' claracteristics cf leftist terrcrian with the
'sadietic' terra‘ of the naticnalist and rigitist coups. Criminals have he-
cpently sham more lunenity that tetrwists....Terra'iete a‘e fanatics 81d fa-
natician ﬁeqmntly leads to cruelty aid sadism." Then he indicated: "In
Fetruary 1972, a Red Army hideout was discovered in Ka‘uizawa, a mountain re-
sort some 80 miles from Tokyo. There they found 14 mutilated 81d tortured
bodies; half the poop had eliminated the others f?‘ mtirevolutimwy weak-
nesses and appaently sane had been hiried alive." 1

In the history of ten~orist movenmts, "settling ccomts" is, as we can see.
practically a constant. To simply state, as letanendia does, that those thixgs
do not happen in the labertzale/ left is the sane type of simplificatim tint
heizaola resented men he published a commune after mero Blanco's nur-
der. At tint time he stated: ”The at of extrane violence, the premeditated
and perfectly planed murder, is unanited to the Basque am so ETA could not
have pa‘ticigted in the execution of the president 02' the ﬁ-aicoiet
government."

hit to exclude this with arguments lilce tin one abwe would be a totally unac-
ceptable type of racism, especially since there are sources that said that
lPerttr/ had been kidnapwd in April 1976 by tta Ibereziak/Zso keep him from
attendim the preparatory meeting for the seventh assembly.

ternal crisis of the divided ETA which tad not hem able to adapt to the new
cmditions of the Spanish political situation.

lPertur/ had been fightirg since the schisn between ETA (m) aid ETA (p-m) to
increase the political ability of ETA. He felt it was necessary to create
the "mass organizations that benefit from its mned stnggle...( because) a

within this dynamics there was a yowins tension between the political leader-
ship of ETA (m) and the "special commas" (/bereziakl). Accordixg to Leta-
mehdia, “these confrontations do not seem to cm itute serious ideolcgical
differences until 3 wt after IPertw's/ death. However, it seems very
obvious that the Berazadi case cased a crisis in ETA (p-m) which led to
/Perttr's/ vdtht'awal. At the end of a long discussion, the decision to kill
him (Berazadi) was adopted by time votes in favcr, two against—lPertur/ aid
IEheka/«md one abstention. IPrtur/ resigned from all his executive respon-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n-an his withdrawal from the leadership crgans of ETA (p-nn) until his disap-
pea'ance, IPertnr/ led a group nmich called itself IOtszaMaI. It basically
produced two works. This effort in doctrinal expansion was made within the
framework of6 prepa'ations for the seventh assembly which would be held in the
fall 0 197 .

The first work was entitled "Notes on a debate on the party." In it, lPertnr/
insisted on the fcrnula of lsplitting up/. "All those who until now lave sup-
ported and identified with the action of ETA without participating in it, with-
out going from the level of pure sympathy to the figrt. of the revolutionary
patriots, today want to participate directly in it, join in an organind way.
Naturally, they ask ETA to We them new channels for that participation.

Our proposal is as follows: the mly viable solution to the present situation
is organizational separation between the political struggle and the armed
strnggle. Cancretely, we propose the creation of a party, the revolutionary
vanguard of the working class and all the Basqne people, and its incorporation
in all the mass activities that ETA has done until now."

To /Pertur/, that party absolutely could not be the KAS [Patriotic Socialist
Coa‘dination] since "due to its heterogeneity, it is an organism lacking poli-
tical initiative." It mst be remembered that the so-called "KAS alternative"
was not yet consolidated when IPertur/ disappea‘ed. Rom the beginning of
1976, there were negotiations between the forces of the labertzale/ left.

The reluctance of LAIA [Basqne Worker%Revolutiana‘y Party] prevented the cre-
ation of KAS until September-atelier.

The party that /Pertur/ proclaimed—which wanld be the mtnre EIA [Basque
Revoluticnay Party] which started at the beginnirg of 1977--would have to be
characterized by the followirg features: 1) be independentist with Basque
strategy; 2) be a class party, exclusive defender of the interests of the
wa'king class; 3) promote the mass mganians and popular power, giving them
pricrity over the electcralist system; and lo) be Nationally based m demo-
cratic centralian and internal unity.

The second work by IPertur/ in /0tsgabia/ was entitled "ETA and the and
struggle." In it, he repeated the primacy of the "mass struggle" that does
not have a limit over "armed struggle" that does. As a result of passage
from the dictatorship to the transitianal pruse of the bourgeois democracy,
"the leading role must correspond to mass strugle." The a'med strugle mst
lose its offensive nature to take on a defansive nature. Its role is to con-
stitute a dynanic force that guarantees popula- conqnests and to serve as sup-
port and cover to the mass struggle.

To /Pertur/, once these proposals-concretely, the /split/ into two organiza-
tions, one political and the other milita'yuhad been put into practice, no
obstacle to the reunification of ETA (on) and ETA (p-un) would remain. As is
seen by the tune of his theses, Ma'xist-Leninist tones predominate over na-
tionalist ones. As at so many other times in the history of ETA, a conflict
rises between the two poles. We already know tint this type of canflict in
the Basqne organization has always ended with the expulsion of the laborites
or Marxist-Mninists, with control of the organization renaining in the hands

ll. 3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the natimalists. Based at these sane dynamics, was /Pe'ttr/ "eliminated"
by the "natimal milita‘iazs"? Nothirg can be caifidently stated. If he had
lived, waxld lPertur/ have ccntinued within the organization a, like in other
times in the histtry of ETA, would he rave been expelled a- beq: faced to
leave? True can only be conjecture.

what is obviaas is the victcry of IPerttr's/ theses at the seventh sssanbly
where they were approved by 60 votes to 20. The main leeda's of ETA (m) in-
cludixg IArgala/ were even guests at that assembly. "They atyuded, pleased
with its development aid with tie resolutims adopted in it.” IPa'ttr's/

plans we ca'ried out after his death emcept possibly his most cherist
drean: tie reunificatim of ETA.

At the seventh assembly, ETA (p-m) discussed the topic of armed strtggle to
which it assigned tires fmctions: educatim subtrdinated to the general
level and development of the mass srlggle; weakenirg the power of the oliga-
chy, actirg as a diswasive and gua‘axteeing fa‘ce fcr popular concpests; and,
finally, remainilg in coordination with the struggle of the msses, cmsoli-

dating ideological easement in both orgazizations (the political aid the
military).

ETA (m), in a November ZUTIK, trmscriwd the complete text of the resolutions
of the Seventh ETA (p-m) Assanbly aim; with the points of the KAS alternative,
statixg that it accepted them all. Nslertreless, betanmdia indicated that
"although the interested parties we not aware of it—nor any of the persons
in the Iabertzale/ left at that time-othe rest of its context notes political
lines that grgtly differ from the concepts that inspire the works of
/0tsgabia/."

ETA (m) mast be m guard gainst the penetration of reformisn whose first
symptan is that the unnamed crgmization begins to pressure the armed one to
disappear when it is still needed. Under these circunetances, the md or-
ganization becomes the last strcnghold of revolutionary strategy.

ETA (m) felt, diffmt from ETA (P-ll), that only when the principles of the
KAS alternative have been applied mist armed action end its offensive nattre
to pass to a defensive nature, "keeping the oligachy mm violating its own
lgality." As ‘8 know, ETA (p-m) felt ttat, starting with the establishnent
of the bourgeois democracy, armed actim would already have a defensive nature.

Letanandia reccgnized that "these differences, still not clearly seen by their
om leaders, were going to abruptly explode in the preelectoral stage before
15 June. They explain the totally different mtwe evolutions of ET (p-m)
and ETA (Ill) and explain even later events, still remembered by all."

These diffa‘ences explain why, gainst the hope and even the conviction of

all the demcratic forces and all the news media that terrcrisn wwld recede
as there was prcgress on the road to demcratization, ETA terrcrisn not only
did not diminish but d‘anatically increased. The figures as impressive: ETA
had killed 2 people in 1968, 1 in 1969. none in 1970 and 1971, 2 in 1972, 7
in 1973, 23 in 1974 (including the 13 dead in the street of Correo never

1“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

claimed by ETA), 19 in 1975 and 19 in 1976. In subsecpent years, ETA would
kill 21 in 1977. 107 in 1978 and 76 in 1979.

Since the death of the mayor of Basairi, Luis Albo Lanosas, on 9 June, the two
branches of ETA observed a de facto truce, leaving summer ta'ra‘ian to GRAPO.
In spite of everything in the Basque Country, the amer was eta-my and the
traditional fiestas held in many places were often motives for violence. The
PNV publicized a manifesto in which it wotested the "attitude of uncertainty

rina/ when the Bascpes use it everywhere as the emblem of a pe0ple, independent
of its crigin or its first politasal connotation." The manifesto ended allud-
ing to "institutional violeme."

These protests intensified when, on 8 September, a youth, Jews Maria Zabela,
was shot to death in Fuenterrabia by the Civil (hard. Aoccrding to Almso,
former Real Mach'id player and eyewitness, Zabala was rumizg, pursued by the
Civil Guard. When he tried to hide in an alley, he was machine-gmmed at close
rage. Alonso himself was pistol-whipped when he grotested to the gents.

The serims incident saddened the /Ala‘de/ fiestas trat were held that day in
the mipuzcoa tom. As a result of this, the run mater-rabia municipal gov-
ernment presented its resignation aid 18 other local governments in the pro-
vince denoumed "the trutality of official regression." Bishop Setien aid
Bishop Argalla made a call to "those who have more power to open other roads
for the achievemait of the legitimate aspiratims of the people and society."
The general strike spread ttrqghout the Basque Country and Martin Villa,
minister of government, went to Bilbao to direct the police operation aid
study the situatim in the field.

In a harsh editorial, EL PAIS amused the government of "insisting m repres-
sion as the only measure" and asked for political solutions. All of Spain
treathed a critical atmosptere due to the action of the POP. In August a
youth, Ehancisco Javier Verdejo Lucas, memba' of the Young Red (hard, was also
shot to death by the Civil Guard in Almeria. This led to the idea of "insti-
tutimal violence" that seemed to parallel terrorist violence. CAMBIO 16 de-
voted a repcrt shortly before Zabala's death to "The Thirty Killed by tie Re-
form." An editorial entitled "ﬁ'eedom and Order" stated: "Police topics

are basic in a democratic society and those respmsible for the forces of cr-
der have to be up to the challenge of ﬂ‘eedan. The policy of the stick is

no longer sufficient. It is necesea'y to scrupu10usly respect civil rights
hit law aid order nust also be maintained. Without this new pgglic order
strategy, the /unborn/ Spmish democracy nigh: never be born."

when the mayor of Andoain (Oiipuzcoa) was the target of an unsuccessful at-
tack. A few days later, on the night of 29 September, a taxi ck'iver, Argel
Andres Lorenzo, was kidnapped in Las Arenas (Vizcaya). He was forced to drive
to Fir-audio where he was handcuffed and gagged. A little later, a bomb with

4 kilogram of dynamite exploded at the momment to the legimnaire Maderal
Oleaga in Ek'mdio.

1’05

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maria Araluce Villa, was assassinated as he got out of his car to go into his
tone at 2:15 pm. Jose Elicgui Diez, his (river, unis Eranisco Sm: Flores
and Antonio Paloma Perez, police inspectors, and Albedo Garcia Gonzalez, an
mned policeman, also died. To CAMBIO 16, it was the "most spectacular attxk
since the murder of Adm Luis Carrero Blanca." There has also the circumstance
that Araluce was an adviser to the king. Minister Martin Villa explained the

into the trap." Apparently, a state of eiceptim "was very close" to heirs
decla'ed. The sane magazine published an editorial on a black background on
the sane cove: "Freedom Without Amen" It said: "Today when the streets
of this country a'e stained with the blood of bothers and the far right and
the far left try to wavate the situation, the truly alta‘native is electims.
an. real electims. Clem elections, without eaclusims aid without tricks,

It mat be rememhsred that there had also been a death for political reasons
in Macrid. At a demmstratim held there, as in many other places, in can-
memcration of the executions of September 1975. a student, Ca'los Gonzalez
Martinez, was killed. Apparently, the shots came from a member of an "anti-
delnonstration comand." This led to new incidents and a "day of snuggle" on
I October with more violence and many strikes in diffa'ent enterprises.

confermce in Bayma, repeated their determination to continue the "armed
struggle." 'lhey a‘gued that Zabala's death in Fuentenabia ”used up or pa-
tience." The note ended by saying that "ETA will continue in the fight as
long as constitutional aid minimal channels fcr the eupressim of popular
Basque frwdan we not created, minimal democratic chamels shaped by the pro-
grammatic points of the announced alternative" (referrixg to the KAS
alternative).

However, there were attxks of a differeat type-«burned cws, destroyed es-
tablisments, etc.-that clearly seemed to cane from the far right. Attacks
on people mbsided while, in the tires provinces of the Basme Country 31d
Navrra, the clanor for total amnesty intensified. Pro-Amesty Q~oups were
created in my teas. Som a slcgm append: "Bieryme home for aristmas."
Total amnesty became the numba' one problem in the Basqze Comtry which did

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With a new language that was nothing like the typical oratcry of the old Pran-
coist regime, Suarez proposed "to make normal what is normal in the streets."
Where the Arias government had failed, he proposed to succeed. The most air-
prisixg thing is that he manxed to convince sectors of the public that, until
than, had not hidden their skepticism The complex alchemy of the reform—to
go from the althoritariai system to the democratic system without treakirg—
becane somewhat credible. The warez plan was simple: the Waneoist Cortes
would apprcve a new basic law, after discussion, that would chmge tin bases
of the system, establishitg new Cortes elected by universal saffrqe. That
political reform law amid then be sibjected to a referendum. The construction
of the new democratic regime would begin there. Its primry goal would be
geneal electims with the participatim of all the previously legalized poli-
tical parties. This was the philosophical basis of Suarez' refcrm which roused
my questions in the less optimistic. Would the Hanoist Cortes be willing
to coumit ha'a-kiri, voting for a law that would mam their elimination? Would
the "de facto powers" of the stateutrat is, the milita'yo-consent to the le-
galizatim of the Cunnmist Party? Otherwise, it was impossible to think of
democratic normalizatim.

The anazement was unaiimous when Suarez, ably using his good knowledge of Wan—
coism, got the Cortes to approve the political refcrm bill which, in parzraph
1 of Article 1, stated: "Democracy in the Spanish aate is based on the al-
prenacy of the law, expression of the swereign will of the people." The nusic
of these lyrics had not been heard in the political ears of the Spmiards for
more than 40 years.

with the exception of the nurder of Araluce and his compmims, Elk-as we
have already said-went though a stge of inactivity. Alter the bombs in
July, the sane thing could be said of GRAPO. However, it was very different
with the far right. A report of CAHBIO 16 in November said in reference to
the Basque Comtry: "It is already impossible to list the attac!.s against
people and property and the death tl'rests frcm those who identir y themselves
by letter, telephone or at the very nioment of wession as the OCR, members
of the New Order crgaaization and the Adolf Hitler Command." It pointed mt
the appea'mce of mm in the coummds. It was reported that "the death
ttreats have reached: Nicolas Redondo, secretary general of the UG‘l' [General
Union of lkrkers]; Jose Antonio Saracibar, also of the UGT; sculptor Edua'do
Chillida; San Sebastian lawyer Juan Maria Bandres; Juliai Viejo, leader of the
Comunist Party of Baskadi; Eduado Magallon, editor of the wsgkly BBRRIAK;
Jacinto Perez Iriarte, assistant editor; all its staff; etc." CAMBIO 16 in
Bilbao was also ttreataied.

This actim of the far right was not limited to the Basque Country. There
were centinual attacks in Madrid. 01 6 November, the Rafael Alberti bookstore
was burned by a commd identified as "New Order-Sixth Adolf Hitler Comand."
This was a reminder that that comand had sent ttreats to publicaticns like
CUADERNOS PARA EL DIALOGO, LA OODORNIZ, TRIUNFO, POSIBLE aid EL. PAIS. It was
pointed out that the insurance canpanies thenselves refused to igsure the
bookstcre which becane a priority trget of far right terrori .

Comenting m the activities of the Nazi group mentioned above, EL. PAIS edi-
torialized that "the authorities oust consider that they are facim a process

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of deterioration of public safety that, festering, can wodme an Argentini-
micn/ phenomenon not desired by anycne." It insisted: "m terrcrisn does
not justify terrcrisn iron the opposite side and tie stateo-if $5 wants to
airvive—nust not accept tie dialectic of guns in tin streets."

Tm black violence was also felt in ﬁndalucia. In December, Blas Pinar in-
angurated the social headwaters of the New Face in Sevilla and stated, with
the provocative style that cha‘acteriaed him: "It was necessa'y to use the
means required to go qainst the corruption that the recent government in
Spain ins introduced." In Seville, linelva, Cordoba and "alga, bookstcres and
press kiodts were turned or danged and sane people nere attacked or trreatened
"as Reds." Respansibility fell on the Nazis of the Adolf Hitler Ounna'nd, the
GCR and, in Helga, the FAE [Spanish Anticommist Want] formed by old le-
gicnnaires and soldiers of the Blue Divisian. ganplaints about this vandalisn
which also ranained mpunished were continual.3

The ”dirty m" in the Wench Basqne Country began to acquire ala'lning dimen-
siorns for Basqie reflgees. No men and a wens: were tried in Novanber by the
Bayona Omrt. Although condemned only fcr illegal possessicn of arms, they
seemed to be involved in a netwrrk of people close to the Spanish police whose
objective might be kidnapping ETA membes for subsecpent return to Spain. An-
other Spania'd, Salvador (ran, as also treated on Shgztober in Bayona. He
was allegedly involved in the sane type of operation. Journalist Jose Mania
Portell, himself a futtre victim of the ETA, studied the crganization of the
"anti-ETA" comands in a report, discarding the thesis that "they could he
persons...uno act personally and empirically." He continued: "There is a
national and international structure behind it." In the sane report, it was
assumed that /Pertnr/ had been the victim of these conmands which he considered
"pa'apolice groups." Portell stated that, in the last 19 months, the number of
attacks comitted by the uncontrolled anti-ETA counnands ”reaches about 200 in
Spain, 2 of them with fatal consequences and the majority, some serious and
sane not, but without blood. In the case of France, in spite of the fazt that
the nunber of attmks tas evidently been lower—lolo—the police has already ma-
naged, by watching the highways an merely by chance, to avast at least nine
anti-ETA activists." To demonstrate the difficulty of statistics in this

area, let us point out that CAHBIO 16 said there were & anti-Basque attazks
in Fl‘ench Basqze Country during the last 1-1/2 years. That includes IPertur's/
disappeaance.

Portell stated: "In some cases, it was the Spanish police who penetrated into
Wench territory withwt revealing their position." He even named some peOple,
arrested or not, implicated in this type of activity. Finally he concerned
himself with the money received for this "wcrk": "Che xtion consisted in
80,000 pesetas for a conpleted job—50,000 in amance and 30,000 upcn comple-
tion.” Finally he alluded to the fact that all these grwpsagperate at the
international level though a confederation called /Hz'kis/.

The Basques living in Phance also felt repressed by the Ranch authorities.
The Basqne refugees who had been banished to the island of Yeu in April had

manged to escape in July. However, in October, because of the official visit
of the Spanish royalty to ﬁance, 11 other refugees including /Argala/ were

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

banished. Aya Zulaica had been saitenced by the Bayona Court to 3 years in
jail. Appa‘ently good winds we not blowixg fcr ETA members.

On 15 December a referendum was planned in mich the political reform law which
Suarez had gotten past the obligatcry step of the ﬁatoist Cortes wmld be
submitted to the approval of the Spania-ds. (h 11 December when there were
only 4 days until the refeenchm, a terrorist incident upset the country. An-
tonio Maria” de (rial and Urquijo, president of the Cowcil of State, adviser
to the king and former minister of Justice under Ehanco, from a fanily well
knom for its ties to the past regime, was kidnapped from an office located
right in the center of Madrid. The Bascpe roots of the victim aid the fact
that he had apparently been ttreatened m several occasions by the ETA made it
appear at first that the Basque organizatim was respmsible for the event.
Almost imediately, however, sources close to ETA denied its pa'ticipation in
the kidnappirg. Shortly before 8:30 pm of the same day as the kidnapping, EL
PAIS received a telephone call in which GRAPO claimed respmsibility, statirg
that the communique could be picked up in a catain telephme booth. In the
note, GRAPO indicated: "Thrash this action, our organization reveals its re-
jection of the face of the fascist referendum." The condition for the vic-
tim's release was that 15 prisoners belmging to GRAPO, tie PCE (r), ETA, FRAP
and UPC [Caliciai People's Union] be released and sent to Algeria.

From the very first moment of this long kidnappixg cane (pestions about the
real objectives of an attack in Which destabilizing features could be clearly
perceived. Who was GRAPO really and what did it want? Has it lgical aid
possible that a far leftist a‘gmization wwld so openly play the cards of
involution? EL PAIS wrote: "The far left has never collaborated better with
the far right than it did yesterday, as it did when ETA assassinated a Basqxe
mayor on the day the Cortes voted on amending the Penal Code or the murder of
M" Aralme in San Sebastian. The sane could be said of the ware of bombings
early in the mcrning last 18 July. It all seems to be a plot to demenstrate--
anong other things--that democracy is was thm what there was, that there

is more public disturbance and more violence." After stating that there was
still no democrazy but "a prior state of tolerance," it repeated the idea that
"the mly way to put an end to terrorism is to eliminate the causes and the
environment that can be its hotbed. These re political measires aid we have
repeated for days that those adopted in the Basq1e Country are not sufficient
nor good enough." Finally it echoed the doubts that may Spaniards harbored
about GRAPU. "It is not appropriate to weale stories hit it is too nuch of a
coincidence that exh time a libealizing political measre is pr-epa'ed, the
far right finds good pretexts to incite rebellicn zainst the state. We do
not question that the executing arm of these deeds is an organization of the
extreme left. but it is appropriate to ask who gives it the ms and the
money and who plans things so that they always benefit the 'extremists' of the
other side.“3

DIARIO 16 also expressed its suspicims about GRAPO than the beginnirg. "me
operation cmied mt assumes an organizational setup too complicated to be

attributed to a snall group of leftist madnen. To set up a few men is one .
thim. It is very different to kidnap a political celebrity with such incre-
dible perfection and without leaving the slightest traze behind. The commd

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that kidnapped the president of the Constil of State is supported by a can-
plete organizatim and needs a closely wovan netwcrk of accomplices to do
things like it has. Fa" a group like GRAPO unich no me Icnew anything about

a yea' go to xhieve anch a high dares of operativeness in a few months alr-
prises everyone and makes many skeptical. How can all that be achieved with-
out the police finding enough clues to dismantle a", at least, control the
group? that covers have been used to create web a developed organization
without raising suspicion d‘ leaving any traces etha- than its consumated M
crimes? Many (pestions lead to suspicions that there is a cat in the be."

In subsequent days the police arrested many including x alleged members of
the PCB (r). SJSpicims about ETA did not completely disappea' since (riol's
son, present at the kidnapping, identified a photograph of an ETA member, Jose
unis E‘chegaray alias /Mark/, as one of the kidnappers.

The political parties condemned tie kidnapping but showed interest. The PCB
of Buskadi canpa'ed "deeds of this nature" to "the persistence of official
repressim." The PNV, trrongh ane of its leaders, stated that "some responsi-
bility in an action of this type which is condemable fell to the gov t
fcr not protecting political celetrities an the eve of tie referendum.

GRAPO constantly issued coununiqaes using EL PAIS and INFOMACIWES as cour-
iers. The first devoted a long editorial to the topic, "EL PAIS and Its Re-
spcnsibilities." It called its "situation unwanted and umomfcrtable" and
stated that "EL PAIS's acceptance of this nmqnfd'table role as intermedia‘y
has no other motive than moral duty and civic obligation to help we Fr
(riol's life." It mrtler asalred that "everyme knows that EL PAIS has not
told all t t it knows" and anphasized the risks taken by its editors in the
opa'ation.

The tensian aroused by Criol's kidnapping led the far rigrtists to expand
their acts of violence. At the sane time, they pressnred the government for
a troad amesty, a measure that was being prepared befcre (riol's kidnapping.

One of the official {romanda posters fd' the referendum had the slcgan:
"People, sped: out so that violence will be duet." Homver, violence was a
daily fact. In its latest issue, CAMBIO 16 published one of its already re-
galan reports an the violence of the fan right in which it revealed that pos-
sibly more than 500 millidn pesetas fran the holdup of a bank in Nice in the
previous amine—called "the robbery of the century"-could have gone to Spain
to finance 'a Spanish rigl'tist group based in Mid." The weekly again
listed the establisrnents, especially bookstores, that had been the ta'gets
of tarorist attacks and people ttreatened a~ attacked. It also referred to
the main groups involved. "In spite of the proliferatim of initials painted
on street signs in Budtadi, only tires youps of the far riglt have real
membership. They a'e HAN [National ﬁction Movanant], the OCR and the ATE.

It is believed that sane manbers of those fa:tions have double membership."
It also studied the banbing systems used by these youps and emphasized that
"the detonatirg system is very complex and apparently can only be acaned
from arms traffickers who operate in Russels. Then it explained the mechan-
isn. It also insisted that the psychosis of terror forced the people in the
Antigua district of San Sebastian to fan self-defense scpads. It stated:

1.50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"khan anonymous trreats were sent, they were signed with initials like OVA
[Q'ganizatian of Antisengaratist Volunteers], FAS [Antisepa'atist Wont] and
other less known ones. 7

GRAPO made its presence felt during those last weeks of 1976 and the bginnng
of 1977, not only ttrongh the continual avalanche of coununiqnes that filled
the front pges of the newspapers but ttragh other azticns like the attenpt
to crganiae a general strike. ‘Ihere was even an armed canirmtatim at the
CASA enterprise in Getafe on 10 Janua'y between a GRAPO cannand that was in-
citing a strike and guards of the enta'prise who were wounded.

Also on 30 December the Council of Minista's abolished the TOP [Conrt of Public
Order] by decree. It had been me of the key instrunents of political and
mien repression during the Ranco regime and was, therefore, hated by all the
democrats. Its abolition, received with relief, meant the crimes of terrcrisn
would go to crdinary courts. me abolitim of the TOP was also considered a
sign of the real democratizing decision of the government in spite of the fact
that the reform process was so threatened by the situatian of violence that we
have been comenting on.

The Trgic Heek: the Atocha Massacre

The political situation reached an extremely high degree of tension in the
last week of January 1977. 0-101, who had been kidnapped, continued to send
letters to his family and GRAPO cantinued to issue commiqnes repeating "that
the delay in solving this problem depands only an the galernment." No one ex-
plained the inability of the police to effectively pursue the kidnappers.
CAMBIO 16 wrote: "The government mst declare its intention to grant anesty,
asking in exchange simply that the Basque opposition lay down its arms until
final peace is reached in that global political greement that will put the
Spanish democrxy on its feet....‘I'he argument that the government cannot give
in to the blackmail of GRAPO is certainly not valid. If ridicule killed, GRAPO
would rave died of shame. This shocked country has not yet da'ed lash at
that sordid trgicomedy of the stupidest kimappa's in histcry....And this is
another subject. How is it possible that the Spanish police have not found
Q‘iol's kidnappers? A manth has already passed and GRAPO walks around here
like Pedro in his own house, talks with journalists without mung any fea‘,
runs its errands as if Madrid ware its bazkya'd, machine-guns people, papers
the Metro with leaflezg and no me is found. Ea'lier it piled banbs up and
they were not found.‘

In this situation of confusion, an Sunday, 23 January, a week of related vio-
lent events began that, without entaggeraticxn, can be called a really trqic
week. That Sunday an unauthorized dennnonstration convoked by all the leftist
parties and sponsored by the Pro-Amnesty Camissicn of Madrid stated at the
Plaza de Espana at rnoan. It was demanding total amnesty. Eboun the very be-
ginning, there were armed groups of the far right determined to "lreak up" the
denmstration. Che of the many incidents that occurred claimed the life of
yang Arturo Ruiz, a student and member of the Workers Camissims, the com-
mnist unim organization. AAA claimed responsibility fcr the mrda'. Later
it was learned that the group that fired at Arturo Ruiz included Argentine

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jorge Oeea‘dcy who was arested. Spaniads Jose Fernmdez Guaza and keel
Sierra, Italian Stefano delle Chiae and a fifth pa'son who was not identified.
All were known for their violent xtivities. Cesa'dcy was considered tied to
the Infcrmation Services of the Residency, one of whose headqua'te‘s was on
Calle Rey ﬁancisco where he was seen. Fernandez maze had acted within the
manework of ATE in the Beagle Country and in the me saitlavest. Azgel
Sierra had led far rightist commds, especially those that destroyed about 20
Picassos on exhibit at the Theo Gallery in Hamid in Rumba 1971. Belle
Chiae belonged to the Italian fascia group Avaguardia Nazimale md had been
seen at the MmteJtrra events in 1976.

The next afta'nocn anewname was added to the alreadyvery lag list ofvic-
tims of political violence. Miss a student demmstration crgmized to pro-
test Arturo maiz' death, a snake bomb killed your; Mia Luz Najera.

That Mmday, 24 January, the 45th day of (riol's kidnapping. weld so dam in
the ctronicles of terrcrisn as me of the oninous dates in the terrorist esca-
lation gainst the Spanish denocracy. In the momixg, Lieutenant General
Villaescusa milis, president of the Supreme Camil of Military Justice, was
kidnapped as he left his home on Calle O'Dmnell. The kidnappers wea'ing army
unifcrms were identified as members of GRAPO. This organizaticn claimed re-
sponsihility for the kidnappirg "in respmse to the nurder of Arturo Ruiz dur-
ing the dencnstratim for meaty." It was, without doubt, an opportunistic
statement since it was impossible to organize a kidnapping without nuch lmger
and more ca‘efm preparation.

That black Monday was witness in the late home to the most serious terrcrist
act cried out by the far right: the Atocha massaere. At about 11 pm, a

far rightist counmd troke into a laborite office of “ulcers Omissions lo-
cated at Atocha 55 where a meeting related to a transportation conflict had
Just been held. The attackers fired their weapons at close rage at the few
people who remained in the mildixg, killing five of then and swiously wound-
irg for others. mime Valdelvira, Luis Javier Benavides, Racism Javier
Saucpillo, Serafin Holgado aid Argel Rocriguez were killed; the first four war:
lawyers and the last was an adninistrator. Apparently the killers were 1m)“
ing for Joaquin Nararro, leader of the ‘lranspa'tation Workers Comissions,

who tad already left the hiilding. In the middle of Mach, the perpetrators
of the trutal killixg were mated: Jose Fernandez Cerra, Ca'los Garcia Ju-
lia, Fernando herdo de TeJeda, Wanisco Albadalejo, Deccadio Jimenez Ca-avxa,
Fernandez Palacios 81d Gloria Herguedas. They were well Idiom people cm-
nected to far right circles. Lerdo de TeJeda was the am of Blas Pinar's for-
mer secretary. Fernandez Oerra md Fernandez maze, implicated in Arturo
Ruiz' anode", had xted with ATE in the Basque Country. Ga'cia Julia was a
New Fcrce dissident. Albadalejo held a positim in the Vertical Thanspcrtatiou
Union and Jimenez Caravaca, an old memba' of the Blue Division where he was
mmdedintheteadncasmexpertma‘ms.

It was hard not to see a perfectly planned operation behind these incidents
aimed at destroyixg the attempted democratic reformisn that 31an piloted.

CAMBIO 16 alluded to the IF [Fascist International] and rote: "Acca-dim to
a note in the BOLETIN DE INFORMACIGJ published in Geneva by CITE CAIIDLIWE,

152
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the IF met in Rome last 3 October to coordinate efforts in the fight gainst
theMmdst trendsinSpain." Thenanesofsmeoftboseattendizgwere
given. It added that "tin Spanish aganizations in LEA [Spanish Ami-Marxist
Strtggle], ATE, OCR and Irade Union Action croups, attended the meeting where
the plan of action for the cannemratim of the first anniversary of Ft‘anco's
death was basically disoussed....1n the middle of the am (1976), the pre-
sence of two reccgnized members of the IF,4§talians Stefano delle Chine and
Salvatore Fbancia, was detected in Spain."

However. the tragic week would not and with the Atocha massacre. an it'iday,
28 January, the teletypes again ran out to amounce two other attacks that
left two armed police and a civil guard dead. ﬁree othu' gents were sa'i-
ously wounded. The events had (curred dwing two holdups of ranches of the
Mid Savings link in two diffa'ent districts of the Spanish capital. GRAPO
claimed responsibility.

No one any longer qnestioned that an operation of provocation was in [regress

as part of what the Italians called the strato of tensian. It was a matte

of creating the conditions to destabilize the democratic systan or, in Spain's
case, to prevent its establishment. For the first time in their hista'y, most
of the Spanish newspapers published a joint edita-ial an Same!» 29 January,
entitled ”Fm the unity of All." we to its histcrical inteest and its rela-
tionship to the subject of terrcrisn, we reprint it below:

"In these times of national crisis when powerml forces ttreaten the very es-
sence of the state and try to violently usnrp the popular mandate fcr danocracy
and peace, the press feels an obligation to make a call fcr the unity of all,
without exclusion.

"The rigrt. of a people to freely decide their collective destiny cannot be im-
peded by violence and organized crime. Only public confrontation of the dif-
ferent positians, the clarification and transparency of social realities and.
in the end, the expressim of the will of the citizens through votirg can lgi-
timately shape the new Spanish society.

"Terror has no ideology. The exposure of those who try to benefit ﬂ'om this
strategy is the unanimous demand of the Spaniards and their gwernment. The
servants of order and other citizens are victims today of the sane violence
that tries to animate our country in civil disccrd.

"Those who have used this machinetim are the enemies of all, the enemies of
the Spanish people. Their plan is obvious: they we trying to keep the civil
fmmlas of tree and orderly coexistence to which the Spania'ds have a right
from beirg established. Facing this challenge, all the political and social
forces oust form a comon front and, setting aside their diffa'ences, proclaim
their determination to stay on the road to democray ttrongh free elections
until the end.

"The government and the rest of the political forces met quickly come to an
agreement and adopt energetic measures to safeguard the peace without rurting

public freedoms. The existence or nonexistence of democrmy in Spain and the
future of our country as a pluralistic and Ree society are in play.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion or preparation of terrorist acts. These articles concerned areas
fer more than 72 hours and the possibility of sea'ching house without manta.

In the middle of this sa'ious situation, tte culy positive aspect was the
rapprochenent between the govemmant and the opposition which felt solidarity
facing the terrorist onslaught. The opposition parties, except those of the
far left-PIE [Spanish Labor Party], 031‘ [Revolutions-y Crganization of "wk-
ersl and MC [Communist ﬂwementl—which were marginal, went up a Joint cumu-
nique. They refered to the "ma/oidable need to reach a complete pluralistic
denocracy th'ongh free elections in the shcrtest time possible" and asked the
government to maintain public orda‘, ”aiming the ta'rorist groups that cir-
culate with impunity today."

The Pat was in a more difficult situation than the other opposition groups.
Its secretary general, Smtigo Carrillo, had even been arrested in Decenber
for several days. It saw its denocratic imge reinfcrced by the fact that

victims which left from the Palxio de Justicia was an impressive demonstra-
tion of grief. Pradcuically, in the midst of so ouch blood, there was pro-
gress on the road to reconciliatian, indispensable fcr the establishnnent of a
democratic regime. However. many suspicions and my bad tubits remained.
The deaths frOm te'rcrisn were taken in different ways, according to the dif-
ferent political positions. Let us analyu tn,- following published by
INFOMACIGJES, 29 Jewry, pge 7, unnds' tm title "Dan Joaqnin Satrustegui:
the opposition should go to the Morals of the mrdered police." "The idea
that the democratic opposition can attend the burials or funerals of the
guards nurda'ed in Machid yesta‘day was widespread in political and news cir-
cles. Liberal leada' Joacpin Satrustgui told INFOMCIWES: 'I believe the
opposition shwld attend the funerals. I myself will attend the ceremonies
held for the hindered servants of crdan'" As can be seen, the way was slowly
opened to the idea ttat the state and its systems served and belonged to the
entire national community, that all victims of political violence met be
equally mourned, that there are no first or second-class deaths.

In the ensuing days, the police made an undetermined but very large number of

arrests that raised the protest of sane leftist parties. There was no police

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

information and many of those arrested were quickly released. The arrests also
affected members of the far right.

These arrests—especially those of members of the PCS. (r), the illQal party
of which GRAPO was the armed branch—appaently gave the police importait
clues. The statements of sane police scmces seemed to respmd to that; they
said that (riol and Villaescusa had to be in Madrid "and in different plazes.
In case the police found one of the hostges, the kichappers cog? ooum. m
the cover provided by the other to continue playirg their gape.

It was also obvious that GRAPO had charged tactics airing the kidnapping. Eton
the release of 15 prisoners, their first demand when they kidnapped (rial,

they went m to demand total amnesty and later resigTed themselves to a public
promise of that. They also went from ttreatening (riol's ”execution" to prac-
tically guaranteeing his life but trreatenirg to hold him "as lag as
necessary."

All this led to continued speculation about the real nature of GRAPO. In many
sectors, especially the left, it was stated thm. GRAPO was a far rightist
group or, at least, "managed from international fascist positions." State-
meats of this type ind been made in foreign Journalistic circles like EL
mUDJAHID, official organ of the Algerian Government (in its 29 January 188.18).
This was Curious since there were knom ties between GRAPO and the MPAIAC
[Sovereignty and Independence Movemem of the Canary Islands], the Canary Ian
lands independence grwp led by oibillo who, in twn, enjoyed open [rotecticn
from Algeria: leader Bowedieme.

In the speculations about GRAPO, a Spanish minister--apparently De la Mata
Gorost izaga, minister of union relations—told the ASSOCIATED PRESS: "Tre
government in Madrid was convinced that (riol's kidnappers were fran the far
right." This idea seabed to be ccrroborated because expert grapholcgical md
semantic tests of the texts sent by GRAPO detected syntax often used in Italy
and Argentina, two frement sources of far right activists.

Sane circles accept the hypothesis that sane news services of the Fbancoist
epoch remained detached from the new political situation and continued fmc-
tionirg in favor of involution and gainst the consolidatim of a democratic
system in Spain. The Documentation Service of the Presidency created by Ca-
rrero Blanco was frequently cited with its functions of coordinatim md liai-
son with all the remainirg intelligence services. This service had been
strergthened in the last years of ﬁancoism and had extensive information at
all the groups and people of the democratic oppositim.

A book published a little earlier in Paris contributed to all these SJSPi-
cions. Its hor was Luis Gonzalez-Mata, a former secret gent in the Spa-
ish services. This straxge and disturbed pe'sm stated that the Spanish
secret services had participated in the creatim and maintenance of some left-
ist organizations with terrorist activities like DRIL [Iberia Revolutionary
Directorate fcr Liberation], MIL and FRAP itself. Aocordirg to /Ciane/-
szalez-Mata's operative nape—he himself had given Alvarez del Vayo, presi-
dent of FRAP, 800,000 pesetas and 20 passports from certain Spanish

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

authcrities. The American CIA an the French DST had also manimlated FRAP,
accordixg to ICimel. behind tte belt of the Spaush secret services.

gle led to the idea that GRAPO could be merely a red {ism-creed conceslixg fas-
cist elements. Judicial and police investigations in Italy denmstrated the
close ccnnectiOns betuem "red plots" sad "black plots." th couldn't the
same mug happen in Spain? CMBIO 16 asked: "RAP, RAP. What do these ini-

Followirg a completely different line, Journalist Alfredo Semprm. closely
tied to police circles, stated in ARRIBA mo in the marine DIA 32 that Phan-
cisco Romero Marin, the PCE leade‘ who became a meal in the Soviet Army,
was the "governixg head" of GRAPO. The next day ARRIBA mblished a correction
at the insistence of the PCB to when "sch slander is intolerable...(and) we

want to denme the coarse We. of trying to camect air party to the
criminal acts.”

The lddnappims of Oriel aid Villaescusa ended happily after a spectacula
"Rescue Operation" tha beam on “emissday, 9 Felruary, after the fortuitous

opment "0ndzreta 2." General Villaescusa was found in one of its muses
and a woman, Biomacim inning: de Satigo, and a m, Abelardo Collazo,

called-othe president of the Council of State was also released. His kidnap-
pers kept him in a: apa‘tment of the "Sardinero" development in the Macrid

district or Vallecas. GRAPO when Hamel Gil Araujo and Celsa Ga‘cia Va-
llejo were treated there.

That same day a police inspectcr, Antonio Depez Salcedo, was mrdered in Bante-
lona 81d a: mo policeman, Jun Romano, Handed. The cummd responsible
fcr the attack, also belonging to GRAPO, was nested at 11 pm that same

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These brillimt police actions had been directed by a comissa'y, Roberto Co-
nesa, who had become fanous ad would be me of the most controversial members
of the Spanish police. Conesa had been the last chief of tin Political-Social
a~igade when it was dissolved by the Suarez Government in November 1976.
Transferred to Valencia as senior police chief, he was called to Mid at the
end of Jama‘y 1977 to lead the team of specialists used in the figtt xainst
GRAPO. Canesa was an am in the fight gainst the fa' leftist. orgmiza-
tiens aid had dismmtled CARI [Iberian Revolutionary Anarchist Group] afte~
this group kidnapped the office manager of the Bed: of Bilbao in Pris, w
Suarez.

On 11 Felruary, the minister of government, Rodolfo Martin Villa, and several
police chiefs including Conesa held a press confermce to explain the details
of the rescue operation of the kidnapped men. Caress insisted that there was
no one behind GRAPO.

However, the doubts did not disappear. To CAMBIO 16, "the cmflictitg ver-
sions of the two kidnapped victims, the gaps in the information given by the
authorities and the logical deductims fran the official note on the case lead
to the team-hidden under a statement of "reserved material” still in existence
which muzzled the press—that GRAPO, finally imprisoned, was not mly the
tkreat of a group of far leftist youths determined to provoke a prerevolutim-
ary state in this country but perhaps a puppet moved by obscure aid confused
forces that would be men more diffigglt to cmtrol at the key manent of the
reform program of the new mmanc'ny.

EL PAIS also insisted that "the release of Fr 0~iol and General Villaescusa
does not put an end to the questions tint Spatia'ds have been askixg about the
origin of the terrorist canpaign unleashed in cur country." It added: "May
doubts remain to be explained in this affair." Further it insisted: "It is
necessa‘y to explain to the Spanish people each and every me of the steps in
this process: if there has a conspiracy, who crgmiaed it aid why." It ended
alludirg to the "garbge that remains which sane we determined not to see.
The possibility of an effective democracy in Spain depends on find and re-
vealing the perpetrators and accomplices in this incredible pian.'6 A few
days later, the same newspaper gain referred to the "atmosphere of skepticisn
(that) spreads in the street. Many people ask the questions that we ask in
this editorial today." It gain listed the contggdictions and incmsistencies
pa'ceived in the official version of the events. Jose meto wrote: "Per-
haps GRAPO does not know who it works foe hit the state should know. If the
gave-meat of that state knows the conspirattrg7tut does not denounce them,

it is betrayirg the interests of the country."

H'om Provocation to Amnesty

The tragic wek. the week of fear as it was also called, left a bitter taste
in everyone's mouth. Laying aside the enigmas, it met be remembered that
altlngh GRAPO appea'ed practically dismmtled for the second time in 6
mmths, the ba‘ba'ic Atocha massxre and the murder of Arturo Ruiz were still
not solved. The Spanish democrats saw indications everywhere that led them to
think that a facmidable conspiracy was in progress to keep democracy hm er.-

ceedirg in Spain.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Before the month of Fetruary ended, the Causal Directorate of the Civil

ma'd publicized a note on mesday, 22 Fehury. It reported that, in the
course of "the investigations by the POP about possible terrorist xtivities,"
the presence in mm of several individials aispected of belonging to an ex-
tremist youp devoted to criminal activities, even no traffic, had been de-
tected. Investigaticns had led to the disovery of a buildixg at Calle Pe-
layo 39 in Macrid where m were mamfxtured. That mildirg tad been rented
several mmths ea°lier by Sanchez Covisa, leader of the fa' rigltist group, OCR.
As a remlt, several people were a-rested in addition to Sanchez Covisa him-
self. This included several Italiais well known for their ties to fa' riglt-
ist organizations aid internstimal fascist circles. The group included cele-
brities like Salvatcre Fl‘amia-who ggd a lot to say in the canirg yeas—
Elio Massgrmde and Mario Tedeschi. The national aid fcreign press really
concerned itself with Mariano Saichez Covisa then. Fa' exanple, the German
magazine DER SPIBGEL published sane of his statemmts. In reference to the
king, he stated: "I cannot show loyalty tows-d saneone who waits to trmsfcrm
Spain into a European-style danocracy.” He Justified violence: "I believe
that...it is not bad....Violence at the service of a Just cause, men the
otter ways have been exhausted, is good in my opinion." He ended stating:

"If the situation occurred,...l would be willirg to kill for the fatherlmd
without too many scruples."

It was obvious that the far rig): was developing a pa‘fect plan of political
destabilization aid that the death of Arturo Ruiz, Atocha and the manufacture
of arms m Cane Pelayo were only the most visible tips of m unusially large
iceberg. The government had decla'ed the first two cases reserved material
against. the protest of the press mich saw the measre more as censorship than
an attempt to achieve g‘eater efficiency in the imestigations. EL PAIS brote:
"mere are obvious indications that mono waits to ttrow a blmket of si-
lence on the escalation of violence suffered by this country recently. A yer
after Vitoria, almost a yea» after Mmtejurra, 2 mmths after @101 81d more
tkm 30 days after Atocha, thee are only confusirg explanations." A 1mg
series of questions followed staing the doubts that overwhe the citizens
as well as the news media and the different political sectors.

Meanwhile, even though the center of gravity of political interest had been in
Madrid for many weeks, the Basque problems, so closely tied to ETA terrorism,
continued without any progress toward a solution. Amestywtotal amesty—
continued to be the popular demzid. Legalization of the use of the /ilo.irrina/
-tte two-cross Basque flg initially the ensign of the PNV--had been achieved
after the meetirg of a g'oup of Guipuacoa maya‘s with Minister Phrtin Villa

on 18 Janua'y. "The traditional 'tanba'rada' of $31 Sebastian...was the real
example of likurrinas/ hit, with this symbol recmtly rescued after almost 60
years of illgality, the aies of other cmcrete and urgent denmds continued
even louder if gsible: amesty, makers bilirguslism, reintegration of the

, autonomy.‘

in the first day of the year, ETA had larder-ed employee Gonulo Santos mrri-
entes in Las Arenas (Vizcaya). Then it maintained a lag truce of more than
2 mmths, leaving terrorism to GRAPO aid the far right.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the bgiming of March, a Pro-Amnesty Week was held in the Basqne Country
without incident. It was know that the government was studying a new amnesty
measure, delayed only by the kidnappings and serious incidents of the last
week of Jaiuary. "In the street, in chlrches, with placa'ds and by wcrd of
mouth, thousands of persons continued to ask the govermneat fcr amnesty befwe
the electims.” At the sane time. "on the manning of the 6th (Ma‘ch), Telex

After the meeting of the Comcil of Ministers on Io Ma‘ch, a note was published
«considered a sounding boa'd-u-in which the govemment ammed there had been
approval "finally of the bases on which the provisions and decisims to can-
plete the set of amesty measnres would be adapted." A week later, at the
next council meeting, the new decree-law ttrough which mly a few members of
ETA and FRAP wOuld remain in Jail—estimated at no me than ZO—was finally
approved. However, the Basque demands were for total amnesty and did not a:-

must know that the people will not cede one iota of their Just demands. ‘11:
people will continue fighting with all their energy, with all their enthleiasn,
until achieving their 6%gitimate «hand of seeing all, absolutely all, the

The government has remhing the limit of its possibilities but ETA, as it had
already daze on other occasions, exploited the concession of the amnesty to
again make its bloodthirsty presence felt. Early in the naming Sunday,

13 March, an attack in Mondragon killed a civil guard, Constantino Ganez Br-
cia, and seriously wounded two other civil suede who died later, Miguel San-
taella Ca‘retero and Jose Castano Vazquez. ETA (m) claimed responsibility for
the attack which was interpreted as reprisal for the death of allged ETA
members Nicolas Mendizabal and Sebastian Goicoechea in a confrontation with
the Civil Guard on 8 March in Ichaso (Guipuzcoa). A third member, Francisco
Aldanorndo, was wounded. Basque sources said that, at the time of the shoot-
irg, the car of the ETA members was stopped at a checkpoint. Ch Mmday,

14 Much, a demonstratim in San Sebastian dqmerated into a pitched battle;

When all Spain breathed relief hr the arrest of those allegedly responsible
for the Atocha massacre, the Basque theme becane inflaned gain in spite of
the amesty. The incredulity of those who had believed that the [regressive
establishnent of freedoms, especially the amnesty, would disarm terrorism be-
gan to spread. EL PAIS asked: "How can the endorsement, synpathy or mere
neutrality towa~d the ETA members by large sectcrs of the Basque people be
explained? How can you acccunt for the solida-ity of the Basqnes with the
political prisoners condemned for crimes "82'; blood and their mobilizations to
protest the deaths of two ETA activists? Irncomprehension grew and was go-
in; to nude the solution of the Basque probleu even more difficult in tie

1.59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

already set m» 15 June. Wan the mdergromd, em demanded the creatim of
"minimal denmratic channels though which their (the peeple's) aspirations
can materialize witlmt rescrtirg to violence." To the ETA, those channels

Memwhile, the prismers began to leare the Jails although the canpaign t‘cr
total amesty did not stop. ETA seemed to keep its truce munenta'ily with the
exception of a Civil Gut-d sergeant killed in Tolosa (Glimmoa) on 29 April.
At the bqinnirg of that mmth, 18 April, the bodies of the two police in-
spectors, Jose Luis Ma'tinez and Jesus Maia Gonzalez HJQ‘O, who had disap-
peared in Hendaya in April 1976 appea'ed on tm French beach of Arglet.

ETA membes mly accepted exile as a preliminry meamre: they waited to
return to their hanes after the elections, reelirg that my other solutiOn "is
not real total amesty.

01 10 May, Suarez received the Basque negotiatixg comission and told them
that complete freedom of all the prisoners was not possible "became of his
allged wealmess toward t‘a' rightist sectors, especially the military,"
according to Letanendia. Meanwhile, a new B’o-Amesty Week has held in the
Basque Camtry from 8 to 11 May with my mobilizatims. Q1 12 May, a "day
of‘ struggle" convoked by the parties including the P308, there we scriOus
incidents. In Renteria a bullet killed an old man. Rafael Gmez Jauregui,
md many other people were wounded. (he, G'egorio Ma-ichalar, died 10 days
late. In Panplona there were two deaths: me youth died from a bullet in
the head and an old man watching the riots Ron a balcony died from a heart
attack when a rubber bullet came near. 0: Saturday. 14 May. another person,
Hamel Riertes, died in Gallar'ta (Viacaya) as he fled than tte Civil ma‘d.

Discaragement been to spread because even if all Spain, tlrough a gigantic
effort, advanced toward democratic normalcy, the Basque Country seemed about

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to break away from that collective effort. EL Plus trote: "Beymd the demand

for total amesty, the political objective of ETA aid its allies is to achieve

a climate that makes electoral absenteeisn of the people as well as the with-
crawal of the central and leftist caididates possible. The reason is that the
elections, and only the elections, can open the way to the third strategy, the "66
only one capable of endirg the vicious circle of 'assimilatimim-independence.’

01. 22 May, the first five ETA members exiled left by air fcr Russels. They
were five of the ones tried in Birgos: Gorostidi, wens, Iriarte, Onaindia
31d Dtrrmsu'o. They had Just reached Belgium what they gave statements to
the press. Their intransigence was dazzlirgly clean They did not seem will-
ing to cede one iota of their demands to balance the concessions of the gov-
cmment which, therefcre, looked more liloe symptans of wealmess than gestures
of goodwill to many political sectcrs.

Javier La'ena said: "Either give us the annesty that the Basque people wait
or everyone here is going to arm himself... .If Slarez continues with delays

as he has until now, he will have to accept tie cmsecpences that the people
impose." La‘ena also stated: "We wins the elections, no me will stop
the mobilimtims of the Basque people. They are going to increase with that
campaign for the total denocracy not granted and socialism" CAMBIO 16, which
printed these statements, cemented: "Tmse who have waited in Jail far 8
years do not want to waste a minute more."

The released EI‘A manbers did not reject intromction of the tOpic of a'med
struggle. Although Uriarte expressed the primacy of "mass mobilizations,"
"trio Onaindiauwho later would experience a very marked evolutimufea‘ed
the formalism of the bangeois democracy. He stated: "Under these cmdi-
tions, there can be democracy aid nothing will cmnge essentially...(so) there
must be demmstratims and new deaths in the streets. thda' these circum—
stances, the armed struggle must be spontaieously reproduced though a self-
defense mechanism of the people." He continued that idea: When the people
ask for armed stnggle, there is no reason to deny them it." (haindia felt:
"ETA does not have anything to hide, any past to regret." To him and the
other ETA manbers, their violence was different and was justified as opposed
to the "black terra'ism" that he condemned. Oonmentirg m the Atocha massa-
cre, he indicated: "It was then that the country discovered tint we lived
surrounded by murderirg bands." Watching a film on the events in the Basque
Country, a Journalist asked them "if they would return to take up arms." The
five "exiles" sailed with a gesture that could be interpreted as an affix-ma";
Live. One of them said: "After having seen the film, you can imagine.... 7

manwhile, thre was me of the frequent periods of crisis in the heart of

5va (p-n). Bapecially after the kidnapping of Javier de Ibarra m 20 Maynto
which we will refer lateruthe disagreanent between the leadership of ETA (p-m)
md the /talde bereziak/ or autonanous camnmds who decided to cmtinue the
armed struggle was clea'ly revealed. In a camuniqxe published (11 11 May,
these comands accused the leadership of ETA (p-m) of not really strengthenirg
the military organism and of having accepted a truce without previously ob—
taining a satisfacta'y response to the demands of the Iabertzale/ left. At
the bottom of all this lay tie secret talks with the Suez govemment

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

umentarily prevent the final repiazenent of the violent pramilita‘y spxe
in which assimilationists and independentistas fight by the peaceful political
space which the Bascpe democratic parties and gresumably the people themselves
of Euskadi advocate." Referring to the last attack of the ETA which took the
life of armed policeman Manuel {rcera de 1a 0112 in San Sebasti "n on 18 May
before the kidnapping and subsequent murder of Javier Iba‘ra. t.e Madrid news-
paper continued: "It is sure tlnn likely that at least some of the trenches
of ETA will unleash a new anned offensive whose ultimate objective would be
the same: to keep the elatinns than opening a new area of constructive dia-
lozue where an, absolutely all, tte froblems of the Basqua people can be
uisrussed and resolved by democratic mu peaceful meals."‘

The kidnapping of Javier lbarra y Berge which we have already mentimed was
claimed by people considered to be part of ETA (p-m) although, as we have
already said, it ms tie liabarra/ c-mnand of the /bereziak/. Its lag can-
munique ref‘erret: to the "days of struggle in all of Euskadi for amesty and
the democratic Freedoms (which) have been a clear 8131 that the wa'king class
and the Basque people in general demand a radical national alternative, refus-
hi“ to accept the reformist hoax. In response, the government tlrwgh its
m-called Faces of (rder has unleashed a wave of regression aid mrder in
.tu-skadi whose balance tragically lives up to the best epocle of the France

.1 Let atorship." It continued: "We have trought battle to the enemy where it
can .::.\st affect him: his rern'essive and oligarchical machine, upholder of the
-;.1::‘*:a-xt systrxo....with the arrest of Javier de Ibarra, we have struck one

he abstential pillars on which the present oppressive state rests: the
.-i.i_;amhy." They considered their nostge "a typical example of ecmomic aid
g-c-lj ti: al gmer, closely tie-.1 to the highest circles of the still intransigent
!-l~aucoist hulker."

:1 this communique, it is not mom whether the elementary nature of the ideas
-.-r‘ the apparently spontaneous naturalness with which they Justify their vio-
L-cnce at the same time that they condemn the violence of the "dominant sys—
'-.~::." is more wwisﬁng. it is light-years away from a democratic concept and
.; enrsary understanding of lumen rights. it is impressive to see that such
crude and widevelored concepts are at the root of the Basque drana and, by ex-
tension, to see the fragile nature of the Spanish democracy. '

The electims approached but violence continued to affect political life. On
(Saturday, a June, two civil guards here mrdered in Barcelorna. At the same

‘. 2mm, electrical installations in .Vacmd were attacked, leaving part of Madrid
without electricity. GRAPU, the sinister phoenix that seemed to rise from its
d5:l.’$, returned to make its presence mom.

The {govern-lent continued its exile policy and thee other ETA nembers—-Inaki
ism'asketa, Jose Antmio Garmenjia, pardoned in 1975 due to his loss of the
ability to reason because of :- head wound, and the well-known ﬁnancisco Javier
lzco de la Iglesia, the most Teams in the Burgos trial-«arrived in Norway at
the beginning of June. tn 2 June, IApalaI, one of the most famous ETA lead-
vrs, was arrested by the Bench police and some naively thought that he could
be used as a hostage to guarantee Ebarra's life since he was considered re-
:ponsible for the kidnapping comnand that demanded 1 billion pesetas for the

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

release of its victim. /Apala/. who denied his participation in the kidnap-
ping, was held in Porquerolle where, at the end of May, 10 of the most dm-

gerous members of the ETA (m) had ended up by decision of the French minister
of interior.

result of bad gove‘nmait but the inheritance of a past that it will take us
years to erase from our lives."71

What has first a fer unfcrtunately became evidence men, on 22 June, a week
after the bright electa‘al 15 June, Javier de Iba‘ra's body was found in the
spurs of Berazar. If the kidnapping was unamimously ccndanned, the mrder
reached even greater heigrts or rejection and coudeanation. DEIA, a news 1-
per close to the PNV, condemed the nurder energetically as it also cmdemed
"any attempt to manipulate this act slowing down the democratization of the
country." It also wrote: "However, every violent deed has roots that ﬁplain
but do not Justify this psychopathology that our country is surferirg."

EL PAIS stated: "Ibarra's murder does not even fall unda' 'terrcriam' It

is a kidnappirg followed by attanpted extortion and premeditated unrda'WThe
Basque People for Liberty do not deserve this insult." What did the Madrid
newspaper mean? Perhaps everything that had been dme before under those
initials--ETA-was honorable? This demonstrates the complex understanding of
terrcrism by the Spanish people, the news media aid political leada's. For

a lorg time. they more or less tacitly accepted "certain" terrorist: and Wear-
tain" violence. It was cmtradictory, for example, that a man like Jose Maria
Bengas, a PSOE leader in the Basque Country, spoke simply of a "tremendms
political mistake." Juan Maria Bandres, recently elected senate" fcr Saska-
diko Eskerra in Guipuzcoa was cleverer when he cemented: "I hJIO always been
against the death penalty. I believe tkat runan life is inviolate." The

ETA (p-m) itself condemned the crime in its press crgan HAUTSI: "That is not
the style of the ETA. That is not the way which has given us unquestionable
popular support 81d sympathy during these years."75

As we have already seen, terra'ism of every cola' was present at this time.
GRAPO still had time to place two bombs in the headwaters of DIARIO 16

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

causing damage valued at. 20 million pesetas. However, this did not keep the
newspaper from printing. Earlier, at the winning of May, the president of
Elnpresa (ros, Jose Maria Bulto, was murdered in Ba'celma by the intumme pro-
cedure of placing a bomb on his chest. Several crganizatims including FRAP
claimed responsibility in commniqxes that could not be inattenticated.

Case of Marginal Terrorism: the MPAIAC

In the pana'ana of Spanish terrorism durirg the stage of transition to demo-
cracy, eva'ything was not reduced to the "big" time in terrcrism: ETA,

SRm’O and the far rigtt. There were other marginal phenomena, tl’e most imptr-
tant being the MPAIAC whose leader was attorney Antonio Oihillo.

Cubillo was a man close to the PCB who chose the road to exile in 1961. He
went to Paris and 3 years later went to Algeria where he lived under the [ro-
tection of the Algerian authorities who gave him a positicn teachirg Spanish.
At that time, (‘ibillo was completely disillusimed by the PCB. The sane yea‘
he arrived in Algeria, 1964, he founded the MPAIAC which, for a long time,
was a "one-man group."

i-Ieanwhile Qibillo was elaboratirg his very basic and uncriginal theory in
which it is not hard to find elements of the theory of the “swim revolu-
tion. (libillo defined the MPAIAC as a "patriotic national liba'ation move-
:nent...that tries to include all the social strata that are for independence,
pc-{ular freedoms and, in the future, socialian."

t‘uhillo extolled his organization which he said had four ﬂoats: the
political-diplomatic, worker, culttral and military. However, it mist be
recognized that mbillo did have some diplomatic triumphs to his credit. The
first was in 1968 when he got the OAU to recognize the "Africamess" of the
Canary Islands. Another far-reaching victory was the permissicn grated by
the Algerian autmrities in 1975an Spam signed the tripartite ageement
on the Sahara with I-lortcw and Maritmiauto lroadcast a daily 30-minute
program called "The Voice of the Bee Canary Islands." Starting then, ij1110
and the MPAIAC became well known and won sane followers in the archipelago.
Cubillo's mottos were stated in his "theory of the war of the fleas" sunnar-
ized as follows: "It is necessary to pester from all sides, each me mtirg
on his own."

0n 1 November I9'.’6--the same day when the armed strugle of the Algerian FLN
began 22 years before—the "military frm-z" of‘ the MPAIAC went into action.
The objectives of this offensive were the Canary Island tranches of the large
Madrid stores, travel agencies (1‘ government buildings. It was never neces-
zany to mourn deaths or serious mids since, as Cubillo axmanced from his
Algerian microphones. they used anall explosives "in crder not to cause seri-
ous ham." However, the h'oadcasts of "The Voice of tie Wee Canary Islands"
gave instructions for manufacturing homemade bombs and urged the cells of the
MPAIAC to become "shock groups,“ the basis for the mttre "marches Armed
Forces." Passge to the "armed struggle" caused a crisis in the heart of the
MPAIAC and some left the organization. Qibillo "dissolved" these rebel

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

groups which he accused of towing been "breaucratized by the infiltration

of Ca'rillo revisionist intellectuals." These dissident youps sta‘ed that
they we not gainst the "anned struggle" but the]; declined the oppurtunity
because "the objective conditions are not r ." Qibillo cmtinued with
what he called the "phase of armed propagaida" that cased an acknowledged psy-
chosis of ta'rcr in the a'chipelqo.

At the bginnixg of 1977, cmcretely m 16 Fetruary, a bomb was trrom at an
armed police van. It was the first time that the POP was attxked. This
seemed to mean that the MPAIAC was bgiming a new stge in its terrorist of-
fensive. This attack could also be seen as a response to the crests of
alleged members of the MPAIAC a few days ea'lier by the intelligence sa'vices
ot‘ the Civil mard. They included the man considered to be tin militant leader

The independence leader energetically rejected the idea that GRAPO was managed
by the far rigkt, statixg: "All this is tre invmticn of Madrid." In state-
ments to CAMBIO l6, Qibillo accused Carine of denouming the members or
MPAIAC who were nested. The magazine pointed out: "Most of the Algerian
circles ggmot igncre the idea tint mbillo has been manipulated without know-
its it."

As the date of the first general elections approached, amino amounced to
the press his intention to "extend our a‘med propaganda to the Spanish Pyre-
nees." He also amoumed that, in the next stge, "we will atth Spanish
intwests ab‘oad." The Algerian atmosphere changed and became more favor 4018
award mbillo who reamed his troactasts on 12 May. A day later a banb
claimed by AIAC exploded in the Galerias Preciados store on Calle Arapiles

mbillo prepared a new diplomatic offensive for the meetings that the OAU held
in May and June 1977. A sibcannittee of the organization met in Dur-es-Salaan
in May and greed to include the Canary Islands on its workixg agend 1. _The

mbillo to present a report in which he pointed out the "Canary Islands colo-
nial status." Accorditg to amino, there was a Spanish-ms. plm to make
the Canary lslmds a major strategic base fa' NATO to control Malgreb aad
wasta'n mica, keeping all the national liberation movements and the new
African nations in check. He stated prophetically: "If you do not 8.1th
the Canary Islands and the MPAIAC now, the responsibility for the future of
Africa and the islands will hmnt you until the end of your days." Pgostinho
Neto, the “clan leader, promised to help szillo ”until complete liberation
of the Canry Islands." .

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 23 June, the 29th OAU Confereme began in Litreville (Gabon). With the
abate precedents, it seemed that Qibillo could xhieve mess tut Spmish
diplomatic mtion aippa'ted by Renee had the counittee sent by mbillo ex-
pelled. However, the conference did me to send a mission cmsisting of
Libya, Alga-ia, Senegal, Guinea 31d Nigeria to draw up a report. If falor-
able, it wmld lead the OAU Liberatim Cannittee to give arms aid money to
ammo ttrwgh secret agreements. Spain refused to be included in the OAU
mission since, in the opinim of Spmish diplomacy, that would be equivalent
to reccgnizing the theses of the MPAIAC. Tm OAU Waste of Chiefs cf
State trat was held inmediately following did not add mything to the topic
of the Canary Islands although it as understood that the achipelgo was in-
cluded when "the anticolmialist struggles" were mentionedﬁo

The absequent activities of the MPAIAC carespond to anottar period in tin
evolution of Spanish terrorism. We will return to it then.
FOOTNOTES
1. See CAMBIO 16, No 215, 1 January 1976, PD 14, 15.
2. See MINDO DIARIO, 8 Fetruz'y 1976, Editorial "We Hate Attained Sanethirg."

3. See Robert Moss, “La guerrilla urbane," Ed. inmal, Madrid, 1972,
pp 55 ff.

4. Ibid., p67.

INEORMACIGJES, 8 April 1976, p 1, Bditcrial "In Cold Blood."

CAHBIO 16, No 2%, 19 Agril 1976, p 3, Editorial "Psalm HA, Wooden."
Ibid.

See Letanendia, op. cit., p 349.

\0 OJ N 0‘ U‘
. . . o .

See EL PAIS, 16 June 1976, P 13.

10. See EL PAIS, 27 June 1976, bmk me.

11. CAMBIO 16, No 241, 19 July 1976, Edita'ial "Armesty," p 3.

12. CAMBIO 16, No 242, 5 July 1976, Editorial "HID Placed tin 8611M", p 3.
13. EL PMS, 20 July 1976, Editcrial "Tm Dynamites," p 6.

111. EL PAIS, 3 Must 1976, p 9.

15. LA V02 DE ESPANA, lo Septemwr 1976.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16. letanendia, op. cit., p 3108. mm publicaticxn of the (noted letter
tragit the /Pertur/ case to the fcrel‘rcut gain in Janua‘y 1978, a
bitter argunent a'ose. IPertur's/ broth», also an laba'tzale/ militant,
mused the Ibereziakl, Justit‘yixg his poeitim with the well-known
pirase: "‘Ihuth is revolutionary." 151. P1113 indicated that the revela-
tians "seriously ta'nish the ime that the ETA mews hare tried to
perpetuate recently." It alluded to "the infa'nal dialectics that moti-
vates the awed vangua‘ds." (E1. PAIS, 5 January 1978, Edita'ial "/Per-
ttr's/ Death,” p 6. See also p 15, "ETA Manha- Has First to anspect
/Beeziak/ in lPertur/ Case" and "New Data on Last Days of /Pa'tur/.")
Also see CAHBIO 16, No 323, 12 Pelmary 1978, "/Bertnr/ Case: ETA
Igainst ETA," pp 22 ff.

1?. Ibid., p 349.
18. Robs-t Moss, 0p. cit., pp 128, 129.
19. Ibid., p 129.
20. Ibid., p 130.

21. See Halter Laqueur, "Tmmisno," p 179, Ed. Espasa-Galpe, Mantid, 1980.
22. See Julen Aguirre, "Operation m," up. cit., p 11.9.

23. See DIARIO 16, 2 March 1981, p 6, "/Pertur/ Would Have Liked Him."
24. Letanendia, op. cit., p 349.

5

as

. DIARIO 16, article cited in footnote 22.

. The points of the K38 alternative we as follows: 1) establishnent of
mu democratic freedans; 2) total amnesty with freedom for all politi-
cal prisoners and return of the exiles; 3) dissolution of the repressive
corps and those of special jurisdiction and azknowlecged responsibilit y;
lo) measures to 1mm the living and working canditions of the popular
masses, especially the wtrking class; 5) recognition of national sov-
ereignty in mskadi and its right to freely determine its national fu-
tnre; 6) prwisional establishnent of a statute of autonomy for southern
Diskadi which covers all its territory including Nala'ra; 7) within
the framework of that statute, constitution of a prelisional gwemment
that will participate in the organs of the central government and will
respect its constitution if both recognize the principles expressed
here; 8) KAS understands that these demands cannot be achieved ttrongh
negotiations with the ref‘a'mist governments of the manarchy but tkrough
a process of popular struggle to end the continuation of fascian and
the oligarchical government.

27. See letanendia, Op. cit., P 161.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
110.
‘01.

102.

43.

lo).

‘06.

107.
“8.

109.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibid., p 353.

Ibid., p654.

EL PAIS, 1 September 1976.

CAMBIO 16, No 50, 20 September 1976. pp 16 ff.

EL PMS, 15 September 1976, Editorial "After Fuenterrabia," p 8.
CAMBIO 16, No 247, 30 Myst 1976. pp 3, 18-20.

CAMBIO 16, No 53, 11 October 1976, cover and pp 8 ft.

CAMBIO 16, No 254, 18 (xtober 1976, p 11, "The Basques Not waited
Amnesty."

CAMBIO 16, NC 260, 29 November 1976, p 55.
BL PAIS, 7 November 1976, bazk page.
EL PAIS, 16 October 1976, Editorial "Terrorisn Has No Ideology," p 8.

CAMBIO 16, No 262, 19 Decenber 1976, "Far Right; here Is No (he Who
Can." 9 39.

CAMBIO 16, No 50, 29 November 1976, 'Mer‘cena'iee ﬁgainst. ETA," pp 52, 53.
1b1d.

MUNDO DIARIO, 2 December 1976, "Anti-ETA Commas Revealed; Nanes;
Connecticns and Reameration," p lo.

EL mus, 12 December 1976, Editorial "Kidnappixg of criol," p 8.
DIARIO 16, 13 December 1976, Editorial "Strange cam," p 1..
EL PAIS, 12 December 1976. pp 11, 12.

EL PAIS, 17 December 1976, Editorial "EL PMS and Its Responsibilities,"
p 6.

CAMBIO 16, as Decemba' 1976, "Blows to the Left," p 111.
CAMBIO 16, 23 January 1977, Editorial "With GRAPO's Permission," p 3.
CAMBIO 16, 6 Fetruary 1977, "The Fascist International," p 13.

Serial on "Week of Cmspiracy" was published by (rega'io Miran in ten
installments in DIARIO 16 from 19 to 30 May 1977.

169

FOR 0mClAL USE ONLY
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

59.
60.
61.
62.

63.

6‘0.

66.
67.

690

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

01111310 6, No 271, 20 Felruary 1977, "GRAPO aid the CIA," p 12.

Luis szalez-Mata, "Cygne," Ed. (rasset, Paris, 1976.

CAMBIO 6, No 271, 20 February 1977, Editorial "RAP, RAP," p 13.

CAMBIO 16, No 272, 27 Fetruz'y 1977. ”GRAPO's Puppets," pp 8 ft.

EL PAIS, 12 Felrua‘y 1977, Editorial "Diarythirz Is Not War," p 6.

a. PAIS, 16 Fetruary 1977, Editorial "Profound Septicisn," p 8.
HISTORIA 16, No 11, Much 1977, "Cirmicle of La Villa y Ocrte," p 8.
Me infa'mation on these Italian neofascists cm be fund in CAHBIO 16,
No 273, 6 Mach 1977, p 20; CUBIC 16, No 274, 13 Ha'ch 1977. pp 16 £13;
and EL PAIS, 23 Fetruary 1977, p 11.

EL PAIS, 24 Fetma'y 1977, Editorial "Term" and the Secret," p 6.
CAMBIO 16, No 269, 6 Fetrua'y 1977, "Darrinas whirled," pp 111, 15.
CANBIO 16, No 275, 20 Mach 1977, "Never mix-g Meaty," pp 8 ff.

Jum Maria Bmdres, "me Decree 81d tr: honesty," in CAHBIO 16, No 276,
27 Mach 1977, p 21. 01 the page before is a chart with a list of the
prisoners who would not imediately benefit from the new annesty al-
thagh their cases could be the abject of individual study aid resolu-
tim, azccrdirg to the new law.

letamndia, in his cited wu'k, wrote: "Of the 110 Basque political
prisoners, about 80 leave by the end of a mmth but very slowly, one by
one. Their departure makes the situation of the appmximately 30 pri-
soners left eve; we pathetic. It is another govermsnt snake screen
resented as total a'mesty 31d again there are anbiguous pirases and
limp statements by the forces in the negotiatim ccunissim" (op. cit.,
p 366).

EL PAIS, 5 March 1977, Bditcrial "Violence in Buskadi," p 8.

0p. cit. , p 369.

EL PAIS, 17 May 1977, Editorial "mskadi: Three Strategies," p 3.
CAMBIO 16, No 287. 12 June 1977, "ETA, Farewell to Arms," pp 39 ff.

Re have followed Ietanendia's narration and his analysis of the crisis
of the /abertzale/ left, op. cit., pp $5 ff.

Ibidoy pp 373, 371.0

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70.

71.
72.

77.
78.

79.

80.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

E1. PAIS, 19 May 1977, Editorial "Ehsledi: Blazlanail by tm Absten-
tionists," p 8.

EL ms, 5 June 1977, Bdlttrial "The Meat Escapes emanate," p 6.
cmmo 16, No 290, 3 July 1977, Editorial "Settled, Country," p 3.
DEIA, 23 June 1977, Bdita‘ial "A border," back page.

EL ms, 23 June 1977, Edita‘ial "mskadi Is Not Guilty," p 8.

moted in MUNDO DIARIO, 2 August 1977. "Iba'ra's Death; ETA Member
Condemns," p 1.

Statements to CAHBIO 16, No 262, 19 became 1976, "Canary Islands;
Indepmdence Elevated to 0.1111110," pp 23 ff. Cant-311173 01111110, tie
origins of the MPAIAC 31d the doctrina'y bases of emery Islmd inde-
pendence, see also MUNDO, 20 November 1976, "Camry Archipelago; Armed
Struggle," p 5; GUADIANA, 3 Felrua'y 1977, "Camry Islands, MPAIAC,
Independmtist Dtpa'imalt," pp 20 ft; aid mTERVIU, 211 Fetrus'y-

2 March 1977, "MPAIAC, the ETA of the my Islands." pp 111, 15.

MUNDO, 20 Nwember 1976, "Camry Islaids: ﬁnned Struggle," p 8.

CAMBIO 16, No 270, 13 Felrua‘y 1977, "le1110: 'GRAPO Is My ﬁ‘iend,”
p 23.

LE 1031105, 12 June 1977, "The Sepa‘atlsts Proclaim a Boycott of the
15 June Electims"; CAMBIO 16, No 286, 5 June 1977, "albino, the GRAPO
and Otters," p 12.

CAMBIO 16, No 292, 17 July 1977. "Canary Islands: Volcalo in tin
Atlantic," and "0.1111110 to 1113 0m," pp 18 ff., 31d No 293, 211 July
1977. " OAU, the Black Babel, pp 118 ff.

COPYRIGHT: Alejandro mnoz Alonso, 1982

7717
030:

6000/0019

171

FOROFII'ICIALUSEONLY
IN)! ONWHCJAJ.I£BEZ(IVLV

SWITZERLAND

TERRORISM AS MISSION. RESPONSIBILITY: RBILECTIORS 0? A PSYCIOANALYST

Basel ARALYTISCHB PSYCHOLOGIR in German 1979 pp 190-215
[Article by Holfgang Giegerich, written in Stuttgart, Hay 1977]

[Text] To preclude a misunderstanding from the very beginning: The formulation
"terrorism as mission" is not to be an intimidation that the following remarks
are to bring about a glorification of terrorism or even a call to terrorist
acts. I am by no means writing as a sympathirer of the anarchist scene.

but I find terrorism just as despicable as everybody else does. I am also
familiar with the indignation that arouses desires for revenge and which

could produce a more or less hidden demand for "court-martial and execution,"
for the "eradication" of this "criminal gang."

Psychoanalysis, however, takes a peculiar approach to those things that are
despicable. It goes back to the early beginnings of psychoanalysis.

At that time, between 70 and 80 years ago, Freud touched on something with
his interpretation of neurosis which produced an abhorrence among the public
which at that time was as strong as today's disgust for terrorism: sexuality.
It is true, today we can hardly imagine how much sexuality was detected at
one time and the immediate, affective indignation that followed violations of
the sexual taboo, because today the whole world knows and even little
children are permitted to learn in school that sexuality is something
"natural and beautiful." Nevertheless, we can still more or less imagine
what it was like at that time when we think of the passionate persecution

and the moral defamation that Freud was exposed to. Although he himself

was a man with a distinct moral conscience, being a psychoanalyst, he delved
especially into the forbidden areas. After all, it is the task of
psychoanalysis to reveal the "other side" and to bring back the memory of
those things that have been suppressed by the ruling consciousness. Psycho-
analysis must deal with the objectionable and despicable things.

The reason why the attitude of the psychotherapist seems really peculiar,
however, is the fact that he does not simply adopt an opposing position and
propagate the reversal of all values. The leaning of psychoanalysis was
never, for instance, to condone sexual excesses and to take the things that
are an abomination and change them into "something good" just like that.
Rather, moral scruples. disgust, resistance are taken just as seriously as
the object against which the resistance is directed. As a consequence,

172
IUI‘OIFKJAI.UUEIHNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LV

a fundamentally new level of consideration has been achieved. Instead of
being partial to one side or fighting on the same level for the opposite
position, psychoanalysis leaves this moralistic level entirely and is
considering the life of the soul under the viewpoint of its actuality
(i.e., its phenomenology). Both, the things we despise (for instance, the
sexual drive) and the moral principle (for instance, the condemnation of
sexuality or something dirty or evil) are concerns of the soul, are psychic
facts. Therefore, the psychoanalyst will certainly not deny the moral or
unconscious-affective values and present all manner of conduct as good
("healthy," “beautiful," "natural"). or neutral; there is no cheap way to
get around the pathological, the perverse. the obscene and the evil values.
But he will no more take these values as he does, for instance, the taboo
sexual impulses and make them into a principle and viewpoint of his own
attitudes, but he will consider both as objects for his research and
experience, because they are at any given time individual psychic substances,
and it is not possible to take one arbitrarily and use it as a criterion
for the others.

According to Jung's presentation. alchemists--spiritual ancestors of psycho-
analysts-~had a deep aversion to the idea of incest; it did not deter them,
however, from describing incestuous alliances (conjunctio) in their works if
they were the result of spontaneous ideas, just as much as Freud later
investigated oedipal incest phantasies without taking a position "for" or
”against" incest. The psychoanalyst must employ a similar attitude to
approach such phenomena as murder or terrorism, which today are absolutely
considered the most barbarous and depraved ways of behavior. He does not
condemn, but he also does not condone; he does not at all pronounce a verdict
of "good" and "evil," "right" or "wrong," but in murder and terrorism he

sees facts which he can first only establish, just like a natural scientist
who in the beginning only registers and describes an earthquake or a volcanic
eruption. The general consciousness, which appropriated for itself moral
judgment (or in other cases, a subjective, human feeling of disgust) and has
become identical with it, essentially means that murder, because it is
"inhuman." "evil," and "forbidden" and therefore should not be, yes, to a
certain extent it is an impossibility (because "something cannot be that must
not be"). But just as much as our disgust is not an absolutely valid
objection to the (biological) right to existence of spiders and rats but

the reaction and sensitivity of one kind of living being to certain other
kinds, the moral revulsion is also not an ultimately valid objection against
the psychic "legitimacy" of murder, destruction and aggression. It is the
essence of the message of the Intel axiom that murdering is evil, but the
moral message is only one "message" in the human soul in addition to others,
for instance, impulses and emotions. It is itself only a psychic and not

a metaphysical truth and for that reason it has the same degree of reality

as does the murder impulse (although it is part of its phenomenology to claim
the metaphysical absoluteneas for its truth). One truth. the one of morality,
which says that murder is inhuman does not exclude the other truth that
murder is very much a genuine human possibility and originates in the soul

as does the moral judgment on it. It sounds like a contradiction. but in
reality it is only a conflict, and anybody can experience it in some form of
a conflict. To begin with, facts or phenomena exist and they are entitled to

FOR‘0FFKJA1.U§I(HVLY
FOR‘OFINCJAI.USEINNLY

the legitimacy that befits all things that are; their effect on our feelings
and our judgment on them, however, are always secondary without being any
less real and. within the framework of a psychological attitude, any less
legitimate; as characteristics they are part of the total picture of the
psychic phenomenon.

Psychic facts, as it were, have an appealing character. They are‘tesks: They
want to be recognized, "integrated." "understood" as reality. If we become
victims of moral outrage--on one hand it is certainly justified-~become slaves
to it and consider a terrorist act as nothing but an act of insanity. a
terrorist as a criminal who has disqualified himself morally: a barbarian,
and if we are satisfied with this opinion, we are taking it too lightly.

The mere rejection does not do justice to something that is real. When we

use the word "criminal." we only put aside the phenomenon, and we want to

rid ourselves of the "responsibility" which has been placed upon us by
reality-~to find an answer to the task--rather than accept it. Terrorist

acts are putting a "question" to us. "by is it that something so terrible is
possible at all? What is it all about? There is something in this blind
violence that is crying out, something that wants to be heard. The incom-
prehensible acts of terror demand that we make a serious attempt to come to
terms with this phenomenon mentally--not only outwardly by using police force.
"hat I am saying is that the victims of terrorism but also the unutterable
misery which the terrorists brought upon themselves (I am thinking of the
Baader-Heinhof gang) must not be totally in vain, an absurdity without meaning.
If this were so. another piece of incomprehensible reality would carelessly

be swept on the garbage pile of history, a letter placed in the files unopened,
an indigestible lump swallowed. we would have "taken care" of the matter,

and yet. deep down, it would remain unsettled. There is something here that
is waiting for deliverance.

whatever happens to us. binds us, it involves us and becomes an obligation
in itself whether we want it or not. It will not leave us alone. He cannot
simply get rid of it by pushing it away, making light of it or ignoring it.
No matter how paradox and "unfair" it may sound: Because of the crime which
the terrorists committed against our society. because of their attack on us
we owe them (and us) something: we must accept the question which has been
raised; we must mentally recognize the phenomenon of terrorism; eventually
we even must find some way to reconcile ourselves with it.

Of course, when I say reconciliation, I do not mean a legal amnesty. The
attempt to make some sense out of terrorism is not to end up as a cheap
harmonization to be used to deny the negative, barbarOus and absurd acts or
subsequently glorify them. The terrorist act is a crime. The law enforcement
organs have the right and duty to fight anarchists and to protect the citizens
from them. But in addition to this exclusively negative reaction, the no!.
the battle against them. annihilation and placing them behind walls or in
fortresses (Stammheﬂa!) there is also a positive reaction to that which we
abhor. It consists of interpreting the event as an appeal to us, a challenge
to take stock of the situation. What does terrorism have to say to us; what
does it have to do with us, where do we have to make changes? As long as

we are not policemen. we do not have to look at the situation from the
standpoint of the police, without, however, ungratefully forgetting the

174
FOI‘OFFIJAI.UBI(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protection which it grants us and without losing sight of the law which it
defends. In addition to (not instead of) the standpoint of the law enforcement

organs, other viewpoints concerning the facts must exist and be permitted,
for instance, a “purely human" or a psychological attitude.

what can prompt people (particularly those from "bourgeois families") to
become terrorists? From where do they derive the strength to place themselves
outside the community, to give up all forms of security in life, taking upon
themselves the enormity of bomb attacks that also destroy "innocent people"
and holding out until the bitter end. including hunger strike and without any
kind of personal gain? it is not appropriate to take refuge in expressions
such as "evil desire," "criminal disposition,” "perverse adventuresome
mentality." They are inSufficient. In this context it would also be absurd
to use concepts like "sick," "psychologically disturbed,” ”full of complexes,"
"politicization of personal conflicts." The phenomenon is too powerful, too
huge to be contained in Such concepts, they would explode. Terrorism cannot
simply be derived from the family situation, personal life experiences and

the upbringing of its supporters. something that must be emphasized in defense
of the parents. Consequently, it would be nothing but a bad joke--an idea
that is utopian anyway--to "cure" terrorists by using the methods of
conventional psychotherapy. Other approaches must be considered. The
phenomenon simply goes beyond personal psychology.

Even the terrorists themselves would not very readily agree with a personal
psychological interpretation of their intentions. Rather, the way they see
themselves is in total reference to the collective social and political
situation, and they consider their behavior as a strategy or tactic with the
purpose of achieving a certain political goal expressed in manifestos.

As much as we have to affirm the emphasis on the collective-objective
dimension of terrorism in contrast to the personalistic view, on the other
hand. we cannot and do nOt want to follow this unique, in other words,
political self-explanation either. Although there is undeniably a strong
rational and conscious trait when planning and implementing terrorist actions,
it must not cover up the totally irrational character of terrorism, because
essentially it came into being through something irrational. The interpretation.
according to which terrorism (in the liberal welfare societies of the industrial
countries-~among the Palestinians, for instance. things are certainly quite
different) goes back to personal political opinions and that terrorism is
nothing but a conscious, rational, purposeful act, is still not getting at

the cause of it and also reflects a superficial, completely inadequate,
personalistic view. The viewpoint of personal desire and opinion cannot
answer our question satisfactorily; it cannot explain where individuals get
the strength to oppose an entire society, a human community in which and from
the native soil of which they derive their very opportunities of existence.

No personal will would be strong enough to carry out such a radical, almost
incomprehensible operation, because every instinct of the individual runs
counter to this behavior; and no individual would have enough strength on

his own to bear the almost cosmic loneliness that results from such a
separation--unless there is another force which carries and supports him and
compensates for the security of the community, which makes all our lives
possible. Just thinking about such loneliness can make one shudder.

175

F0!‘0!11C1A1.USE(NNLY
FOI(MHHKJALIEHEONLY

In the lives of the terrorists, anything personal is almost entirely in the
background. It is a life without personal consideration, giving up happiness,
coafort and most of the other private interests in life that an ordinary
person enjoys, a life of renunciation, asceticism and sacrifice. Terrorists
are almost no longer persons who act according to their own thoughts, feelings
and aspirations, but they are almost total servants, in other words, impersonal
tools and organs executing an idea. Hhen we visualize the lifestyle of
terrorists, their devotion, an almost absolute obedience to their mission and
call and when we then look for the closest parallels or analogies. what comes
to our minds-ss long as we are not blinded by our affective rejection of
terrorism-is the picture of such objective forms of life as the life of an
official, for instance, a Prussian civil servant who knows nothing but his
duty, or even better, a monk or a priest. It may sound like blasphemy to
compare a terrorist with a priest, but a phenomenological way of looking at
things cannot but confirm a certain analogy. To be sure, goal and contents
of the respective aission are entirely different. The terrorist serves
destruction and violence, the priest, on the other hand, serves love.
Nevertheless, it does not change the fact that according to its phenomenology,
the life of the terrorist appears to have been selected from the ranks of
ordinary people, just like the priest, the prophet or the Maid of Orleans,

I almost want to say: chosen, and he is living out of devotion. consecrated
to a superpersonal "idea." (To land in prison, on the stake or the cross.
naturally, is very much part of the life of a chosen person.)

Of course, it is difficult to reference to our Christian-enlightened
harmlessness, which can only envision the priesthood as something good.

But morality is not always and not necessarily a part of the religious way
of life. The history of religion has seen forms of the priesthood, the office
of which originally practiced a great deal of cruelty. Here is only one
example: During the period of antiquity, the sacred grove and the shrine of
Diana Remorensis were located at the Italian lake of Nemi. In this grove
there grew a certain tree, and one could see a dark figure walking around

it at any time of day until late at night. The nan carried a sword in his
hand, and he was constantly looking around as if he expected to be attacked
by an enemy at any moment. He was a priest and a murderer; and the man for
whom he was looking would murder him sooner or later and become priest in
his stead. It was the rule of the shrine. A candidate for the priesthood
could only attain the office by killing the priest. and after he had killed
him he stayed in office until he was killed by a stronger or more skillful
person (according to Frazer. l922).--Thus a dimension of religious reality
becomes visible which shatters all bourgeois-harmonic-noral thinking, a reality
which makes the comparison between the way of life of the priest and the one
of the terrorist appear not quite so irrelevant in spite of the fact rhst
the example has no direct relationship to terrorism, although on the basis
of our conventional moralistic concepts of religious offices one might have
assumed otherwise.

The issue is not to upgrade the anarchist into something like a priest but
to do justice to the power and extent of the phenomenon, to its enormity by

adjusting the framework, the dimension and the categories of our thinking
on the phenomenon to meet its requirements. The real motivating force behind

176

IOR¢OIIIC1AI.IEIL(I§LY
FIHR()FFIC1AI.lﬂ§EICH‘LY

the way of life of the terrorist and the principle that shapes it cannot be
found within the terrorist himself. neither can the lifestyle of the priest

be derived from the conditions of the personality of the individual clergyman.
Rather. the lifestyle of the individual priest is determined by a superimposed,
prescribed principle. he is the fulfillment of a preordained design. and
whoever wants to understand his lifestyle must take into consideration the
objective psychology of the office of the priest, including its "metaphysics"
and symbolism and its independence--independent. of course. of any personal
motives that the individual officials might have. Because inherent in tnis
lifestyle is the fact that the private life is more or less sacrificed to the
superpersonal office. The terrorist also sacrifices his private life. in part
even his physical existence--just like a nartyr--to a superimposed independent
"office"; nevertheless. there is an important difference. which is that his
"office" is not given to him by the outside. by society. It is not rooted

in the collective consciousness. It has no social legitimacy but an individual
legitimacy which is based on the spontaneous "natural force" of the soul.
Therefore it would be more appropriate in this instance to use the term of
prophetic mission or work rather than office. Accordingly the anarchist

would be more like an artist (of recent times) whose work is also quite
individualistic and creatively new. One cannot know what it will look like
until it is finished, because it is not a simple repetition of a familiar
picture, passed on by tradition. But in spite of the inherent individualistic
character of creativity. the artist is not only personally motivated and
destined. Jung 11971) says: "It is apparently quite evident that the artist
must be explained from his art and not from the inadequacies of his nature

and his personal conflicts..." (Article 158). "In the end. whatever wants

to be within him. it is not the person but it is the piece of art" (Article
157). Goethe saw it the same way: "The songs made me, I did not make them,"
and Nietzsche formulated the following words: “Am I searching for my
happiness? I am searching for my work." The work. however. like the office
is something objective and impersonal; the artist does not create it but it
forces itself upon him and it has its own autonomous. objective psychology,
which is the reason why the artist does not have to be by any means the best
authority for the interpretation of his works: As an interpreter he is just
as much a human being and a person like everybody else, and possibly he is as
much a stranger to his own work and its real creator as is the public.

1brrorist acts are not acts of madness by individuals, although we would like
to see them that way to make them more harmless. It is not enough to use a
purely negative attitude and point to the flaws: inhumanity. unreasonableness.
abnormality. There is also something positive to terrorist acts (in this
respect. however. "positive" is not intended to attach a value): No matter
how destructive and negative they are, they are still an expression of a
creative force; no matter how immoral. they spring from an extraordinary
degree of a moral life, and inexorable victory of a spiritual principle over
mere natural aspirations (one need only remeeber the hunger strikel); no
matter how sinister and dark the works of the terrorists are. they are still
the religious fulfillment of a fateful life. Already the general Outrage and
the horror show that we are faced with a "monstrous" power that goes way
beyond the ordinary. with a reality and a (albeit evil) truth that cannot be
eliminated from the face of the earth by turning away from it or belittling it.

177

FOI<0FFKJA1.USEIH‘LY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(XNLY

using as an explanation that the causes are personal conflicts, a misguided
formation of opinions or deprivation. 0n the contrary, terrorism reveals
an objective-psychic content, a reality.

Therefore the true subject of terrorist acts is not the terrorist, taken as

a person, which is the reason why he is no more or no less personally
responsible for his act than the artist is responsible for his work. Just as
such as the artist's interpretation of his own work is not reliable, infatuation
by terrorists on the reason and purpose of their actions must not be taken
literally, because they would only report as persons and interpret their
terrorist activities subjectively, seeing themselves as victims of these
terrorist acts that have been thrust upon them objectively.

Because they confuse themselves just as much as we do with the real subject
of their actions, the mighty, real idea which is the driving force behind
them. Their information could only have profound validity to the extent
to which they might have become aware of the power which has manifested
itself within then as a psychic background which themselves distinguished.

Of course. we are especially interested in the reason why: why did
particularly these people become a part of the terrorist scene? Considering
what has been discussed above. it is clear that there can be no explanation
for the decision to adopt this style of protest-because it is not at all a
matter of decision. I believe that in this particular case we can only
confirm an event after it has taken place; we cannot explain it any more than
we can explain the reason that made Mozart into Mozart and Saul into Paul.
One cannot choose the kind of terrorism that has appeared on our scene.
Rather, we should perhaps say it the other way around, terrorists were
"selected" and seized by terrorism and in it they discovered themselves and
their own fateful way of life. Is it not possible that our longing for
"explanations" expresses the desire to remove the power from the objective
psychic reality, to take away the potency of the "Gods," because for logical
reasons every explanation of the "decision" would confirm the ego in its
self-glory?

Everything would be so much simpler and more agreeable if terrorism could be
explained from the personal inadequacies of the few individuals who support
it. Because then it would simply be nonsense, a perversion or a sickness-

in short, it would be nothing and as such it would not really have to be taken
seriously. We could "thank God that we are not like this one"; we could find
peace in the thought that whatever happened was the private work of a few who
have gone astray and it only concerns them. He Ourselves would not be
involved at all, we would be outsiders and observers who could only be
affected by the consequences of the acts. At that moment, however, when we
must realize that behind the terrorist acts is an actual subject, an objective
psychic reality, the picture changes. Suddenly they are of great concern to
us; we have been involved in it from the very beginning: It becomes my
business. I am not referring to such platitudes, for instance, that
everybody, as a human being, is perhaps a potential murderer and nobody knows
what he may be compelled to do when driven by fate. It remains noncommittal
and distracts from the real thing. On the other hand, however, I do no want
to obliterate the differences between us and the actual terrorists: We are

178
I‘lltolIIClAl.Ubs.(lVLY
FOR(NHWC1AL.US£10NLY

not terrorists and pre8umably never will be terrorists. He have not committed
any violent crimes and therefore we do not need to have a bad conscience.

The issue is really something quite different. We have to recognize our
connection and solidarity with the things we detest and identify with that
which we are not.

If terrorism is not to be considered from the personalistic point of view
but from its psychological autonomy and objectivity and if the terrorist is
not considered any more responsible for violent acts than the artist is for
his work, the reverse would have to be considered, meaning that they cannot
only be attributed to the terrorist but just as much to the community as

a whole. An objective reality is not the private property of individuals,
it belongs to everybody. it has a collective dimension. Just like a work of
art originates in a single invidual without, however, being his own personal
affair, terrorism is also evident in individuals and still possesses
universal significance, yes, validity. Hhat differentiates a piece of art
from the painting of a hobbyist is the fact that it is not of a purely private
nature but that it is born of an entire period and it has something important
to say to this time and maybe for all times. The piece of art concerns
everybody, a whole people and sometimes even all mankind. Although the
artist's personality becomes a part of the piece of art, whatever makes a
work a piece of art, the style, is only incidentally inherent in the
personality of the artist, it is not substantive. Just as much the persons
who are terrorists might only be related by accident to the objective
phenomenon of terrorism, and in the final analysis it may have no more to do
with them than it does with us, in this respect I am not referring to our
characteristic as private persons with our own idiosyncracies and opinions
but to the objective-factual level, the collective-superpersonal side in us.
in other words, the same distinction between personal characteristics and
objective factors which we emphasized when we mentioned priests, artists

and terrorists, also applies to us. After all, we are not only Mr or Mrs x.
but we are also people of the 20th century, members of a people, carriers

of a collective consciOusness, and psychically we are just as real and
substantive in this capacity as we are as private people. Whatever it is in
us that responds to and comprehends the objective content of a piece of art,
it is not our subjective ego but an objective dimension within us which
corresponds to the true subject of the piece of art, a dimension which
connects us with the present time and its spirit. To be sure, we are not
our time or our society, but we belong to it, just as much as, the other way
around, it belongs to us. Whatever happens to it affects us: Whether it is
the success in soccer by the national team or the economic crisis, the piece
of art or terrorism; it makes no difference whether we participate personally
or not, because the personal level is part lcularly nonessential. The
superpersonal collective is not simply the collection of innumerable private
persons, but it possesses an independent psychic reality.

In this manner we become conscious of our responsibility, because the
question is pressing in on us: What does terrorism have to say to us (and
about us), what does it have to do with us? What kind of a world is it,
what kind of a community which practices such signs of the time? I do not
want to answer the question in this essay--we all must answer it--but I want

179

POI 0FFIJAI.US£(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to restrict myself consciously provisionally to a few aspects. Terrorism can
be interpreted as a collective shadow of our time. It reflects and explains
the destructive seamy side of our public life and thinking and it tries
simultaneously to protest against it, to fight it. It is only apparent at

a few places of the entire community, in a few individuals who, however,
represent all of us.

There are two specific characteristics that distinguish terrorism: brutal
force and anonymity in its application. when I say anonymity I mean the fact
that the violent act is committed blindly without any inner connection with
the respective victim, that bombs are placed and the perpetrators themselves
do not know whom they may tear apart. Terrorism does not fight against
specific persons, just as much as it is not fighting for personal goals,

but it is directed against anonymous organizations or structures. It is the
case even when a gun is aimed at a specific person: The bullets were not
intended for the man in Buback but for the Federal Chief Prosecutor and the
authority for which he stands. What makes the violence so brutal is the
fact that it strikes anonymously and blindly at any victim, that is remains
impersonal and abstract.

The twofold characteristic of brutality and abstract anonymity is not only

a mark of terro:ism but also of the style and mentality of our state of
affairs. initially it may seem incredible, because today, in our society,
everything seems to proceed generally quite civilized, constitutional and
sometimes even almost philanthropic, certainly to a much greater degree than
at any other time. I am not going to dispute that. Nevertheless, I still
feel that there is a steadily increasing brutalization, especially on the
collective-public level, and it makes only sense if a distinction is made and
accepted, a distinction between the outer person and the person as a soul.
This distinction is very important because the psychic development of the
contemporary man itself made it indispensable and it led to a wide rift
between the two aspects and almost total displacement of the aspect of the
soul. The displacement was and is so strong that the soul could only return
on the basis of some otherwise inexplicable symptoms, disguised as the
so-called "unconscious” (which is something totally unknown, hypothetical
and something that has never before been anticipated), but in such a state
of unconsciousness it can naturally lead only a miserable, wretched
existence. With respect to the level of the outer person, today things are
as a rule not brutal but pleasantly civilized, i.e., the level that refers
to the human being as a legal person and a citizen, as an employee and a
person seeking recreation. his basic rights, his social security and his
living standard, in short, all those things that today make up the concept:
quality of life. From the philosophical point of view, the outer person is
the sensual-objective person and psychologically it is the eqo personality,
i.e., the personality which comprises the consciousness, my physical
experiences and "my" unconsciousness, in other words: "I myself," including
everything that is part of me. On the other hand, we cannot consciously
perceive the quasi-official terrorism which proceeds from our community,
until we cease to stop at the outer person when looking at people and view
things from the standpoint of the soul (which is more or less an autonomous
person in contrast to the ego personality) and until we stop feeding on and

180

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being diverted by the "bait" of “improved quality of life" and visualize the
treatment of the soul--including the treatment by us!

1 would like to show the brutality and anonymity in three areas or aspects
of our modern life: in the bureaucratization of life, in the political

area and in the trend toward scientism. I will restrict myself to a few
examples and pertinent remarks, because I do not want to make my presentation
and proof exhaustive but inspire continuing consideration. More and more
areas of our lives are becoming victims of the bureaucratization, an
administered world is coming into being. In the process, the civil servants'
apparatus (or its analogous body in the free economy) is increasingly being
supported and replaced by a real apparatus. the computer, which can be called
the perfect bureaucrat because it lacks what makes the human functionary

an imperfect bureaucrat, human feelings and weaknesses. Hith the computer
humanity succeeded in realizing even the ideal of the bureaucrat in a pure
culture, because even its weaknesses are exclusively of a technical or
urganizational nature. Today all economic planning and economic policies
depend on the computer; it takes care of modern police investigations, our
letters are delivered with the aid of a computer, a large share of our mail,
printed advertising and bills are written and mailed to us exclusively by
computers; our bank transactions are carried out by a computer and it goes
on and on through all areas of life, including vacation scheduling or even
marriage arrangements. But even where the computer is not yet in use. the
thinking is more and more adapted to the computer mentality: The police,

for instance. is "rationalizing," in cases of speeding or parking controls
the main concern is so longer the law but statistics, purely rational,
practical aspects, for instance, replenishing the budget; tickets are issued
routinely-bureaucratically, totally disregarding any kind of perception of
justice, simply following a bureaucratic "fine catalog."

When I use the expression "disregarding the perception of justice," I do not
at all want to imply that illegal practices are being applied; on the contrary,
because of the rational approach by the police the chances are greater of
getting away without a ticket when one would actually have deserved one.

in addition. the computer is by no means a total equalizer, it does not
necessarily pose a danger to the individual, because the increasing computer
technology also makes it possible to consider and coordinate individual
wishes or peculiarities within the organization to a much higher degree than
human workers would be able to do. Converting to a computer also does not
mean that somebody will lose his head in the process or suffer violence;

on the contrary, it provides for people relief and an improvement in the
"quality of life." At least that is the way it looks when we consider the
nituation from the viewpoint of the outer person. But what does it look

like from the standpoint of the scul? What must be the effect on it when

a computer addresses a letter to me, when I receive a ticket based on mere
police routine, when l have to stop at a number of traffic lights although
the streets are empty? The computer cannot "address" me as a person, as a
man with a soul, but only as a statistic, and consequently it can only
address and awaken that side of me. Every time I receive such a letter,

i am shut out as a person, the soul is liquidated. Every time I have to stop
at a traffic-free intersection because of a red light and wait until it turns

181
FIHRi)FFI(]Al.|I§EI(M§LV
FOI(NHHKJAL.USE(NWLY

green, I am eliminated as a competent, responsibly acting being and am assuming
the nature of the apparatus which directs me. Every routinsly-buresucratically
issued traffic ticket-ca purely administrative measura-disregards me as a
person equipped with a perception of justice, not because it would be unfair--
injustice would actually strengthen the perception of justice-but because it
is outside of right and wrong and involves the replacement of the idea of
justice by an administrative measure.

when one looks at these examples separately, they appear unimportant.

It seems that they are insignificant details, and that "nothing else will
happen" because of them. But in a similar context Heidegger (1975) made the
following statement: "when a doctor treats a number of patients incorrectly,
there is an impossible interpretation of a poem, 'nothing else will happen.‘
But perhaps it is good if we say things more carefully: ...in a case of an
inadequate interpretation of a poen it looks as if nothing else is happening.
Some day-perhaps 50 or 100 years later-however, something happened."

Perhaps we only think that nothing else will happen, because we only look at
the foreground, the physical, political, economic and legal events, at visible
and tangible damages to oar bodies and lives and external comfort, while in
reality--a1though it is not directly visible-«an enormous amount of things
have happened which will gradually affect even the physical-social sphere.

Is it not possible that something serious has already happened: Is it possible
that terrorism may already be an initial answer?

It is not inmaterial whether I experience and imagine mayself as a noninter-
changeable person and whether the manner in which I am approached also
indicates that the person within me is meant or whether I am seen as a
disposable number in an "integrated personal-data-recouding system" and
whether 1 agree to be "recorded" accordingly. It is nvt immaterial whether

a bureaucratic agency uses an automatic radar-control installation and a
computer printout to send me an "anonymous" notice of a fine as is done to
thousands of others or whether I am stepped in person by a policeman and l
have to appear before a judge to defend myself. In view of the "administered
justice.“ is it still possible at all to call our state a constitutional
state, i.e., if we look at the real meaning of the word? It is not ﬂmnatcrisl
whether something is undertaken from the viewpoint of apurely practical
purpose and a technical-organizational advantage or whether my sensual
experiences, my perception of justice, my power of judgment, my feeling of
responsibility are addressed (and whether the irtentions are sincere).
The computer, even if it addresses me by my name and with "Dear Sir...,
whether it says "cordially" instead of "respectfully" and prints "private"
on the envelope, even if it knows extremely personal information about me

and does justice to my individual situation, it has no idea whatsoever what
an individual, what a person is; a computer does not mean individual
peculiarities as such. but it sees them as abstract characteristics expressed
in figures and numbers, which is the reason why the consideration of the
individual in computer work is an abomination: It undermines our concept

of life of the individual person, because it substitutes irperceptibly an
anonymous—abstract, technical-statistical meaning, and as a consequence

we will no longer notice how ruthlessly the real personal factors are being
eradicated.

182

FOI1OFHKJAI.USB(IﬂLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

What we have here. in this mentality and the internal style of public
attitudes, is the same anonymous brutality toward the soul. which the
terrorists employed in their external actions toward society. Terrorism
reflects in an obvious manner the psychic terror of our time, which is behind
the legal-social civilized atmoSphere and which is almost incomprehensible
but ever-present, a terror which is not borne by the small circle in economics
and politics who are responsible but by all of us. In this area there is no
difference between the person who is responsible and the victim. We get
what we deserve. To get more material things-~more "quality of life," such
as leisure time, more labor-saving devices through technicalization, more
consumer goods through more economic growth, more "education" (- information!)
--we all are selling the qualitative aspects, meaningfulness. justice, in
short: our soul. We are not making any attempts to look at life from the
viewpoint of the soul, but we have limited ourselves to the point of view of
the outer person (body and life, possessions and property). when problems
arise. they are exclusively approached by using practical-organizational
(political. economic, sociological and technical) categories and methods,

a psychic way of looking at things is absolutely nonexistent. (After all,
even psychology liquidated "the soul.") There are attempts. for instance,

to pass new legislation to guarantee the protection of data: as if the evil
did not begin until the illegal misuse of data; it began a long time ago,
when the practice was started to ”record" and ”store" human life in the form
of computer data.

with respect to the topic of psychic brutality, the phenomenon of television-
because of its enormous influence--is particularly important and so is
“managed communication“ in general. There are complaints about the violent
scenes in the films that are being shown. But that is not the real problem,
not the actual corruptive brutality. Rather, truly brutal is the fact that

I can turn on and off a person who is speaking on television and the spoken
word in general by pushing a button; the fact that I can be "taken care of"
technically; that a female television announcer can present a beautiful smile
to an apparatus, the camera, which, however, is allegedly intended for the
public. But how can I smile at an audience which is not only unknown to me
but is is also invisible, unnoticeable, without violating myself? Here we
really have absolute anonymity, and the human smile is abused for this
purpose; it is robbed of its humanity and objectified, just as much as the
word that is turned off can no longer be an animated. living reality ("of
divine origin," was was believed at one time), it can no longer be human
language in the fullest sense of the word, but it has been degraded to a
thing functioning as a means of communication. To be sure. it certainly

is feasible that the announcer does not feel at all that she is smiling at
the camera. but rather, she is imagining that she is looking at the audience.
But if that is the reason why she is able to smile beautifully, it would mean
that even subjectively she succumbed to the deception in which she is taking
part herself, because objectively the relationship between her and the

public is impersonal-anonymous and purely factual (information transmission);
consequently the familiarity that was intimated with the smile is not

exactly simulating an existing human emotional relationship.

183

FOI‘OFIICJAI.IKNE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Somehow one will have to take a look at the disregard for psychic values,
which is inherent in our technical approach to culture (culture as a noise
backdrop, as consumer goods, disposable if one feels like it, independent of
the rules of time and space and our inner disposition. What would people

say if human beings were treated in the same manner as creations of the soull).
The distinction between worthless and valuable broadcasts is therefore totally
irrelevant when it come to the actual question of value which is raised by
television, because tacitly it already presupposes a positive basic decision
on the value of television and defies an insight into the principal
depreciation and degradation of the psychic culture and personal attributes
through television. radio, cassette recorders (not to aention the level of
programs or the manner and style of announcements).

1 would like to cite only two examples of brutality toward the soul from the
political arena. "hen community reforms are carried out, for instance, it is
purely done out of "administrative-technical necessity"; traditions.
geographic connections, established col-unity and competitive feelings are
ruthlessly disregarded. The abstract number is in command: The personality
of a comaunity or a landscape is ignored. When a politician or an industrial
manager talk about the expansion of nuclear energy, all they see is that
without it "the lights will go out" sometime, growth will stagnate and the
number of unemployed people will rise. They point to the "force of
circumstances." the perniciousness of the matter. however, is the belief that
economic problems are forces of circmastances and not the problem themselves,
although they certainly appear serious, temporarily almost insoluble. Such
thinking is governed by the independent law of the economy, man himself
abdicated and considers himself a mere object of the economy. Consequently,
man is a priori reduced through our concept--not by the facts themselves—-
to "economics"; man as "freedom," as a moral subject, as a creative
individual is excluded from the facts from the very beginning. One will
certainly have to deal with the hard demands of the objective reality, and
one must not suppose that man's freedom to act is unlimited. But the human
subject is also a fact and is part of the total situation—unless it is
systematically shut out through our attitudes and self-opinion; unless we
prevent it from coming to the fore. Fundamentally no consideration is being
given to the fact that in the worst cases there might also exist the
possibility of a sorrowful renunciation. a voluntary sacrifice. lien is what
he eats. An active clearance sale of man as a soul to the self-legitimism
of abstract, objective occurrences.

with respect to brutality in the third area which I would like to mention,
the trend toward scientism, i would only like to point to the introduction
of tests and their statistical evaluation in psychology; here, however, we
must also keep in mind that even if nothing else happens outwardly,
psychically many things could have happened. Of course, nothing at all
happens to the person taking the test; but is it possible to measure what
the soul must experience when its living emotions, convictions or feelings
are reduced to an abstract cross on a schematic questionaire and subsequently
became a dead numerical value? Together will 100 others they will be thrown
into one pot and possibly they will be dropped altogether if they ahOuld
deviate too far from the mean value of the entire investigation. If the soul

184

FOR WHOM. USE ONLY
FOR‘0F11CJAI.US£(NVLY

and its emotions are alive, yes, alive beyond the vegetative and animal state,
showing human qualities. we can equate what happens to various psychic
emotions during a psychological test with reactions by people if they were
treated in the same manner. Thus we can experience the anonymous brutality
which is no less horrible than the treatment of the physical person in
concentration camps. of course, the psychological test is only one example
of a development that is advancing on a wide front and which is pursuing the
goal of limiting reality to the calculable and simultaneously denying the
status of reality to those areas that are accessible to vivid intuition and
sensual experiences. A significant factor is the development of research
trends in areas such as information theory and cybernetics, which also look
at the entire human and spiritual reality, including art, as if it were a
technical product: man in the image of a nachine! The idea of man as a
machine (Lamettrie)-at one time, during the enlightenment, it was still

a bold concept, hardly more than a presentiment--became reality a long time
ago. I cannot go into further details in this connection. The following
appropriate words by Heino Gehrt (1975) may serve as a brief summary of

this entire topic. he writes: "The growing scientism of the intuitive side
of life and the progressive mathematization of this side of science are
resulting in a heretofore nonexistent brutality, violating original life
impulses. Naturally it corresponds to the brutality to the life impulses
which have been dismissed from the social and personal order by this attitude."

As I said before, the above statements contain only a few examples to serve

as a hint. A comprehensive discussion would have to include many other things,
last but not least the development in the area of language, the (apparently
insignificant but Still fundamental) importance of which cannot be overrated
(deterioration of the language, something which, for instance, is evident

in the latest lyrical products; reolacing language with pictures--comics and
television-—combined with the so—called phenomenon of the "no longer readers";
the language in the hands of advertisers, information theorists and computer
technicians, etc.). Furthermore, without any additional explanations it has
to be pointed out that a discussion which would go beyond a mere illustration
of brutality, bringing to light also the background, c0uld not avoid getting
into a presentation of the history of the metaphysical attitude of the soul

in the occidental world. Everything else would remain a superficial
treatment.

In addition to the three general aspects which I sclected--bureaucratization,
politics, scientism--another unique but still symtomatic example for
brutalization must be mentioned, particularly in connection with terrorism:
forced feeding of prisoners during the hunger strike. But also in this
respect I can only make a few brief remarks. Independent of how the moral
value must be judged of the respective motives for the hunger strike, a
hunger strike is only possible when it eminates from a spiritual-moral power.
The act of the forced maintenance of life of those who are conducting the
hunger strike is simultaneously a destruction of man as a moral being: In
this instance the abstract state machinery is usinv brutal force to crush

an individual psychic emotion (decision); the technical (medical) superiority
of the state, the coldest of all cold monsters, is running over a moral
principle. The idea of vegetating biologically wins over the spiritual

185

FOB‘OFFTCJAL.USE(I‘LY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢NVLV

existence of man; the last freedom of an otherwise absolutely defenseless
person is thwarted without hesitation. The decision of the individual is not
respected as something untouchable; one knows better than the prisoners
themselves what is good for their welfare. At one time heretics were burned
for their own salvation. today hunger strikers are forced to live for so-called
humanitarianreasons. The terror is the same. All ideas about the dignity
of man have been lost. If the formulation should be retained, at best it
might be the human physique, the living organism. The image of man which is
manifested here is materialistic in principle, because in the final analysis
it reduces man to his physical existence. "hat good is the basic right of
freedom of expression if it does not include the freedom to err and freedom
to the final no. to hunger strike? Forced feeding is not taking the
superior spirit of our constitutional state and pitting it against the (evil)
spirit of terrorism; the challenge on the part of terrorists born of freedom
is not being met with a higher moral principle. The fight is not accepted

at all at the moral level on which it is extended, but it is bypassed and
double-crossed, because the physical substratum and man as a free subject
("and if he were born in chains”) is simply taken by surprise and checkmated.
No matter how immoral and unlawful the behavior of terrorists, at least on
this point their moral superiority becomes apparent, whereas the state
declared its own bankruptcy as a defender of human dignity and the freedom
of the individual.

the assumption that the disgrace is undeserved and morally unjustified, brutal
force is not a weapon of defense against such an attack. Even if the hunger
strike is used maliciously, as a means of blackmail, the striker is coming
forward and risking his life, a conscious decision requiring continual will
power. Considering such a high risk. abuse ceases to be nothing but abuse,

it acquires an extraordinary degree of reality, yes, truth. Consequently

the issue is no longer who is right according to legal-formal, written laws

spiritual substance of the constitutional state are engaged in a final.
inexorable duel and that during this struggle the truth and the right to
existence in reality will have to be decided. Every countermeasure against
the hunger strike which does not require an equally high commitment and is
not willing to stake the entire personality and its own moral value is
disqualifying itself morally from the very beginning. whoever cannot lake
this commitment, must accept the fact that he may be blackmailed. This way
or that way we are involved; in something that we are not looking fur and
something that we do not want. yes, something that originally did not even
have anything to do with us. A piece of psychic reality is moving toward us
and is compelling us to come up with an answer, which we must provide not
with words or deeds but with our being and entity. we must not "overcome"
such a reality as a "problem," we must be willing to accept it and be
changed by it, "remembering" instead of “acting."

186

INJI¢0IIICJAI.IIBE1DRHJV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

humanity is only beginning to conquer gradually this totally new "world."

consciousness, which seems to be in the process of replacing the present
factual-real level of experiencing the world. To quote Jung (1972): "It is
my firm conviction that beginning now and continuing into the indefinite
future the true problem will be a psychological one." At this point I can

mediate topic and statements that have been made. although a detailed
presentation would be appropriate because it is dealing with a form of

is directed against such emotions. In such a case nothing terrible needs
to happen to a person. no gestapo is necessary, no clubs and torture
instruments. on the contrary, conditions can be "devilishly human" and as
we have seen the most brutal violence can take place. It is souething that
we have to realize more and more until we see this brutality in the sane
POI OFFIOAL USE ONLY

when it comes to burning witches and to torturing or the way we react to
"psychoterror" (in spite of the word component "psycho" it must not be

confused with psychic terror to which we refer here). Although we may feel
uncomfortable inside when we fill out a questionaire-for the time being we
still believe that nothing will happen because of it: because our consciousness
has still not accepted the psychic reality; we simply do not yet see it.

But it is already there and only too real, something that has been made
unmistakably clear by the terrorist answer to the psychic brutalization.

There were times when people were completely insensitive to brutality used
against people (torture chambers, inquisition, and into the 19th century

the exploitation of the working proletariat)-something that we hardly imagine
today-because their (medieval) consciousness had no idea of man and his
natural reality; they only saw the metaphysical-mythical level of reality

in our world. As far as they were concerned, man was still completely in

the image of God. behind which the physical existence faded into immateriality
and unreality or had not yet fully appeared. Only gradually the idea of

the ”concrete man" fought for and obtained its right against the demands that
were placed on man my metaphysics and religion and subsequently captured a
place for itself in the general consciousness. Only since then man has been
able at all to experience hﬂmself as a sensual-objective being. Analogously
we too are actually still quite insensitive when it comes to brutality against
the person in the soul, because our consciousness is still dependent on the
natural, factual, social level of reality, and the right of the soul and its
emotions (even against the concerns of the "outer person") must still be
conquered. But we have already entered the vast situation of revolutionary
change. Today, man's really big problems are no longer the same as they were
during the last century, on the level of political and social concerns;
concepts a long time ago, they have been integrated into our consciousness

and been promoted extensively. It has been a long time since the rights and
the welfare of the individual have been a burning topic, because everything
that can be said about it was said a long time ago (naturally it is a long
way from being realized).

As people who see themselves as politically and socially functioning human
beings, we are helpless when it comes to today's problems (mass and conpnner-
goods society, information deluge, technicalization, computer, nuclear

threat, breakdown or disintegration of traditional religions and philosophies);
we have been surrendered to the "forces of circumstances," because we built
structures and unleashed forces that have overwhelmed us. These far-rcacning
changes are calling for a new man, they require a human being with a psycho-
logical consciousness, which will be the only thing that can penetrate the
depth of problems and search behind them. Furthermore, it will not have to
be a mere object to be surrendered to the technical and social development--
which can no longer be reversed-obut, on the contrary, it might again consider
technology, which overwhelmed us (as mere "cuter people"), as a means.

The dangers of technology, environmental and population problems cannot be
overcome with technology. It usuld be a catastrophic aistake to think that

it might be possible. The only hope of overcoming these problems lies in a
change of man in the sense of a fundamental deepening of his consciousness

of reality....(As a consequence it is also anachronistic if we are still

188
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USI(NVLY
FIHI()FF1CJAJ.IJSEI(NVLV

thinking and acting on the political-social level (even in psychology). hoping
that it will bring about fundamental changes, if we still do not recognize the
so-called women's problem as a genuine psychological problem, which must be
treated on the level of the inner attitudes and the style of consciousness

and not on the social level "of women" and "of man.")

Just as much we are making a mistake when we fight against terrorists and
anarchists with blind hatred and get rid of our disgust with criminal
prosecution--the same mistake, the same literalistic misunderstanding to
which the terrorists fell victim on their part; they envisaged their protest-
which was actually Justified--as a political one and acted "on the outside"
with armed force. As I said before, I am not pleading for immunity from
criminal prosecution. 0n the other hand, we do not have to be proud after

we manage to put the terrorists under lock and key. After all, the murderer
and his executioner are on the same level, between them there exists a hidden
identity. And the punishment, although it is necessary, essentially is as
much an encroachment on the crime itself. At any rate. moral outrage is

cut of place. On one hand, it ought to be difficult enough for us to swallow
and digest the psychic terror in whicn we also share, and on the other hand,
instead of reacting with outrage, being shocked and challenged by terrorist
acts, we should absorb the shock and let it affect us in such a way that
something within us will be set in motion. That would be the true answer

to terrorism. Something must be done not only with the terrorists but with
all of us.

He should be grateful to the terrorists for startling us, because now we

have been given an opportunity to pay attention to the general terror, which
has been in existence for a long time although it has been barely visible,

and by developing a new insight, we will simultaneously enter a new phase

of psychological consciousness. In the final analysis. this is the task to
which we are challenged by terrorism, the responsibility which it imposes

on us. Is it not possible that the deep psychological but totally unconscious
meaning of anarchist ideas, which of’late have spontaneously sprung up again
and again, is not that they are to destroy the state "outside" but the idea

of the state: that they break the fixation of our mentality on political

and social aspects, the spell under which we are held by the idol--the state--
and the idea of society and subsequently overcome (in a psychological but

not social sense) the "collective man"? Is it possible that anarchism and

the mighty revolutionary impulses are only misunderstood politically and
"acted" literalisticaily because of a psychological consciousness that is

too narrow, while they are in reality a fundamental psychic change?

As long as thinking and acting remains politically oriented, the overthrow
of a system can only be accomplished in the name of another system, which

is the reason why all political revolutions fail. They carry within them—
selves what they want to overthrow because they operate on the same old
level and avoid the true overthrow, which would also have to include their
own thinking. It is the tragedy of the politically-oriented anarchism.
Nevertheless, it is useless to dismiss as utopian and wrong the powerful
longing of modern man for a ”revolution." for something new. It is more
important to take the inherent impulses and channel them in the direction of
their true meaning and goal.

189
FOR OIIICIA1.1!NBCN‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anarchism is questioning the state in such a fundamental manner that none of
us knows where we stand and how it is to be classified. After all, even

the judicial organs have been totally shaken and are at a loss what to do
about it. To be sure, normal criminals are antagonists of judges and
policemen, but because of it they are playing their role within the judicial
system, if I may put it that way. The terrorist, however, does not play
along, he is questioning the judicial system in general. what makes that kind
of questioning possible at all? It is only possible because a standpoint is
actually behind it and it is based on the foundation of that which is
questioned. A consciousness which is based on the same foundation as the

one which is being considered. cannot fundamentally question the item because
it lacks the required dimension. The simple fact that an anarchist movement
exists, that the thought of anarchy can even be thought, shows that the
consciousness must have penetrated the foundation much more deeply. at a
level where the "State" itself becomes altogether questionable (and also

can only become at all).

In this respect we should not be disturbed by the fact that the terrorists

and anarchists themselves have not yet become conscious of this consciousness:
Nevertheless, it is already present although it takes on the form of more or
less blind, "impulsive" political behavior (which, however. is supplemented
with political theories, but their main value is rationalization and
intellectualization). Furthermore, we should not be deceived by the fact

that in the terrorist act the new consciousness expresses itself in a purely
destructive form (apparently because of the extensive unconsciousness) and

we must realize that it represents a truth. It is not unusual that initially
a new attitude of consciousness appears only in the form of symptoms, in the
behavior and on the affective and somatic level: interferences with customary
attitudes, thus the latter also reacts easily with paranoid resistance to

the new. Is it not possible that anarchism must be approached psychologically,
which may be the only way that it can find fulfillment and that the
ideological manner of thinking and the fixation on state and power can be
overcome?

The idea of "anarchy" as an invitation to a (psychologically envisaged)
individuation? The true revolution as a process of advancing toward LLL
fundamentally new level of psychological form of life? The (modern) "state"
as an embodiment of the literalistically solidified imagination--an immovable
fact--and the enmity against the state as a negative road toward psychology?

Summary: Terrorism As Task and Responsibility, Reflections of a Depth-
Psychologist

Terrorism cannot adequately be explained from the life-histories of the
individual terrorists. The life-style of terrorists is one of devotion to
powerful transpersonal ideas. Terrorists live and carry for all of us the
destructive shadow aspect of our age. Thus they belong to us, and we are
called to sincerely respond to the phenomenon of terrorism--not merely
negatively through police action, but also in the sense of "responsibility."
The crude and open brutality of the terrorists mirrors a subtle and covert
brutality of public life. This latter brutality appears to be directed.

190
FOI:OIIIC1A|.IIHE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not against people, but against the persons in the soul. This leads to the
distinction of a fundamentally new level of experiencing (from the point of
View of "soul") from the hitherto dominant one (from the pcint of View of
"man"). The anarchists misunderstand the idea of anarchy as a political
idea (on the level of "man") and do not. see its actual, psychological meaning.
The idea emerges that the "state" might be literalism-eabodied and that the
antagonism against the state might have to be seen as a via negative towards
psychology.

BIBLIOGRA?HY
l. Frazer, J. 6., "The Golden Bough," New York, 1922.

2. Gehrts. 3., Mahabharata, Das Geschehen und seine Bede-.vtung" [The Event
and Its Significance]. Bouvier, Bonn, 1975, p 158.

3. Heidegger, 11., "Die Frage nach dem Ding" [The Question Concerning the
Thing], Niemeyer, Tuebingen, 1975.

a. Jung, C. 6., Collected Works, Vol 15, Halter, Olten, 1971.
5. Jung, C. 6.. Letters, Vol 3, Walter, Olten, 1972, p 263.

COPYRIGHT: This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17, 0.5. Code)

8991
cso: 6100/0007 5“”

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY