FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10420

29 March 1982

West Europe Report

(FOUO 20/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UTE

JPRS publications contain informtion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Englisb~language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and mteriel enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inform: ion was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OP
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
REST EUROPE REPORT
(rouo 20/82)

Cameras

THEATER FORCES
UNITED KINGDOM

Nott Statement, Comons Debste on Trident
(m TIES, 12 Mar 82) O...OCOCOCCIOOOOCOODOOO...0.00....

TERRORISM
ITALY
Overview of Alleged International Terrorisn Ties
(Stefano Sil-vestri; mono, 25 Jet: 82) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POLITICAL
ITALY
PCI Reichlin's Interview on Party Policy
. (Alfredo Reichlin Interview; swam, 8 Feb 82) . . . . . . ..
Surprising Results of South Tyrol Census
(Line Coletti; EUROPEO, 25 Jul 82)
SPAIN

Opposition to BTA's 'Revolutionsry ‘rsxes' Stiffens
(“$1016. lpeb 82) O...OODOOOOIOOOIOO'COOO...0.0.0....

Basque Official Accuses ETA of Descending Into Gangsterisn
(Herio Pernsndez Interview; CAHBIO 16, 1 Feb 82)

-s- [III-WE-IE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY

FRANCE

Army Cnpuin Feels Armored Division Lacks Air ”dense
(Jacques Vuillenin; ms D'AUJOURD'HUI. Jan-Feb 82)

GENERAL

SPAIN

Political Institutions Not Hoot Influential, Poll Shows
(Jose Manuel Arija; CANDID 16, 15 Feb 82) ...............
NOT! SIAM, COHONS DEBATE 0N TRIDBNT
1511212107 London THE TIMES in English 12 Her 82 p 6

[Unattributed report of 11 March UK House of Co-ons session: "Opposition
Pledge To Cancel Trident"]

[Text] The announcement by Mr John Nott. secretary of state for defence,
that the cabinet had decided to buy Trident nuclear missiles fro. the United
States to replace Polaris was met with a fins undertaking by Mr John Silkin,
Labour defense spokes-an, to cancel the Trident project.

Mr Nott said in his statement: On 15 July 1980, ray predecessor announced
the government's decision in favour of Trident as the replacement force for
Polaris; but as I told the Defence Canittee of the House in March last year
final decisions were still needed on the type of subnarine and the choice of
missile.

we have now decided that our four trident submarines, to be built at Vickers,
Barrow, will have a larger hull section than previously planned, and will
incorporate an advanced propulsion system and the latest sonars. And after
detailed consideration here, and with the United States, we have now decided
also to purchase the Trident II 05, instead of the Trident I (:4 missile system,
fron the United States.

The masher of warheads that the Trident II US missile will carry, and there-
fore Trident's striking power, renains wholly a natter of choice for the
British Government; our intention is that the move to 05 will not involve
any significant change in the planned total number of warheads than we
originally envisaged for our Trident I 66 force.

The reasons for our choice of Trident II us are briefly as follows:

Just as the Polaris systen will, by the mid-1990's have been in service for
approaching 30 years and will have reached the end of its operational life--
so the Trident system nus: runain a credible deterrent for a similar period
and thus remain operational until 2020--that is ’00 years from now.

Our experience with Polaris and the decision-endorsed by the last Labour
geverment--to modernise the Polaris missile with Chevaline at great cost,
has shown us the financial and operational penalties of tannin and develop-
ing a United Kingdos‘unique systel.

1
FOR omen. USE ONLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAI. USP. ONLY

Following President Reagan's decision to accelerate the Trident II 05 pro-
grams, if we were to choose the C6 missile, it would enter service with the
Royal Navy only shortly before it left service with the United States.

This would mean that the United Kingdom would be alone responsible for keep-

ing open special Trident I 06 support facilities in the United States and

the United Kingdom alone would be forced to fund, as we have with Chevaline,

any research and development needed to counter improved Soviet anti-ballistic
missile defences.

For these reasons our judgment is that the through-life costs of Trident I
would almost certainly be higher than Trident 11.

Accordingly we have entered into an agreement with the United States to pur-
chase Trident II.

The United States Goveth is selling Trident II to us on more advantageous
terms than Trident I. The missile will be purchased by us at the same price
as the United States Navy's own requirements in accordance with the Polaris
sales agreement. The additional overheads and levies will be lower than
would have been the case under our 1980 agreement to purchase Trident I Clo.
In particular the so-called B&D levy will in fact be fixed sum in real terms.
and there will be a complete waiver of the facilities charge which was part
of the ca deal. I would emphasise to the House that the terms protect as
completely from development cost escalation.

Finally the United States will waive certain of the Buy American Act provi-
sions and set up a liaison office in London to advise British industry on
how they can compete--on equal terms with United States industry--for sub-
contracts for weapon systa components for the DS programs as a whole, in-
cluding the American progra-e.

When I appeared before the House of Co-ons Defence Conittee I made it clear
that the range of options which we still had to study for the Trident systen,
over and above the total cost of 5,000! pounds then given, could be confined
within an additional 1.00“! pounds at 1980 prices and exchange ratesnand so
it will.

On this basis the initial capital costs of the Trident II 05 missile system
will be an extra 39m pounds above the Trident I 04 missile system which
represents an addition of about 7 percent to the total cost. And we have now
decided also to fit the latest propulsion system, the British pressurized
water reactor 2, already under development, and improved sonar systems which
together with the larger hull will add about a further 50m pounds to the
cost, which will mean additional work for British industry but within the
1,00% pounds total increase.

These changes will greatly impmvs the efficiency and the quietness of the
submarines. As a' result we are planning to run our submarines for around
seven years between refits so that the availability of the submarines for
patrol can be greatly increased. This will allow us to maintain three boats

2
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
in the operating cycle for a high proportion of the time. The Trident 11 D5
missile should also have an in-tube life within the submarine of at least
seven years, a much lower period than for Polaris thus greatly reducing
maintenance which will be largely carried out on board the submarine.

[m212b9] At Septqu 1980 prices. therefore, we will spend on Trident
about 6,000! pounds. Updating the price basis on Septeaber 1981 prices,
which reflects a much lower exchange rate than in September 1980, adds a
total of about 1.50!!! pounds, so the total cost over the procurement period
will, in 1981 prices, be 7,5004 pounds against an estimated total defence
budget over the sane period of approaching 250,000! pounds; that is just
over 3 percent of the total defence budget.

This means we will spend on Trident at current prices an average of somewhat

under 5001! pounds a year against total defence spending of 14,0004 pounds a
year.

I am making available a document explaining the goverment's decision which
also shows how the cost of Trident couperes with the anticipated capital

expenditure on our conventional forces. This information has not been
published before.

From this it can be seen that Trident expenditure over the next 15 years is
a far smaller amount than our planned expenditure on equipment for our major
conventional capabilities such as anti-submarine warfare or offensive air
operations. Hith the 3 percent growth in the defence budget until 1985-86,
several billions of pounds extra in real terms will still be available to
spend on our conventional defences in future years.

For about 3 percent of the defence budget we will be modernizing the British
Independent Nuclear I’érce that successive governments have considered to be
essential for our national security over the past 30 years. Nothing has
happened to change that need—rather the reverse.

The goverment remains convinced that no other choice but Trident will pro-
vide a credible nuclear deterrent into the year 2000 and beyond; no other
use of our resources could possibly contribute as much to our security and
the deterrent strength of NATO as a whole.

To choose a system lacking in credibility to an aggressor, or still more, to
abandon unilaterally a capability we have now maintained for three decades,

would be a futile gesture that would serve to increase rather than diminish

the risk of war.

Mr John Silkin: Labour will cancel the Tridmt project. (Labour cheers and
Conservative protests.) We will do so for three basic reasons.

First, this programme escalates the arms race, particularly in the light of

the Geneva talks and the United Nations Special Session on Disarmmentnand
incidentally I hope that the prime minister is going to that special session.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a va- we a mv-em- yum. v. the

Second, the project breaks the Non-Proliferation Treaty in the spirit, if not
the letter, of that treaty, (Conservative shouts of "nonsense").

Third, the expense, despite everything Hr Nott says, has an effect on our
conventional forces which destroys the security of these islands.

He may bamboozle his cabinet colleagues but not this House when he says it
will be done for 3 percent of defence expenditure. What he does not tell the

House is that it will be nearly a quarter of expenditure on new equipment in
the major and maximum years.

Is the pressure being maintained on the United States Goveruent for the
United Kingdom to take part in the Geneva talks? If we are to have this new

and devastating weq>ons system, we should be at the top table Mr Nott tale
of so often.

How many of the 50,000 lost jobs resulting from the devastation done to the
conventional forces will be offset by this prograI-e?

How can he be so certain about costs when we have no experience of building
submarines of this sort, which are such larger than anyone has had before?
We have no experience even of the warheads.

Hr Nott: It is no surprise to anyone that the Labour Party, if it comes to
power. will cancel Trident. We realize the pressures on Mr Silkin from his
party. Re have to be realists about his difficulties.

Trident II will represent only about 3 to lo percent of the planned number of
Soviet strategic missiles. Thatis approximately the same proportion Polaris
represented of the Russian strategic nuclear missile force when it was intro-
duced.

It is not true to say that this escalates the arms race. If there is an arms
race, it comes from the Soviet Union which is introducing one new 58-20
every week. This is no more than the modernization of the existing force
which we have retained for 30 years.

It does not break the letter of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. That is an
inaccurate statement. (Labour interruptions) Nor the spirit. The Non-
Proliferation Treaty never sought to refer to existing nuclear powers.

(A Labor MP: of course it did.)

0n the question of conventional forces, Hr Silkin is not in a position to
lecture us. There are approaching 30,000 more regular reservists; every unit
is up to strength. There are a third more tanks manned in Germany than when
we became the goverment and the amount spent on defence equipment with
British industry in the coming year will have doubled since the last
election.

[PHlZlZSl] If there is a difference at all. it is only on nuclear policy
where the previous Labour government modernized Polaris secretly by Chevaline
and we are doing so openly on Trident.

FOIOII‘FICIALUSEONLY
Vickers Barrow has an excellent record. It has built w nuclear submarines
with no real cost increase at all.

Technology is very Inch the same and we shall benefit from the experience of
the United States in building Ohio.

Trident II will have the sue warhead as Trident I and that is already

tested and development far advanced. I know of no reason for any escalation
in that cost at all. The Americans have a good record of developing missiles
to cost and we are protected by a fixed am.

The NR II is nearly developed and we have an enormous contingency allowance
in these figures.

If Labour cancels, 4,00m pounds of business will be lost to British industry.
I do not think any of us have ever believed Labour assurances in opposition
before. They have always proved wrong in the past and there is no reason to
believe that they are any different now.

Mr David Steel. leader of the Liberal Party (Roxburg, Selkirk and Peebles):
The fact that this government is continuim openly what the previous govern-
ment did secretly is not an argument about the merits of the independent
nuclear deterrent. Since no other political party in the House accepts this
programs, the likelihood of cancellation is high.

What discussion has he had with our allies on that. particularly since it
is not required under our obligations to NATO?

Leaving aside future conitments in the defence budget on pay, pensions,
buildings and so on, the real percentage coat of this is over 20 percent of
the capital procurement program. That is the real effect on the conven-
tional defence system.

Will he be more explicit about the compensation which he believes he has ob-
tained for the jobs lost in our dockyards and electronics industries through
cutbacks in conventional forces?

Hr sort: Our conventional forces are greatly strengthened beyond what they
were 2.5 years ago and in a whole range of areas the capability of our con-
ventional forces has been transformed since May 1979. Our allies welcomed
the decision to introduce the Trident progrume.

I have looked at every possible option for the modernization of Polaris with,
I hope and believe, a totally open mind. If he were trying to select an
independent nuclear capability that is going to take us way into the year 2000
and beyond he would find, as I have found, that there is only one option and
that is the Trident systn.

Trident will take up on average about six percent over the years of our total
equipment budget. At its peak it will take up about 11.5 percent of equip-
ment spending.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM 0"me USE ONLY

For the security of these islands this country can afford over thenext 18
years to spend 3 percent of the defence budget on this capability. It is
essential for the naintenance of peace and the defence of these islands.

Mr Anthony Buck (Colchester, C): MP's on both sides of the House who try to
give even-handed consideration to these matters will welcome this. The main
considerations are the me as those which caused the Labour Party to con-
clude that it was right to go for Chevaline. There will be many jobs for
British industry.

Mr Nott: we are talkim about large numbers of jobs for British industry
and a huge programs which will stretch over 18 years while this moderniza-
tion is being brought forward. We have debated this matter openly and
arrived at a unanimous decision after long debate within the goverment.

Chevaline seemed necessary to the previous governnent to keep Polaris credi-
ble as a deterrent to the Soviet Union over the next 10 years. There is
no point in retaining a strategic independent deterrent if it is not credible
in the eyes of the Soviets. That is the judpent we have to make.

Sir Hugh Fraser (Stratford and Stone, C): We are now involved in weaponry
which is essentially that of a super power. There must be an effect on our
conventional military budget and also other parts of it. Several conserva-
tive HPs find this difficult to accept, too.

Mr Nott: History shows that the long bow successively was needed to nodern-
ize the crossbow and that the pitchfork was not sufficient in the day of the
crossbow. -

The threat facitg this country comes from a super power. he is wrong if he
thinks we can defend ourselves against such a power with inadequate weapons.

Mr David Owen (Plymouth, Devonport, SDP): He should correct the misleading
impression that the Chevaline decision was made by the last Labour govern-
ment. It was nade by Mr Edward Heaths' administration and planned and thought
about in the previous Labour goverment.

Many people, including servicemen, who have had the same information as
Mr Nott, regret his decision to spend, in current prices, 8,000)! pounds on
Trident. They feel it would have been wiser to spend money on Polaris
motors, to have extended the life of Polaris.

Hr Nott: I should have said Chevaline was endorsed by the last Labor gov-
erment and carried on by it secretly.

I an not sure who are the servicemen with the information Dr Owen mentions,
though I know I an in trouble with the information, and there are few,
who are unaninously in favour of this decision.

Our Polaris submarines going on into the [year] 2000 would be too noisy and
would be detected.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mr Alan Clark (Plymouth, Sutton, C): as has negotiated a successful agreement
at a price less than many of us feared for what is unquestionably the finest
strategic system best suited to the needs of the United Kingdom.

"hat guarantees are there that during the currency of the procurement of this
system it will not be cancelled either at the whim of the United States
Congress or by any changes of presidency or of presidential mood or attitude
over the next 20 years?

Mr Nott: 0n the whole our allies tend to keep to their agree-ants. I do not
think such a hypothetical situation has ever arisen before.

We will build most of this system here with British industry. It is only the
missile and the missile control system that we are buying from the United
States. The majority of the expenditure will be here in the United Kingdom.
There is nothing in the technology that we here are not capable of producing.

In the French socialist govsrment, the communists have declared their colours
and they are spending 20 percent of their present defense budget on.their
nuclear deterrent. He could do this ourselves as we proved with Chevaline

but it would be expensive and it is cheaper to buy the technology from the
United States.

Mr Keith Speed (Ashford, C): If the choice is between modernizing Polaris,
or 64 or 05 he is right to for 05 there is no alternative. What is the per-
centage of the naval equipment programs at the apogee of the Trident expen-
diture?

I a concerned about the submarine building capacity once we have the system,
to build SSNs, which are getting old. Who is to build the new 2,600 SSKs‘!

Hr Nott: He hays a defence equipent programme. that I am concerned about
is defence capabilities. I look at our overall defences.

0n the Trident programs, we are finding money for it as a separate item.
Because Trident is going to be manned by the Royal Navy, it is easier to
manage this programs under the Royal Navy and put it into their programs.

It is not right to say that if we had not had Trident the naval programs
would have been any different. That would not he logical. It is financed
by the defence programs.

The SSN programs is going forward as planned when he was with me. We will
build as many as we can at Vickers Barrow, until the moment comes when Trident
takes over. As for the SSK, we have not yet placed orders for than but as
soon as we do we will look to sea which yards will take them.

Mr h'ott, answering later questions, said that the running cost of the exist-
ing strategic deterrent and of Trident were low. The strategic deterrent
probably only required about 10,000 to 5,000 people to keep it operational
whereas there were 650,000 people for defence overall. In terms of revenue
it was small; 1.5 percent or so of the defense budget.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hr Denzil Davies for the Opposition (Llanelli, Lab): The figure of [as pub-
lished] is merely one of those carefully massaged Ministry of Defence figures
put to cabinet to try and get past the treasury. The figure will be higher.

The decision is an emotional apasn which pays no attention to the test ban

treaty or to the arms limitation talks and merely will bring the danger of
a nuclear holocaust that Inch closer.

Hr Nott: If it is an notional spun, it has been a disease of eight succes-
sive governnents. We will keep on with the strategic deterrent his government
had until the end of its operational life and Trident will replace it.

COPYRIGHT: Times Newspapers Limited, 1982
cso: 3120/69

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJRGJFFNUDQL USE§CNNLV

TERRORISM ITALY

OVERVIEW OF ALLEGED INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM TIES
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 25 Jan 82 pp 6-8
[Article by Stefano Silvestri: 'ﬁhat Bay in Lausanne"}

[Text] A meeting of Italian Red Brigades, the German Red Army
Faction, and George Habbash's Palestinian extremists. This is
the trail that our intelligence agents followed. We have recon-
structed the mosaic, piece by piece.

He spoke of "internhtional collegiality" among subversive groups, alluding to the
possible existence of an international strategy of destabilization. He mentioned
the Italian-French kidnapper terrorists working in the South of France; the ground-
air missile plans that Roman Autonomy leader Daniele Pifano had in his possession
when he was arrested in Ortona; the frequent trips by Italian terrorists to Eastern
countries and the Third World as well as other Nestern countries with terrorist move-
ments; training camps in Lebanon and Libya; joint anti-NATO action by the Red Bri-
gades in Italy and the RAF [Red Army Faction] in Germany.

In his speech to the Chamber of Deputies on Monday 11 January, Council President
Giovanni Spadolini Iaintained the existence of foreign terrorism centers (an idea
dear to Sandro Pertini, the PSDI [Italian Social Democratic Party] and the PSI) with
a wealth of detail that earned him the praise of the socialist daily AVANTI! for the
first tine in months.

Spadolini did not spare the arguments, for he was pressed by the necessity to put an
end to the disputes that had flared up recently within the intelligence agencies,
and by concern over increasing uneasiness within the armed forces. At the last ni-
aute he added a sentence to his speech: it concerned the 16 foreigners expelled from
Italy in 1980 and the 10 expelled in 1981 (among whom were about 15 Libyans).

Many thought that these people, too, were in league with terrorists. Not so. Actu-
ally, none of the expulsions (as far as EUROPEO has managed to ascertain) had any-
thing to do with terrorists. Of those expelled, only three were diplomatic repre-
sentatives of some kind (one of them was probably the Russian commercial vice-attache
Zazulin, who replaced Boris Ossokin a year ago, after Ossokin had been expelled), but
they had more to do with industrial secrets than terrorism. Nor were there any
Czechoslovakian names among those of foreigners sent hone. The last time anything
had been done about officials from that country (Military Attache Karol Kluf and the
Turin vice-consul) goes back to 1979, but in previous years there had been a vir-
tual slaughter (29 expelled in 1968, and another 19 in the period 1975-78).

9
FINICNﬂﬂCJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
EUR UPHLIAL USE ONLY

Prague obviously got such a bad press from being singled out as a possible base for
international terorism that it decided to be more careful.

Spadolini's remarks are not in themselves alarming. People have been talking for
years about contacts between the various terrorist groups. Up to now, though, the
Italian government had appeared somewhat divided, uncertain and devoid of absolute
proof. Now Spadolini has decided to embrace the theory of international coordina-
tion. But can he prove it? And what will the consequences be?

EUROPEO has learned that the Italian intelligence agencies' most recent information
concerns a meeting in Lausanne of the new BR [Red Brigades] hardliners (those who
kidnapped Gen James Dozier and are commonly called "militarists"), the remains of
the German RA? and probably some Palestinians from the rejectionist front (led by
George Habbash, Naif Hawatmeh, or Ahmed Jibril. all of whom are leaders historically
tied to the USSR or Libya). This meeting is said to have confirmed cooperation that
had been going on since 1975, when a group of representatives met in the coven at Via
Piacenza, Turin, and drew up a plan of concerted operations for these groups. In
1980, the German police discovered indications in Monaco that Italian, German, and
Palestinian terrorists had decided to attack NATO targets.

But it is hard to say just how solid this international network is. One indication
comes from the dealings in arms used by the terrorists, but it is not unequivocal.

it would seem at first glance that there was a kind of jump in quality at the begin-
ning of the 70's. Even in 1974, for example, Valerie Horucci and Libero Maesano
were arrested in Chiasso while trying to smuggle a machine gun. Switzerland is a
large arms-smuggling center (the arms are mostly stolen from its army arsenals);

as the Swiss franc has risen in value, cigarette smuggling is no longer competitive,
which explains why it has become fashionable to smuggle arms through Chiasso and
Varese. At the beginning of the 70's, Sergio Spazzali (younger brother of the more
famous lawyer, Giuliano), along with Giuseppe Salvati and Roberto Mander, tried to
bring recycled Swiss arms into Italy. But then the scene changed.

The motley array of Western arms on the black market were replaced by Czechoslovak
and Russian arms (as well as Belgian, probably coming from Libya), with plenty of
ammunition. In the attack on the DC party headquarters on Piazza Nicosia, Rome, the
Kalashnikov rifles used Russian bullets made in 1978; one of the rifles, as ascer-
tained by investigating judge Fernando Imposimato, of Rome, came from Saudi Arabia.
Also appearing were sophisticated weapons, such as Pifano missiles or those secreted
recently in Giovanni Senzani's hideout. Senzani's were equal to those used by the
German RAF to try to assassinate 0.5. General Kroesen. There were also the strange
French SNEB [expansion unknown] missiles, which are hard to use (they can be launched
only from airplanes or helicopters against ground targets). But missiles of this
type are loaded on the Siai Marchetti SF 260 aircraft that Italy has sold to Libya.

About the middle of the 70's, then, Italian terrorists began to be supplied with
serious war materiel, which was mostly recycled from the Arab front. These were
also the years when Libya was beginning to rearm heavily the rejectionist front in
Lebanon. And 1975 is the year of the Tel el-Zaatar battle in Beirut. where about
a thousand Italian extremists participated in some fashion.

10
KMOHKMLMEMWY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The routes of the arms trade are innumerable; they go mostly by sea, probably
through small Yugoslav ports. Mario Moretti seels to have been engaged in this in
1978-79; he was for a long time an umcatchable Red Brigadesman. And there were

the Autonomy fugitive, Oreste Scalzone, and the BR "business-an," Maurizio Folini.
Repentant terrorists, such as, most notably, Patrizio Peci, Alfredo Buonavita, Mar-
co Barbone, and Fabrizio Giai, tell involved stories about yacht trips and contacts
with the most varied intelligence agencies (even Israeli). In I977, there was an
attempt to import arms supplied by Basques from GRAPO [First of October Armed Revo-
lutionary Group] through a French terrorist movement, NAPAP [expansion unknown].
The former lieutenant of the legendary terrorist, Carlos (the one who held the oil
ministers prisoner in Vienna in 1975), Hans Joachim Klein, talked about the possi-
bility of using diplomatic pouches.

On top of all this come the revelations of Czechoslovakian exiles, Gen Jan Sejna
and Gustav Frolik, who spoke of Eastern intelligence agencies involvement in domes-
tic terrorism, leading to the South Tyrol dynamitings in 1961 and to the involvement
of Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, Pabrizio Pelli, Augusto Viel, Luciano Ferrari Bravo,

and others.

To delve deeper into this history, Italy has requested the unofficial collaboration
of the SDECE [French Foreign Intelligence and Counterintelligence Service], which
did surveillance of the mysterious trip Moretti made to France just before his cap-
ture. Moretti went to France with a forged passport, probably setting out from
Libya.

This is what we have been able to reconstruct on the basis of available information.
The government has set things in motion but has not furnished the information neces-
sary to complete the picture. Above all, it has not answered the main question.

It is true that many contacts can be traced through terrorist movements. But does
this justify talk about a foreign terrorism center? Spadolini did not mention it
explicitly in his speech. was it political timidity or lack of proof?

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Editore

8782
C80: 31047111

ll
FORlOFFKJAl.USE(HVLY
PCI REICHLIN'S INTERVIEW 0N PARTY POLICY
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 8 Feb 82 pp 51-53

[Interview with Alfredo Reichlin, a member of the PCI secretariat, by Chiara Valen-
tini: "K As In 'Change'“; date and place of interview not given]

[Text] Hithout the K factor, the PCI is moving forward with
increasing decisiveness as a force for change in Italy. It is
the third way, and in this interview, Alfredo Reichlin takes
the first concrete steps on this way.

Social democrats are splitting into various factions; socialists are in turmoil;
severe critics suddenly change direction; and old friends waver. The Italian com-
munists' break with Moscow is becoming a great, unexpected spectacle with every pas-
sing day. It is capable of initiating a chain of consequences and roiling the vis-
cous world of Italian politics.

0n the extent and implications of the third way, PANORAMA interviewed Alfredo Reich-
Iin, a member of the PCI secretariat. He is one of the four communist leaders, along
with Pietro Ingrao, Giorgio Napolitano, and even Enrico Berlinguer whom PRAVDA has
labeled reprobates.

[Question] Now that the initial euphoria has subsided, people are generally begin-
ning to recognize the historical importance of the break with Moscow. Carlo Donat
Cattin says that the break has not really taken place; Alberto Ronchey recalls that
even the PCUS [0.8. Communist Party] was supposed to change after the 20th Pnrty Con-
gress, but nothing ever came of it. For many people, then, the K factor is still
present. How do you answer them?

[Answer] If the K factor means that the PCI cannot be trusted to be democratic and
patriotic, then the K factor has never existed. It has just been a big alibi to keep
our party out of the government. But now the alibi has broken down. But what has
not broken down is what was behind it, and I mean K not as communism but as change.
We have very radical ideas for change. And this makes me think that the confronta-
tion will not diminish in the near future.

[Question] There are those who say that the exchange of accusations with Moscow is
just beginning.

12
F0!(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(MMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] At the moment, everybody is concentrating on the argument between us and
the Soviets. What they are ignoring is that the decisive issue is quite different.
We want to confront what the European labor movement has not yet succeeded in con-
fronting in depth, the problem of transforming the Nest. We want to bring new forces
and goals into play. I do not think people have given enough thought to the fact
that in defending the freedom of Polish workers we have been defending the freedom

of Italian workers. We have opened the door to going beyond the ironclad laws of a
world divided into blocs.

[Question] You have raised the issue of the third way, the new cloak that the PCI
seems to have put on. Rivers of ink haveflowedower this, but it is not yet clear

whether it is the same thing as European social democracy or something new and dif-
ferent.

[Answer] In our ideas, political formation and tradition we are very different from

social democrats. In the past, those parties mainly attacked the issue of redistri-

bution of income. The great social democracies have managed to develop the so-called
welfare state under historical conditions that allowed them to go without profoundly

reforming capitalistic structures. That is what the present crisis is all about.

[Question] But it does not appear that you communists have a plan ready, either, to
get us out of the present crisis.

[Answer] We are being pushed more and more to become a party not of ideology but of
programs. There are only two ways out of the crisis: either strict authoritarianism
or a new answer of a socialist kind. Hence we talk about a new quality of develop-
ment and life. We are looking at new needs and a different mode of consumption.

[Question] You have opted for the democratic alternative to achieve all this. But
Bettina Craxi seems hesitant to follow you on this route.

[Answer] We are strongly challenging the PSI to change its policy on short notice.
We are making a thorough revision and are asking the PSI to do the same. Ne are
asking them to take sides on the social front and renounce their deal with the DC
[Christian Democratic Party] to get a limited slice of power. The PSI no longer has
the reasons its used to to justify its alliance with the DC and to reject an agree-
ment on the left or put it off indefinitely.

[Question] Francesco De Martino even speculates about reunification. Is this your
idea, too?

[Answer] It is premature to talk about that; in any case, there is now an articula-
tion and diversity on the left that is respected. The first item on the agenda is
to begin a sincere, true, and open political dialogue with the socialists on pros-
pects and programs.

[Question] What do you mean, concretely? A union of the left, as in France?

[Answer] At the moment, we want to begin getting together and conversing, of course,
with the idea of.launching a new political alternative. This would have immediate
effeCts. First of all, it would shake up the Dc and make it get off the fence.

It would also give strength to the workers' struggle and, finally, rid management of
the illusion that it can solve the crisis by making the workers pay for it.

13
FIMICHNHCJAI.USIZCH§LY
I'UK Ul'l'lLIAL UM ONLY

[Question] You mentioned the DC's fencevsittimg. But Flaminio Piccoli has been very

explicit in recognizing the value of your break with Moscow and the new cast it puts
on the whole Italian political scene.

[Answer] The fence-sitting or ambiguity is not in what the DC are saying but in
what they are. This DC party claims to he on the right, left and in the center,

to be all things to all people. Piccoli proposes a waiting strategy for us commu-
nists and at the same time asks Craxi for an anti-cmumnﬁst pact. He has been able

to do this so far because there has been no communication between us and the social-

ists. But once this barrier is down, the DC will have to get off the fence aid go it
alone politically.

[Question] How do you see an alternative future government? If you add your votes

and those of the PSI, you do not have a majority; you don't even get 45 percent of
the electorate.

[Answer] We are thinking of a broad coalition that would not necessarily reproduce

Mitterrand's front. For example, Catholic people‘s parties would have to be involved.
But a process such as the democratic alternative would mix things up again so much
that it is now too difficult to speculate.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Arnaldo Mondadori Editore, S.p.A. Milano

8782
C80: 3104/11]

1“
F0!‘0FFKJA1.USE(NNLY
SURPRISING RESULTS OF SOUTH TYROL CENSUS
Milan EUROPEO in Italian 25 Jan 82 pp 18-19
[Article by Lina Coletti: "German Spoken Here"]

[Text] Some say it is a mistake. Some say it is due to
a high ethnic German birth rate. But others are suspicious.

It came as a real shock to many. But the first official returns of the census, which
provided for an ethnic choice in Bolzano province, leave no doubt: South Tyroleans
declaring themselves Italian-speaking show a net decline, while those who claim to

be German-speaking are increasing.

This shrinkage in the Italian community occurs in larger proportions in the "low"
zone near Trentino. There, the drop reached 6 percent. However, the decline is
also very visible in communities with more than 10,000 inhabitants, where the oppo-
site was expected. These communities account for 46 percent of the population. In
any event, the decline exceeds the most pessimistic expectations.

In the period 1971-81, the Italian population has decreased by 4 percent, from 33.3
to 29.4 percent. Meanwhile, the South Tyrolean proportion rose by 3.4 percent, and
the Ladinos by 0.5 percent (in Val Gardena, with laxinuns at Selva and Ortisei, the
Ladinos increased their share by 7 percent).

Attempts are obviously being made in the province to adjust the figure by insisting
(a) on the temporary nature of the data, (b) the higher German birth rate, (c) an
allegedly higher Italian emigration rate in the last decade. Yet the urgent ques-
tion remains: what has caused people to take the option of joining the larger group?
Is it an assimilationist impulse to join the larger group? Is it a kind of adnira-
tion for a "Germanic" model? Is it a choice to take on the common, non-national
autonomy of an almost monopolistic majority group?

"Essentially opportunism," most people say, because the region is governed on numeri-
cal proportions between ethnic groups, and the system assigns social spending, pub-
lic housing and jobs on the basis of the size of these groups (hitherto, about 1/3

to the Italians, 2/3 to the Germans and a mini-us to the Ladinos).

In sum, the slogan nust have been, "You have a better chance to be better off as a
German."

FORIDFFﬂJA1}hSEINNLY
I'UK UI'I'ILIAL USE. ONLY

A farmer, who wished to remain anonymous, said, "I calculated what I would get in
subsidies from the Bauernbund, the South Tyrol Parmers' League, and what I would
get from Coldiretti. I opted for the Bauernbund."

A city civil servant said, "My career was blocked because Iy group, the Italians,
had already filled its quota of jobs, but as a 'Gernan' I night be promoted."

A boy studying in Austria confessed, ‘15 a 'German' I'll get discounts on the train
to Vienna, pay lower taxes and avoid quota troubles. These may be trivial reasons
for some people, but not for he."

V.M., a worker, explained, "I use public housing, and I knew that the waiting list
here in Bolzano requires fewer points for Germans than Italians. It's a way to dis-
courage imnigration, you know? Make housing unavailable so peeple won't cone up here;
right? Anyhow, it's crazy to use proportions in this way, because people figure it
out, as at Santa Maria di Ora, a hospice that uses it to protect old people."

Giuseppe Sfrondini, a socialist and president of the Provincial Council, explained
that this zone is among the richest and has the largest public budget ("Last year
the budget was 1.2 trillion lire for 430,000 inhabitants"), that several increases
were made in agriculture and tourism, which are traditionally South Tyrolean, while
decreases occurred in industry, which is traditionally "Italian." V.M. confirms it:
'ﬁhat means that many, especially among Iy fellow workers, did not come and stay as
expected. Many, in fact, had to leave. Like Lancia, which has had to reduce its
personnel by about 1,300 in less than 10 years. "as the agreement supposed to be
on a development.plan that would artificially modify relations between the three

ethnic groups? Actually, the opposite has happened, and the census results are
there to prove it."

According to Alex Langer, leader of None Linke-Nuova Sinistra [New Left], the census
has institutionalized the "ethnic lock-up" and created a real "apartheid" intended
to discriminate between people on the basis of language and ethnic group. 'ﬂhe
choices," he said. "were coerced and therefore not valid, especially for minority
language groups such as Slovenes, Flemish, Gypsies, etc., for whoever does not fit
into the rigid classification of the three ethnic groups and have to choose one or
the other so as not to be cut off from certain advantages."

For Langer, then, the data are false, false and untenable. ("Because they were
-gathered with incomplete and contradictory instructions.") False, untenable and
extorted ("The climate was, 'Don't refuse unless you want to lose your rights. Even
Bishop Gargitter, a German, has publicly called for the right of solidarity with
one's own group."0

The fact reaains that the consequences will probably be heavy for everyone and will
threaten even more an already precarious balance. People say up here that whoever
wins will be exposed willy nilly to the arrogance and temptation of new power while
whoever loses will make increasingly larger demands of guarantees for his ethnic

group.

It is also being said that the struggle between ethnic groups will be rekindled and
that there will be a revival of nationalisms. And it will finally guarantee that
old plans will be dusted off and brought out again ("For an Alpine foothill zone

16
FOILOFFKJA1.USE¢MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dominated by conservative or even reactionary Germans, for example.") Even the
.Heimatbund is taking advantage of this, as well as the SVP [South Tyrol People‘s

Party] hawks, who have again put forth the plan of separating South Tyrol from
italy.

For Langer, the census shows a serious threat to harmony, autonomy, and even the
"pactlet" (as is known, the region's special status was initiated in 1948. In 1969,
a "pactlet" was drawn up with special concessions, and it established an operative
calendar for their implementation). Autonomy and the "pactlet" are seen as great
democratic achievements, but people obviously feel that they are being administered
otherwise. "It is no accident," says Langer, "for example, that great strides have
been made in proportionalism, which is an instrument of division, but not in bi-
lingualism, which is an instrument of communication."

Meanwhile, even Italian political elements have begun making heavy remarks. They
had been tolerating the Volkspartei [SVP], which was considered the sole mediator
with the German-language population. "when a provincial law gives special privi-
leges to one group," said Franco Ravagnani, secretary of the Christian Democrats,
concerning increased subsidies for agriculture and commerce, "we are faced with the
misuse of the instruments of autonomy."

Even Silvius Magnago, who has been the unquestioned, charismatic leader of the Volks-
partei for 40 years, is not exactly unperturbed, because now some people will accuse
him of using autonomy not to stabilize the province but to feed new extremisms.
Moreover, it will be hard for him, as Ravagnani himself says, "to make further re-

quests new that some guarantees already made have led to the results that appear in
the census."

Those of the New Left, who have no direct parliamentary representation, will propose
through the Radicals that the results not be certified, thus preventing them from
being made official through publication in the GAZZETTA. ("So that the proportions
are not recodified for another decade," says Langer.) Meanwhile, though, the argu-
ment is increasing, especially among the "losers," i.e. the Italians. They are in
a different position from the Germans, who are solidly united and proud of their
ethnic identity; 90 percent of them are supporters of a single party, the SVP; and
they are rich, because they are anchored in heavi y subsidized sectors such as com-
merce, agriculture, and tourism. The Italians, on the other hand, tend to remain
unaware of their common cultural background, handicapped by their lesser economic
power, ignorant of the "other" language (15 percent have mastered German), divided
by political ideologies, and unprepared for their rendezvous with autonomy.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Rizzoli Editore

8782
C80: 3104/111

l7
FKHICNHNCJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL SPAIN

opposmon T0 ETA'S 'azvownoum taxas' snrms
Madrid cmto 16 in Spanish 1 Feb 82 pp 18-21

[Text] After enduring the most spectacular process of economic ruin in the
recent history of Western Europe, the Basque nationalist leaders, under pressure
by a large part of their party menbers and aympathizers. and especially by the
4.000 victims of extortion by ETA terrorists, who will have to pay, in France.

a total amount greater than 15 billion pesetas, have started open warfare
against the terrorist organization. Town by town, village by village. It

is the rebellion of the victims that on 26 January, when 20 days had elapsed
since his kidnaping, they had their lost dramatic synbol in industrialist Jose
Lipperhe ide .

In a desperate attelpt, the BIA Iilitary terrorists replied with new assaults,
with explosives and gunfire against the brave persons ready to challenge then
and not to pay a cent. Bravery against extortion. But the fact that histori-
cal dynamics is working against the assassins disguised as revolutionary poli-
ticians is demonstrated by the fact of a lack of support among the Basque society,
as Mario Fernandez hinself, new vice president of the autononous government

of Vitoria analyzed in his interview granted to CAMBIO 16: "In order to or-
ganise a promeaty demonstration or one on behalf of a specific hunger strike,
they have to stand with a poster in front of those of us who came out of the
Athletic-Royal Society soccer game 2 weeks ago in Bilbao, and organise a demon-
stration in this way. Otherwise. 200 or 300 persons in the duty shift go on
demonstrations that weekend."

In sumary, Xavier Araallus himself answered ru's challenge with a categori-
cal: If ETA wants fear, there will be fear for all!

The declaration of total war made by the Basque Nationalist Party (PM) and
the autononous goverment of Vitoria against ETA. mobilizing the population
against the acts of economic extortion. brought to the surface the real back-
ground of the Basque problem the existence of a hard class struggle with
the force of area.

E'l'A's nusber one objective is, and has been. the impoverishment of the Basque

Country. Over 3 nillion citizens in that calamity have undergone, directly

or indirectly. as personal witnesses of history, the lost spectacular process
of economic ruin in Western Europe in the last few decades.

18
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PU“ 0"“.th U3!- UNLI

Pour thousand professional an, businessmen, financiers, Sﬂlll 08201181168, ¢1V11
servants all over the Basque countryhavebeen intimidated into paying a total
amount: greater than 15 billion pesetas.

Bach demand ranged between 3 and 20 nillion: "If you do not deliver it within
the specified time, we shall seek you out to execute you," the message from
the terrorists concludes.

The request for the ao-celled revolutionary tax includes another sentence that
extends the arm of terrorism to other continents: "If you notify the police,
or any kind of setback whatsoever occurs in delivery, you will also be executed
wherever you may be. even if you leave Europe."

In recent years, the terrorized victins went in person or sent intermediaries
to the French Basque towns of St. Jean de Luz, Biarrits or Bayonne to pay the
tribute of fear to "Senor Otxia" in used bsnhnotes with unconnected serial
amers. This was the moat tangible proof of the impunity with which ETA ter-
rorism operates in the south of France. Billions _in' illicit money that is
"laundered" later in French agencies or other foreign centers.

But this extortion has touched bottom. In view of the internal and public
rebellion by the victims. the PIN and Basque government leaders have said en0ugh!
to this economic bloodletting by facing up to the reign of terror by weapons.

With the call by lendakari [president] Carlo Garaikoetnaa'hlbt to be intim-
idated or give in to extortion" and a unanimous reaction by the people who
gathered in their districts. places of work, associations and pd>lic opinion
media, two victims of the "rsvolutonary tax."-‘the mayors of Guecho and Santur-
ce, put out the watchword: "He shall not pay."

"It would be a norale boost for me." Jose Antonio Loidi, mayor of Ssnturca.
said, while his colleague from Guecho, Dr Urretxua, stated: "I believe that
in that way ny stand can serve as an example to encourage the others."

Indignation in the batzokis (PIN houses) of the towns was evident. "If some-
thing happens to our mayor. we shall respond." These reactions aloud were

repeated in a mmber of public establishments in Algorta, as a watchword that
"he who wants to be informed. take note."

In this atmosphere, the PIN municipal boards all over the area net in the par-
ty's building in Algorta. Over 100 representives of the party approved unani-
mously a note representing. because of its harshness. a definite war comnique
against ETA. Finally. the Basques were 'taking a hard stand.

In this comnique. after asking the extortion victims to make their name known.
the nunicipalboerds of the eight towns stated that "social justice travels
on paths other than assassination, extortion and terror."

Nevertheless. the last point in the communique was the most definite one. be-
cause the threao been» a counter-threat against ETA and its collaborators:

"He point out, the eighth point stated. "that we all know each other,- in the
Basque Country and very especially in the towns. and we know who is who. who

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are in agreement with those methods and who abstain when there is a proposal
to reject this reprehensible recourse."

Herri Batasuna [Popular Unity]

In view of these words, those who live in the Basque Country or who are famil-
iar with the reality of the problem know that the warning was addressed to the
members of the Berri Batasuna extreme left nationalist coalition and to its
spokesmen, who, on many occasions, refused to condemn this kind of action by
ETA terrorism. And that it is not' merely going to be words. There will
be something more.

This was realized by Mario Fernandez himself . who stated, in an interview
granted to M10 16: "I have the feeling that there is an overwhelming ma-
jority absolutely in agreement (not to pay). Sane of them even. with that
voluntarism typical of our party. will probably be ready to put the last sen-
tence in that statement by the municipal boards into practice."

This firm stand ran through the Basque Country like powder. In some towns,
like Orozco. the threat, although verbal. was transmitted directly to persons
slmpathizing with ETA. Persons who up to now had kept silent about the threat-
ening messages were now consenting to their friends and were revealing them.

in .spite of family annoyance. 0f the 6,000 persons affected by the tax, not
all were industrial magnates or Neguri businessmn.

Thus. in Algorta. it was learned that a former dentist, a gudaris (Basque
fighters) captain during the [civil] war, a foreman. an industrialist. two
physicians, several merchants. and so on. had been victims of extortion by
the terrorist organization. Pour physicians in the Portugalete clinic were
affected. The surprise was great in nationalist circles. ”what, he too? But
he has been a party meter all his life!

With its veto on the revolutinary tax and its severe condemnation of ETA, the
party presided by Xabier Arzallus and the Basque government have declared open
war against ETA members, playing the host severe and most difficult game in
its recent history. A war that does not evade many risks. including physical
risks. that PM is ready to assune. Attacks with explosives on Guipuzcoa in-
dustrialists or the shooting of a San Sebastian businessman within the space
of a few hours. in connection with failure to pay the revolutionary tax, were
proof of the nature of these risks.
"We cannot leave the mayor alone now." a well-known attorney in Guecho said.
"his stand must be extended to the whole Basque Country. Those who are brave
enohgh to make their rejection public merit the support of all the people.
Public support and with names."

In this connection, the PM will have to have its own party members who still
are paying the tax decide bravely to refuse. It must be condemned. as the
mayors of Guecho and Santurce have done and the furtive border passages must
be used only for traditional tourism.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The increasing part being played by ETA in the terrorist International was
also revealed with the statements by a "repentant" [terrorist], Fernando Va-
liche, leader of the First Line organization.

The historic trial of the cal-ander of this organization, taking place in Milan,
made it possible to become acquainted with a memorandua from Veliche in which

he revealed that Gianantonio Zanetti was made responsible for establishing
connections with ETA.

In June 1978, Gianantonio Zanetti went to Spain and made an agreemnt with

an on the holding of training courses for members of First_t.ine, the Commu-
nist Fighters Formations and other terrorist groups in what is known, as a

whole. as "arsed party" of Italy, that is to say. organizations basically in
agreemnt on confronting the democratic state violently.

COPYRIGHT: 1982. Informacion y Ravistas. S.A.

10,042
C80: 3110/81

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hcanwhile, a new slogan has emerged in the Basque Country using the statement
by a businessman, Jose Maria Vizcaino, president of the Guipuzcoa employers
association Adegui. The slogan "Not to pay is more abertzale" [nationalistic,
patriotic] has begun to spread around.

For a long tin, the PIN was accused of ambiguous respect for the point of
view of ETA, in spite of some sporadic condematory statements. Suddenly,

it has launched forth in an open war against terrorism. It is increaing its
statements. It is organizing its members and it is criticizing both branches
of ETA severely and openly. What has happened?

The reply comes from attorney Bario Fernandez, the new vice president of the
autonomous Basque government: "In recent times, terrorist. and particularly
the revolutionary tax, have been contributing considerably to the deteriora-
tion of the economic situation of the Basque Country.

“Therefore," Mario Fernandez adds, "the revolutionary tax not only does not
protect the interests of the Basque working people. as is said customarily

in those cyclostyle comniques that ETA is accustomed to issuing, but, rather,
it directly harms the Basque Country workers."

For the right arm of Garaikoetxea, the challenge hurled against the ETA now

by the Basque government cannot serve for seeking, in this attitude, an indivi-
dual physical protection of all the recipients of a threat or coercion by the
ETA terrorist organization.

"I believe that what the Basque government has taken on the comitment to lead
nust be a reaction of public opinion," Mario Fernandez states, mentioning the
assassination of engineer Ryan as the people's £irst massive reaction. This
event served both to weaken the terrorist organization and the political
groups that may be more or less defending their stands."

That is true. The nurder of the lemonizengineer Jose‘lhrin Ryan. that oc-
curred on 6 February--a year ago now--gave rise to a general strike and large-
scale demonstrations by the people-dike the one at the portal--agsinst ERA
terrorism in the Basque Country.

During that day, 9 February 1981. 300,000 persons demonstrated in the three
Basque capitals, in a meeting held by political and labor union forces like

the PIN. PSOB [Spanish Socialist Workers Party]. PC. Buskadiko szerra [Basque
Left]. 0000 [Workers Omissions]. 061' [General Union of Workers. FLA-SW
[Basque Workers Solidarity] and with the support of "CD [Democratic Center
Union] and AP [Popular Alliance]. Nationalist leaders, like Xabier Arzallus
himself , socialists Bicolas Bedondo and Txiki Benegas. or columnists Mario
Onaindia. Roberto Lerchundi and Marcelino Camacho, were in the large demonstrar
tion on that day in Bilbao. under the mbrellas that covered the crowd from
the rain.

The Buskadiko szerra deputy stated categorically, in the capital of Guipuz-
coa: "Today 133mm: any scrupl'es that they are few. but with fascist me-
thods. Fascism has been in the streets of San Sebastian, without uniform.
shielded by the acronym BB (Berri Batasuna)."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Twelve months later, a Vizcaya industrialist, Jose Lipperheide,. lived minutes
and seconds in the clutches of EM between life, and death, because he refused
to pay the revolutionary tax.

In that lengthy situation of dramatists. in which sectors close to HIV and Bus-
kadiko szerra maintained, sadly, until Wednesday that ETA military would
finally kill Lipperheide "regardless of how much negoatiation," the family was
still awaiting proof that he was alive, while the kidnapers revealed that solu—
tion of this kidnaping presented more problems 'than the kidnaping of Dr Iglesias

Puga .

The senseless action by ETA political-military in the kidnaping of the father

of the world famous aim Julio Iglesias, as well as the subsequent discovery
of a sizable arsenal of weapons by the police in the Viacaya town of Brandio.

gave rise to conflicting reactions.

In spite of the fact that the political-military organization of ETA announced
in its co-unique. after the freeing of Dr Iglesias by the police, that the
kidnaping did not isply a breaking of the truce and that they had perpetrated

it only for economic purposes. fear that the terrorist organization is returning
to its old tricks has alarmed the Basque Country and the Madrid authorities.

The statements by Mario Onaindia. leader of Buskadilco Ezkerra, who is playing
a key role in the process of pacification. who made a statement with an opti-
mistic note after his interview with the minister of the Interior, Juan Jose
Roson in Madrid last week. were not entirely shared in Basque circles.

"I believe that there is a political desire by the ETA p-m [political-military]
and by the government to maintain the positive dynamics originated by the truce
and acts like the return of political prisoners to the Basque Country might

be the basis for continuing on that course toward normalization," Hario Onain-
dia said.

“esters of Terror

[Text] The ETA members have yaduated as professors of terrorism, training
other European groups that are part of the staff of "international terrorism."
An INTERPOL official informed CAMBIO 16 that last December the strategic lead--

erahip of what constitutes the International of terrorism met in the Swiss
city of Leuaanne:

The Italian Red Brigades. the Fraction of the German Red Army, the Irish IRA,
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and ETA.

INTERPOL is sure that the wave of attacks on United States diplomats and senior
military officers was discussed in the meeting.

At the same time. it is obvious that the terrorist assembly was the result
of public invitations drawn up by several of the ettendingiorganizations to
coordinate their activity against the European democratic governments.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY "

One of the immediate results of this collaboration was the arrest by the Ital-

ien police of a Syrian citizen who was transporting detonators and explosives
intended for the Red Brigades.

Apparently, the connection with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Pales-

tine extremists is whnt ensures the supply of Soviet-made rocket launchers
and grenades. used by the leading guerrilla groups in Europe.

10.0102
080: 3110/81

21.
“R OPPIcm. us: om:
DUI 0!!me Uﬁb Vﬂbl

POLITICAL SPAIN

BASQUE OFFICIAL ACCUSBS EBA 0F DESCRIBING mo GABGSTEBISH
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 1 Feb 82 pp 22-23

[Interview with the new Basque vice president, Mario Fernandez by CAMBIO 16,
in his official office. in Vitoria, date not given]

[Text] After a meteoric political career, in less than 2
years young Bilbao attorney Mario Fernandez, 38 years old.
was appointed vice president of the Basque government, last
week. Skillful and clever. the vice president of the Basque
Country is also regarded as a hard man in the negotiations
with Madrid. A few days after his appointment. th'e 'Basque
politician received_(_:Al_lBIO l_6 in his official office of
Lakua; in Victoria. Mario Fernandez stated
categorically and without mincing words that his party and

the government will answer the challenge hurled by ETA [Basque
Fatherland and Liberty Group] members. he asked the Basque
people to "rearn themselves morally." in order to eradicate
terrorist blacklnil and extortions that "are only causing

work stoppage and ruin for the Basque Country."

CAMBIO 16: Has the fact that now people in the majority party are also being
threatened obliged the autonomous government and the Basque Nationalist Party
to declare thsnselvas more clearly and categorically against ETA and its ex-
tortions‘!

Mario Fernandez: I must make it clear that Lipperheide does not belong to

the PNV [Basque Nationalist Party] and the latest statements have had as their
excuse precisely Lipperheide's kidnaping. Kidnaped. according to what we know,
as a result of not paying the tax demanded of him and, still more concretely.
owing to a presumed action of setting an example with regard to business

who had refused to pay that vile extortion. PIN members had previously re-
ceived this kind of letters. The conflict has certainly been caused.'basic-
cally, on the one hand. by the economic situation. 0n the other hand.” the
constantly increasing maturity of the labor union federations. of ewloyer
organizations and. to a certain extent also. the consolidation of institutions.
Reactivation of violence has not occurred as a consequence of the breaking

of this prevailingcalm streak. but. rather. as the result of BTA's internal
difficulties themselves. Just as it Ins difficulties with regard to infra-
structure and released persons. and so on, it also has them with regard to

25
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
financial means. Thus, when ETA p-n ["polis-milis," ETA political-military
organization] made itself responsible for the kidnaping of Dr Iglesias, it
argued in substance that it was not a question of breaking the truce, but,
rather, "because we have financial problems." Because they said this so natur-
ally, the usual procedure is to solve treasury problems by neans of acts of
violence, of extortion, on persons, regardless of their status. That is lap-
sing into gangsterism.

CAHBIO 16: What is your evaluation of Lipperheids's kidnaping? Do you not
think that it is more political than the kidnaping of Dr Iglesias, or is there
a substantial difference between the two kidnapings?

Mario Fernandez: I would not be so categorical to the effect that it is a
political kidnaping, unless the adjective political refers to the fact that

it is not simply the consequence of solely obtaining a ransom in money. If
that is the acceptation. I agree. What has been atteqted is an effect on

a very concrete class in the Basque Country, the business class. Leaving to
one side any kind of stand of an ideological nature, it is absolutely clear
that all the political parties in Parliament. excluding, therefore, those par-
ties not represented in Parliament, realize that the economic situation of
the Basque Country can be solved by means of public sector actions, but that

it is absolutely indispensable for private initiative to contribute to the
recovery.

CANBIO 16: Nevertheless, there is another interpretation that states that

BTA could not continue to put up with the harsh criticisms by the Basque gov-
ernment and by the PIN.

Mario Fernandez: I as also convinced that it is a challenge. But I believe
that only this is being sought. It must be borne in mind, also, that not only
a businessman has been sought, but, rather, a business-an whon they are trying
to adorn with the famous topic of oligarchy (he lives in Neguri and is con-
nected with great names through family or business ties). But I agree that
the second point is also occurring and it is a challenge that we are ready

to answer.

CAMBIO 16: How can that moral rearmament be achieved? Do you believe, for
emple, that the very harsh note of some mnicipal boards in the Basque Coun-
try nay contribute to it?

Mario Fernandez: when the persons most directly affected ask for concrete
acts, there is a tendency to downgrade. not only the significance, but even
the effectiveness of stands that may seem to be strictly moral. It is taken
for granted that the stand of the PIN and of lendakari‘Ineaning unknown}
Garaikoetxea has harmed the ETA. Nevertheless, I realize that anyone who suf-
fers in an imaediate way from aggression is much inclined to regard the solu-
tion of statements or stands of a political nature as valid and exclusive.

But I do not reject or belittle the degrees of effectiveness of this kind of
actions. If, finally, the people are becoming aware that, in order to pay

the terrorist revolutionary tax, it is not necessary to be more abertrale [pa-
triotic] than to refuse to pay it, and that, at the present time, a person

is more abertzale by refusing to pay the terrorist tax than in the contrary
case, I think that we can cause considerable harm.

26
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KV“ VA‘LUW U“ Vh‘hl

CAHBIO 16: The last point in the resolutions of the municipal boards is almost
a declaration of war ("we know who is who, we know them all, and so on.").

Mario Fernandez: Of course, obviously, that cannot be the government's lan-
guage. The government has to seek actions of a constitutional nature. He
cannot set up here a kind of field of aggravating circumstances.

CAHBIO 16: From the government's point of view, how do you evaluate the loss
of influence and the scanty mobilization power that the groups close to ETA
have been undergoing for a year now?

Mario Fernandez: True. There has been a considerable decrease in popular
support of these organizations. Then almost situations that would be anecdotal,
if it were not because this country is in no mood for too many anecdotes. should
be recalled. In order to organize a demonstration for amnesty. or on behalf

of a more or less certain specific hunger strike, of certain political pri-
soners, it is necessary to stand with a poster in front of those of us who

came out of the Athletic-Royal Society game 2 weeks ago in Bilbao, and in this
way a demonstration can be organized, because, otherwise, the 200 or 300 per-
sons in the duty .shift‘go on demonstrations' that week“; Hhsbooncerns us isthat
this kind of decline in points. or in the voting records of these radical n
groups. may not have definite aspect. may not become lasting, as a result of
topics like the Arregui topic. or an Almeria in Basque. Obviously. this calm
spell that we are all displaying at the present time would be broken very sig-
nificantly.

CAHmIO 16: A businessman, Jose Maria Vizcaino, said. in an interview granted
to DIARIO 16. that Basque businessmen have felt very isolated with regard to
ETA and that there are government. party and labor union responsibilities in
this abandonment.

Mario Fernandez: Vizcaino is a very brilliant and representative spokesman
of Basque businessmen. I believe that he is right. because. for a long time.
businessmen, by definition. have been the bad guys in the motion picture.
Because, implicitly, we were being fed with the notion-andthosewerethetac-
tics of ETA--that if we are businessmen. by definition we must necessarily
connect the word businessman with exploitation and not necessarily with the
creation of wealth. Then it may be right, in that connection. to say that
businessmen have been the bad guys in the motion picture. Businessmen would
not escape responsibility. either. from the point of view of the Administra-
tion. But I believe that there also is something imputable, to a certain ex-
tent, to businessmen and it is the fact that they too have not known how to
open up to society and explain what their function is. I believe that this
might be somewhat the division of responsibilities.

CAHBIO 16: The resumption of activity by the "poli-milis" has caused-great
concern in most of the Basque political sectors. -ﬂow do you interpret this
new event after the kidnaping of Dr Iglesias?

Mario Fernandez: He would give a very negative evaluation to a breaking of
the truce, because it is true that the ETA p—m truce has contributed, up to
now, to the processtof consolidation of democracy in the entire State and,

27
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
in particular. in the process of statutory development here. A breaking of
that truce concerns ua extraordinarily. But what concerns ua lost is not the
fact that ETA p-u as an organization night break the truce in the near future,
but. rather. the fact that, judging from the reports that we have, persons
in ETA p-n might be in danger of changing their affiliation by losing a "p"
to become members of the military organization. This really does worry us.

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Infomacion y Reviataa, S.A.

10,042
(:80: 3110/81

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY FRANCE

Am CAPTAIN FEELS ANDREI) DIVISION LACKS AIR DBMS!
Paris ms D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Jan-Feb 82 pp 70-71

[Article by Captain Jacques Vuillenin who entered the French Amy in 1962 and
has served in the 7th Arnored Division at Besancon: ”Air Defense of the
Type-77 Armored Division]

[‘i'ext] 'lhe armored division has no lack of offensive weapons
and equipment. But in the opinion of the author of this
article, its air defense capabilities have been neglected.

An air attack is so sudden and brief that the division
cannot rapidly rely on support fro. corps air defense units.
To correct this deficiency. the author ream-ends that

each arnored division be authorized an organic air defense
unit. The views expressed herein are the author's and do
not necessarily reflect Ministry of Defense or nilitary
comnd policies.

Denied its on organic air defense units, the type-77 [1977] armored division
is highly vulnerable to air attack. Such a deficiency can seriously inpair
the division's effectiveness.

without waiting for the results of current or future studies, all armored
divisions should inediately be issued air defense weapons enabling then to
fully neet nodern conbat requirements.

Vulnerable

The type-77 armored division's main characteristics are its firepower, nobility.
flexibility of enployuent, and logistical self-sufficiency. A scout company
gives it an extended reconnaissance capability and an antitank conpany
reinforces its long-range antitank capability.

The division is also characterized. however, by a complete absence of organic

antiaircraft weapons. This shortcoming is especially serious in that the
airborne caster-fixed wing aircraft and helicopters--is continuously capable
of operating in the contact area and in depth.

2
FOR OFFICIAZ USE ONLY
IVA VI‘I‘I‘JRL U5!- UI‘LI

Easy targets for eneny aircraft include: signal conpsny vehicles, on the nave

or in static positions, transportation conpany convoys, and the division rear
area.

It is indeed paradoxical to note that while France's defense industry produces
numerous and reputable air defense weapon systens, the French Arny is one of
the nost ill-equipped ethics in this respect. This deficiency is likely to
jeopardize seriously the operational readiness of our divisions.

In rubuttal it can be said, and rightly so, that arnorsd divisions do have, with
their 20- guns. nany self-defense weapons, and that they say also be protected
by corps air defense units attached to the divisions. In this regard, we met
be highly realistic, however.

Actually the arny corps will not be able to attach air defense units to every
division. The Roland [surface-to-air sissile] batteries attached to an arnored
division cannot nest all requirensnts: protection of tank reginsnts on the nave

or in waiting positions; protection of Iain supply routes, connand posts, and
the division rear area.

As for the ZO-n gun, without belittling that weapon's capabilities it would
be misleading to believe that by itself alone this gun can provide an adequate
answer to the problen posed by the air threat.

It is impossible to ask the sane troops to naintain continuous and sinultaneous
surveillance of the air space and also the coapartnent of terrain they are
assigned to defend or capture, with its ridges, woods, and borders free which
deadly fire nay erupt at any nonent.

Such essential actions of an effective response to the air threat as surveillance
and warning can be taken under good conditions, in other words continuously,

only by personnel to when these actions are assigned as a prinary nission.

Only a specialized unit can perforn this nission round-the-clock. It is

absolutely necessary, therefore, that the type-77 areored division be assigned
an organic air defense unit.

Organic Unit

The presence of an air defense unit within a division-n unit continuously
perforning surveillance, warning, and identifications tasks for the benefit of
the other units-would considerably enhance that division's capability of
countering an air attack.

It would be desirable to equip that unit-a battery or battalion-with
tractor-drawn antiaircraft guns characterized by flexibility of employ-ant and
sinplicity of operation.

Studies are currently being conducted for the purpose of defining the weapons--
guns or nissilesuwith which to equip forward area units.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But we should be able to cope with this danger right now, without uniting for
the dubious result of studies that are at tines very lengthy. Appropriate
weapons are available at the present tine: single ZO-II and 30m guns. and
twin 20m guns. So let us use then.

Air attacks are a key element of modern combat. The air situation will not
always be as balanced as it is too often depicted in field exercise scenarios.
The contact area will be the preferred field of activity for attack helicopters.
It is no longer solely a matter of familiarizing personnel with this aspect

of combat. They must at the sane time be instructed and trained without
respite to handle this problem and becone proficient in enploying specialized
equipment.

Assignment of an organic air defense unit to the armored division will make it
possible to achieve this dual objective in the insdiate future while at the
same tine inproving the division's operational readiness.

COPYRIGHT: 1982 Revue des forces arneea Francaises ”Arnees d'Aujourd'hui"

8061
C30: 3100/ 411

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS NOT msr INFLUENTIAL, POLL “W8
)hdrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 15 Feb 82 pp 33-35
[Article by Jose Manuel Arida]

[Text] In Spain it is the government which has the met influence, followed
by the political parties. After that, power. cousnd or influence over what
takes place in the country belongs to terrorisa, television, the United
States. the army and other unofficial elenents. This, at least, was the
opinion of those surveyed by the WM Institute when they were asked the
following question:

"On this list I as showing you are several social groups, institutions or
countries which have political, social or economic influence in Spain. Which
of then, in your opinion, has the greatest influence over events in our
country? The second greatest? Third? Fourth? Fifth?"

0n looking over the results, the first thing that catches one‘s attention is
the broad distribution of power seen by the middle-class Spaniard. The citi-
zen does not see a single center or at least a preponderance of power, but
rather a mingling of powers.

he distributes influence, giving the higher ratings to two political institu-
tions: the government (18 percent) and the political parties (110 percent).
Following this are three groups which differ widely among themselves: terror-
ism (9 percent), television (8 percent) and the army (5 percent), and to a
foreign country, the United States (6 percent).

Cortes Not Very Influential

That is to say, the formal institutiona--government and political parties-w,
in the opinion of those surveyed, have one-third of the power, while the
other influential groups have not quite one-fourth. The ruining influences
on our national life are quite varied. Like a bunch of small prizes in a
lottery, they touch upon all the lost important public organizations and
institutions. The small amount of influence attributed to the Cortes (3 per-
cent) is noteworthy. Spaniards have a View of politics which is not too
parliamentary, inzspite of the fact that from time to time they insist that
congress and senate are the basic axis around which important questions are

32
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

debates and decided. Those interested should find out whether this low per-
centage accorded to the Cortes was influenced by the consensus, whether the
middle-class Spaniard feels that way because he believes the parties decide
questions outside the deputies' chnber or because he believes that anyone
who governs does so without any controls.

The fact is that in spite of the necessary provisos, we continue to have a
centralist view of political activity. Only 2 percent of the influence was
accorded to local adninistretions--town councils and autonomous co-unitiesn,
while the Central Adninistration's quota is 35 percent--government, political
parties and the Cortes.

Among econonic centers of influence on power, those surveyed indicated the
banking col-unity (6 percent) and the mltinationals (2 percent). It is
curious to note that a greater influence on society was attributed to each
of these sectors of the econoay as a group than to organized business-en,
the CEO: [Spanish Confederation of Business Organizations] (1 percent).

Anong outside influences, the great power attributed to the United States
stands out, perhaps because the interviaoeea were influenced by the proxinity
of the date of the survey to that of the parliamentary debate over Spain's
entry into NATO. On the other hand, the European Economic Couunity (l per-
cent) occupied a lower position than night at first have been expected. The
influence attributed to the USSR, only a fa tenths of a percent, indicates
that alnost nobody believes it has any influence on the Spanish Covernnent's
decisions.

As for the press end radio (2 percent), their capacity to influence, in spite
of having awarded thanselves the title of "fourth estate," is also low, par-
ticularly coepared with the great influence accorded television. However, if
one adds together all the col-unications media, they would be in third place
with 10 percent of the influence over what happens in the country.

In studying the ratings of the various institutions in second, third, fourth
and fifth places, one can see how the various organizations and institutions
redistribute themselves and conpensate for one another. Groups which re-
ceived a low rating in first place occupy higher percentages in the following
places, as with press and radio, the Cortes, the unions or the mltinationals.
Others, such as the church, the army or the banking co-unity, maintain the

sane percentages in all places.
Principal Institutions

The results of the principal institutions, according to the segments into
which the survey is divided, are as follows:

The governnent (18 percent). The influmce attributed to the governnent is
greater anong persons between the ages of 31 and 65 years, those from the
Levante and eastern and central areas, the lower middle class and small towns.
'l'hose from lbdrid and the south credit the government with the least in-
fluence.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Political Parties (15 percent). 0n the other hand, Madrid and Andalusia feel
the political parties have nuch more influence than the government. In
addition, the upper classes seen to consider the parties more influential,
as do the youth and Barcelona.

Terrorisa (9 percent). Hadrid seems to be the area most concerned by the
powe. f terrorisa. Curiously enough the north-«long with the Levante»,
although it is the part of the country most affected by it, attributes little
influence to terrorism. women consider terrorisn nore inportant than do men.

The any (5 percmt). The relationship between terrorisn and the any is re-
versed. Thus those who concede less influence to terrorism concede were to
the army, and vice versa. Hen, the upper classes and the northern and south-
ern areas of the country attribute greater influence to the army.

The United States (6 percent). The younger the age group and the higher the
social class. the greater is the tendency to attribute more influence to the
United States. Large cities, rather than smaller ones. also credit the
Americans with are influence.

Television (8 percent). Persona under 105 years of age, the upper and upper
middle classes, Madrid and the northern part of the country attribute the
most power to television. Women give it quite a bit more than nen.

The survey, done by the Institute mm, s.a., was taken last November, using
a sampling of 2,000 persons and with a dependability rate of 95.5 percent.
The people surveyed included nen and women iron 16 to 65 years of age.

Table 1. WHO HAS T!!! 14031 INFLUENCE IN SPAIN
Percent
Government 18
Political Parties 1!.
Terrorism 9
Television 3
The United States 6
Army 5
Church I.
Banking (Io-unity 6
The Cortes 3
mtinational Firms 2
The Courts 2
Unions 2
Press and Radio 2

Others (local governnents, ultra-
rightist officials, enployers'
groups, the BBC, autonomous com-

nunit ies) 6
No answer 15

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 2. DISTRIBUHON IN ORDER 0? IMPORTANCE

let 2d 3d 6th 5th
Place Place Place Place Place Total
(Percent)

Government 18 10 8 7 5 68
Political Parties 16 ll 9 8 6 68
Terrorism 9 6 5 6 3 27
Television 8 6 6 7 5 32
The United States 6 6 3 6 3 20
Army 5 S 6 5 5 26
Church 6 6 6 3 3 18
Banking Oomnity 6 6 6 6 3 19
The Cortes 3 5 6 5 5 26
mltimtionaln 2 6 6 3 6 l7
Courts 2 l l 2 l 7
Unions 2 6 6 3 6 17
Press and Radio 2 S 6 7 6 26

 

Key:
1. Government 13. Northeast
2 Political Parties 16. North Central
3. Terrorism 15. Madrid
6 . Televia ion 16 . Barcelona
5. United States 17. Economic Status
6 Amy 18. Upper, Upper Middle Clues
7 Age Group 19. Middle Class
8. Area 20. Lower Class
9. East 21. Population
10. Levante 22. Sex
11. South 23o $19
12. Central 26. Female

COPYRIGHT: 1982, Informacion y Reviatae, S.A.

8735
050: 3110/ 89 BM)

35
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY