FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10429

1 April 1982

USSR Report

HUMAN RESOURCES

(FOUO 4/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIENT LABS AND REGULATIONR GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSRNINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OPRICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
HUMAN Resouncss

(7000 V32)
Comems

EDUCATION

Prokof 'ycv Mame. Status of Education
(H. A. Pmkof.’ev; SOVE'I‘BKAYA Pam, J“ 82)... o o o. to...

Problem of Interaction of Funny. Oultnm
(A. Go mrmv; SOWBKAYA Mn, Jm &)oooooooooooooo

Perfecting Orgauzntzlon of Education in $183 Nonchomoun 20m
(v. 6. “av: soumAnW’ \‘ﬂ &)OOOIOOOOOOOOOO

{ERQGRAPH‘I

nasal insulation of Denguphic Pincus», Discussed
(Galina Il'inichnn ucvinova; ano 1 13mm
PmmnsszsssR’ 1981)’ 00.00000000000000000000UODOOOOOOOOOI

-a- [III-USSR-38CF

mo nmnu "cc mv
m OFFICIAL 118! DULY

MCATIOI

PROKOF'YBV DISCUSSE STATIB OF EDUCATION
memsmsmersnaooolnmmuo l, JanBprlO-D

[Article by H.A. Prokof'yev: "A Teacher of the Society of Mature Socialiss")

[text] Soviet teachers and all educational personnel have entered into a new
five-year period arsed with a precise and :clesr program of further development
of the quality teaching and mu education of students contained in the
Accountability Report of the 080 Central Conittee to the 26th Congress of the
Commist Party of the Soviet Unim. The congress noted with satisfaction that
the Soviet school reached an inortant landmark in the past five-year plan—it
conpleted the transition to universal coqnlsory secondary education. But the
requirements of society with respect to public education and the teacher are
growing. "The Iain thing today," General Secretary of the cm: Central Co-it-
tee L.l. Brezhnev noted in the report, "is to raise the quality of instruction,
labor and noral training in the school. to eliainate foaalise in evaluation of
the results of the work of. teachers of the students, to strengthen in practice
the tie between education and life and to imme the preparation or school
children for socially useful liar.“

Further developsent of the general educational school at the present stage is
firnly based on the achievements of the entire educational systen attained in
the years of the past five-year pln, the chief tasks or which were systematic
inplenentation of the decisions of the 25th CPS!) Congresses and the provisions
of the ass 0583 Constitution on the developsent of universal conpulsory second-
ary education, further inrovenent in the‘ content of education lid enhancing
the role of the school in preparing young people for life and labor activity.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan, 2‘ aillion teenagers cowleted the 8—year
school and nore than 20 sillion young an and sense coqleted full secondary
education. Practically all young people, choosing one or another direction in
secondary education, continue to study following the 8th-vyear class. They ere
entering into the period of labor naturity. having behind than a basic general
educational training. As before, a leading place in the obtaining of secondary
education is occupied by secondary day general educational school. Ninth-year
classes of. general educational schools take in aore th-I 62 percent as pupils
of those who cowlete 8th~year classes of day school.

Secondary universal education... These words for us are custoaary, everyday.
But how iuportant is their political, econonic and social nearing. The fact is

1

roe 017161“. USE ONLY
a'va ve'a’avanae vans venue

that secondary universal education is the foundation of the country's "educa-
tional potential.“ This potential, as attested to by practice, plays a nost
important role in raising labor productivity ad standards in industry. agri-
culture and all other sectors of the national econony. It is difficult to
overestinate the iaportance of universal cowulsory secondary education in the
fornation of a scientific outlook. ideological conviction, develop-ant of so-
cial and political activity by the youth ad preparation of then tor an active
ad creative life. .

the 26th CPS!) Congress eat our take before the ehcational systen. ‘lhe role
of the school in the (creation of young generations ant grov still further.

In the uorda of General Secretary of the 080 Central Co-ittee l..l. Breahnev
addressed to educational personnel there is contained an entire progra for our
activity: to raise the quality of education ad training ad to bring than to-
gether even nore closely into a single process for the (creation of the indi-
vidual inspired by the ideas of Herein-Lenin“, a individual ready for cre-
ative laor for the good of society; to achieve such a organisation of the
educational process that the tomdationa oi the sciences dealing with society
ad nature beco- fudeantal ad profound for each schoolboy: to develop in
students durable norsl principles vhere vord ad deed are one, while the know-
ledge of studied lane is indiuolubly connected with the practice of socialist
construction: to bring up young citizens for when selfless service to the Noth-
erland is the hiduat ain ad great hapinese. During the 11th Five-Year Plan,
there is to be consolidated the greatest achievemt of the party and the Sovi-
et people—grating to ell rising generationa real rights for obtaining a sec-
ondary education of a high scientific level. Estimates show that about 18 nil-

Ihe 8-year school is an iaortat eleneut in the solution of the teak of uni-
versal secondary education. It feeds with its graduates both senior classes
of secondary school ad vocational-technical schools as well a to a signifi-
cant degree secondary specialized educational institutions. During the current
five-year plan. incoalete eecondary education in day school will be obtained
bv about 20 nillion people of who. about one nillion will enter vocational-
technical schools and 6.6 nillion persona—secondary vocational-technical
schools and secondary specialized educational institutions. The 8-year school
is directing increasingly large contingents of its graduates to vocational-
technical schools ad to secondary specialised educational institutions. It is
right to orient young people to the selection of paths of vocational education
-this to a significant degree signifies deterninetion of the success in
training of young vorkere and second-echelon epecialiats, that is. to solve
the iaortat etate problee of labor reserves. The school of working youth is
also not losing its iaortace; it is becodng for us to a increasing degree
the senior concentrun [kontsentr] of study. An interesting process is to be
observed: in this school there is a increasing nuﬁer of students aged over
25-30, who in the past had not received a coalete secondary education. Round
figure eetinatea show that we ca expect in the current five-year period that
about 6 nillion persons will coqlete the course or secondary education u
evening (correspondence) schools.

2
roe omcm.’ use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY

Several years ago, a mass-scale experiment was begun on teaching 6-year olda
who are not included in preschool institutions. During the current year,
810,000 six-year olda have begun education. It is expected that this figure
will have grown by the and of the fivedyear period. If the introduction of
the educational program used in preparatory groups of kindergartens for school
are taken into consideration, it could be expected that by 1985 a large part
of the six-year olds will have obtained a certain mount of elementary know-
ledge and then it might be possible to think of teaching children beginning
with six years of age in going on to the next five-year plan. mach work
will be required to create an optimal teaching-educational process in the
most initial part of education.

Much attention is paid in our country to the development of public ferns of
upbringing of children of preschool age. In the years of the 10th Pive-‘Iear
Plan the number of children in preschool institutions increased by 2.5 million
persons. The state is not skimping on outlays: in 1981 more than 5.3 billion
rubles were allocated for the maintenance of preschool institutions and about
1 million rubles on construction. A large army of pedagogs, exceeding 1 mil-
lion persons. carries on educational work in kindergarten. The decisions of
the party congress determine the target for expansion of this inortant form
of assistance to families. During the years of the 11th Five-Year Plan, the
number of children in preschool institutions will grow by 3.2 million and
reach 16.6 million. The combination of family with public education creates
objective preconditions for the moat correct, all-vround scientifically based
education of children in their early peﬂ‘od 6f'1ife. The task is to realize
these preconditions most fully and to show special concern for the health and'
development of each child.

Full-day attendance of school by children has received universal development in
recent years. This coweratively new undertaking for the school is gradually
being developed and iwroved. Many schools eadst where nonspecific work is
arranged interestingly: children have an additional possibility of physical
mad ssthetic development; "hey cm: do home assign-ants at school and engage
themselves in any task. During the current five-year period, there is planned
an additional trasition to a regime of semiboarding ‘ maintenance (extended
day) for abOut 3 million children. By 1985, about 16 million school children,
primarily of beginning classes. will be on a boarding and aemiboarding

regime. This will be of tremendous importance to the family, since parents
will be provided with the possibility of working in peace in production. The
actual scale of these measures attests to their colossal social significance.
But much yet remains to be done for inroving the upbringing of children.

That large army of pedagogs. which selflessly worhs in schools and groups on
an extended day basis mud in various kinds of boarding institutions. should do

a great deal of work on improving specific forms and methods of education of
pupils.

During the current five-year plan. the inortmrce of the qualitative aspect in
the work of the school will especially grow in iqortmrce. Raising the level
of general educational preparation of school children mad of their perceived
assimilation of fundmntals or the sciences is an object of special concern.
Further improvement of the teaching mad educatimal process on the bases of

laws and principles based on pedagogic science is n unconditional requirensnt

3

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
eve. voocvma- vana- UAW.

of any teaching collective. And this name that first of all the lesson not
be inproved. The school lesson, as it was eqhasized in the decree of the
party and the govern-ant on the school, renains the basis and well tested fora
of instruction and education of pupils. There has to he a deepening and fur-
ther inprovenent of labor training of school children, the orientation of stu-
dents prinarily toward labor in the sphere of eaterial production. Today the
task is to raise the effectiveness of labor instruction, to orient the greater
part of graduates of 8-year nd full secondary schools to worker occupations,
to subsequent training in vocational schools. ﬁnch not be done by the school
and all pedagogic collectives in connection with the fulfill-ant of the decree
of the CPS" Central Co-dttee and the 0583 Council of Ministers "On the Further
Rise of the Mass character of Physical Culture and Sports.“ Physical-culture
study should he ends into a need for every individual fron early chilth age
-this is the idea behind the given decree. It would be inposeible to achieve
her-onions developmt without sconcern for one's physical condition.

At the dawn of the Soviet power, in June of 1918, v.1. Lenin, in presenting a
speech at the let All-Russian Congress of Teechers-Internationalists. defined
with precision and greet perspective the role of the teacher in the new society.
"The teachers' artsy," he said, “lust set itself gigantic educational tasks, and
first of all it nust hecone the chief erny of socialist education” ('Conplete
Collection of works,“ Vol 36, p 1020). v.1. Lenin and the (to-mist Party have
always looked upon teaching as a nest inportent channel of the ideas of the
party to the assess. At the All-Russian Conference of Political Educational
Cosnittees of Guberniya and Uyesd Departunts of Public Education held in No-
vesber 1920, the leader of the revolution set a concrete task: "...to train a
new any of pedagogic teaching personnel, which would be closely connected with
the party, with its ideas and which would be per-sated with its spirit...."
(”Couplete Collection of Works, p 61, p ‘03).

Several decades have passed since then. In this tine. there became part of
history the struggle with illiteracy, for universal elenentery and then for
incowlete secondary education. The people have reached a high level of cul-
ture and education. A developed socialist society has been built in the coun-
try. Knowledge in its true, objective sense has bacon a genuine inheritance
of the Soviet people. Under these conditions, the role of the teacher has in-
creased significantly and his tasks have beco- coqlex. he lust not only
master to perfection the arsenal of contenporary netth of teaching but also
fora: in school children a high counsnist consciousness and prepare then for
labor. The general educational school ad its pedagogs enemass all the
young muons in their influence. The success of the operation of the
school predeternines to a significant degree the quality of operation of voca-
tional and specialised educational institutions. The army of educational
workers in our country has becone the nost numerous group of the Soviet intel-
ligentsia. A high educational level and political qualities of fighters of the
ideological front have created nationwide prestige for teachers.

In spanking at the All-Union Congress of Teachers (1968), LJ. Brezhnev euphe-
aized: ”In our country, the school teacher is one of the nost honorable, noet
respected by the people professions... the work of the teacher is so valuable
and wonderful because it actually nolds the individual.“ The past fivedyear
plan was characterised by a significat inrovensnt in the qualitative “up .. ‘

I.

FOR omcuu. USE ONLY
of pedagogic cadres. wring this period there were sent to school sore than half
a nillion young teachers with higher education and alnost 350,000 with second-
ary education. As a result, the educational level of Soviet teachers has groun.
In recent years, special attention has been paid to providing rural schools with
qualified pedagogic cadres. The great najority of young teachers, fulfilling
their civil duty, work in rural schools. which has had a positive effect on rais-
ing in then the level of teaching and educational work. During the current five-

year plan new hundreds of thousands of young specialists will go into the educa-
tional systen. '

The quality of teaching and education of the rising generations depends to a
significant degree on the level of scisntific-aethodoloﬂcsl and ideological-
political training of teachers. Purther isrovemt of theoretical ideological
and professional training of pedagogic cadres is the object of special concern
of public-education organs. in this sense. special untion should he node of
the teachers' met so that everyone would have a higher political education.
This swemt was born in Moscow and has been. vichspread in the country.
Under the conditions of developed socialise, the content of teaching work and
the very concept of “teacher" has becone fuller and sore capacious. This on-
rich-eat is connected with powerful social-political, econouc and cultural
processes of the vigorously developing Soviet society.

At the present stage of developmt of the genera. educational school, its
training and educational functions have hecone significantly expanded. Today’s
teacher is essentially a first coser to the solution of a historic task—to
provide young generations with a coqlete secondary education. The solution of
this task naturally requires of the teacher that he be arsed with the nest sod-
ern and effective nthods and techniques of work. In recent years, mch has
been done on inproving the methodological arsenal of teachers. The Soviet
school does not just help each student enter the total of knowledge scan-u-
lsted by sankind; it so organisesthe vork of a student that he relates his
learning at each step to the canon cause, to the work of creating a new soci-
ety. The teacher of our day, on the call of the party and the wish of the
Motherland, is to he fond in the advance positions in the struggle for the
hearts and Iinds of children. The tremdous progress of the Interial, cult-
ural and spiritual life of Soviet society has created qualitatively new condi-
tions which, on the one hand, have expanded the framework of the creative work
of the teacher and, on the other, have nade it possible to disclose in full
degree all his potential possibilities as a creator, builder and sculptor of
the young citizen of the Land of the Soviets.

Inplenentstion of party policy in the field of school education is a latter of
honor, s sacred duty of teachers. Soviet teachers with deter-ined labor inle-
nent the policy of the party. The present-day Soviet teacher possesses all the
necessary qualities for fruitful pedagogic activity, for the forning of an all-
round developed personality. Only that teacher can stay at the level of con-
teworary high den-ads who, as Lev Tolstoy said. will not tensin stationary in
knowledge, but will possess a unique flexibility while not ceasing to educate
himself. For our teacher, all the necessary conditiaas have been created for
‘his growth, creative reinterpretation of the theory and practice of Soviet
pedagogy.

P02 OHICIAI. 08! (IL!
of the events of our day, when a ideological struggle is intensified in the
international arena. The develop-ant of this process is connected with the

the further sweep of the atiiaorialiat nova-ant. Today, a ucoapronioing
battle is going on throughout all the world for tho ainda of youth. The chief
front of the struggle between capitalise ad socialise lies in the field of
philosophy. in the field of (emotion oi aoral ideals ad values.

educational potential of the Soviet people a special place is occupied by the
scientific world outlook, knowledge of the natvro of harriet-leniniat theory
and lows of historical dovelopaant. It is naely this that ashes it. possible
to establish in the ninds of youth a nnderstading of the establish-ant of

is and will he hie sincere attach-eat ad love for children. Under our Soviet
conditions this attach-ant end love is ani-oted by high ideals in the none of
the aduevenent ﬁorwhich the Soviet teacher works. The teacher of the society
of developed socialise is distinguished by a broad outlook, thorough profusion-
al competence and the ability to organise a children’s collective. to (inely
observe and study the special to_a_t_n_rgs_ of children withMot poking aar-
inane use of the "3.73511511113- of the personality of the school
children. Thus, as 8.1. Krupsheya said, the teacher “will be able to invest
book knowledge with living flesh ad blood,” and will m the fusion of sci-
ence and life a powerful aas for the trastorootion of reality and teach
children to serum on active position in life.

The Motherland highly values the labor of teachers. During the years of the
10th Five-Year Plan, are than 20,000 teachers and other educational personnel
were awarded orders and nedalo oi the Soviet Union. The high title of Hero of
Socialist Labor was awarded to 46 persons. For special services in teaching
and coauniet training of students, 29 «teachers received the title People's
Teacher of the USSR. In the sons period, the title of Honored Teacher was
conferredon 5,000 persons in the republics. According to certification totals,
the titles Teacher Hethodologiet ad Senior Toochorwon awarded to 11,239 per.
sons. Medals na-ed after outstanding podagogo 13.1. Krupekaya, 1.1). Ushinahiy,
A.S. Hakarenko, Kara-Niyasov; Ye.s. Gogehashviliand Kh. Abovya grace the
chests of more than 3,000 teachers. Many teachers have received other rewards.
The high prestige of the teacher is characterised by such a noteworthy fact:
there are 111,064 teachers along the deputies oi' eoviets of people's deputies,

including 100 deputies-educational personal—to USSR and ropuhlic suproae
soviets.

The teachers of Hoscow and the capital ohlast are asking a significant contri-
bution 'to iwrovcnent of the systea of education. Here a ave-ant has been

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lanched for “salary schools. 'rodsy already 30 schools have earned the title
of enaplary. A socialist coaetition has been started with the notto "For the
exemplary co-miat city—enqlary schools.” Many valuable initiatives have
been born aong Moscow's teachers. The concentration of all conditions on the
nest pertinent questions on the basis of athoroughly thought out coals: plan of
teaching ad educational work ukas it possible to approach aaagsunt of the
process of fornetion of the personality at School He 76 in Gagarinskiy Rayon
where the director is A.V. Isvetkove. The pedagogic collective is working on
the selection of ferns and nethods of nonspecific educational work; wide use is
nade of talks, disputes and conferences for this. Here they deteuinsdly strive
to see to it that for each pupil a subject is found and‘proposed to his liking and
individual inclinations, ailities and know-how are taken into account. Host
seniors when it cones to social-political subjects have a deep and lasting
knowledge ad are able to utilise in practice studied theoretical positions.

In practice each pupil of the school cleates a social test.

1.4.. Osipove, a female teacher of literature at School lo 190 in aura-ushkin-
ekiy Rayon of Moscow-works interestingly. "ith the resources of her subject.
she inculcates W’s hatred of the petty bourgeois way of life and forns
Gor'kiy's drean of the wonderful nan of revolutionary spirit. If any litera~
ture lesson does not evoke enotions, thoughts, if it does not lead to ergo-cots
that are frak and open, then it is a bad lesson. Il‘his is how this teacher
thinkséshe does everything possible 'to see to it that the literature course
noxianlly pronotee the aoral foraing of the young person.

NJ. Deaidenkov works at Raaenskaya Secondary School in Shakhovskiy nayon of
Moscow Oblast. Nikolay Ivanovich was born in Shakhovskiy layon, coapleted
rural schools and the pedagogic institute and returned to his native village.
He does not merely give labor lessons. but firmly forns in his pupils such
feelings and concepts which becoae the source of nanifastation in each of then
of love for the Motherland and hone axes and a feeling of citisenship and deep
patriotisn. In 5 years. 113 of his graduates have been granted rights of
tractor operator and nachinist ad of these 69 have stayed on to work at their
local kolkhoa. At rayon and oblast coaetitions of yoag plow-en, the pupils
of Nikolay Ivanovich inevitably take prise places. teacher 3.1. Denidenkov
generously shares his experience with his colleagues ad is the director of
the rayon nethodologicel association.

Among the renerkable nesoere of pedagogic work. we with full right include
ﬂoscow representatives-WA). Sidorova, a history teacher of School No 620 of
Volgogradskiy Rayon, 0.1. Koloakovs. a netheaatics teacher at School No 59 of
Tushinskiy Rayon, 8.1. Galaktionova, a teacher of elenentary classes at
School No 906 of Krasnogvardeyskiy Rayon. A.I. Ivanov. a teacher of history at
Voerozhdenicheskaye School of Koloanskiy Rayon of lbscow Ohlast, LII. Vasil‘-
yeva, a cheaistry teacher at hedvesh'ye-Oaarskays Secondary School of Shchel-
kovskiy Rayon, Deputy of the 38183 Supreae Soviet NJ. Zakharova, director of
Nikonovskeya Secondary School of Baasnskiy Rayon and nay others. In the front
ranks of our teachers, duo give all their energies, knowledge ad ability to
the cause of teaching and comist upbringing of the rising generation, there
stand thousands of teachers. who adorn the Soviet school ad nultiply its
achienants as the nest deaocratic. accessible and huae in world practice.

’0! OFFICIAL US! 0111.?
UV‘ USU‘U“ 00“ m‘

The successes of the Soviet school ere first end tore-0st due to perty guidence.
In the decisions of the CPSU Centrel Co-ittee and in the works of LJ. Brezh-
nev, personnel of the Soviet educstionel systen (ind both inspiring idees and
plans of concrete action. Percy co-ittses devote constsntly growing ettention
to the ceuse of educstion. lbs school would bsve been uneble to solve neny of
its problems if it did not depend on the sesistence of operstionel orzens.
trade-union end koseonol organisetiae. parents did the public; tbouends upon
thousands of people, enriched with life experience, teke pert in school ettsirs.
'reechsrs end the public educetionel personnel of our country, es ell the Soviet
people, inspired by the decisions of the 26th 080 Congress. persistently end
deterninedly work on the iqlsnentetion of the perty's pleas, end there is no

common: 'Sovetekeys pedegoaike”, 1982

7697
C80: 1828/56

8

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
PROBLEM OF INTERACTION 0P PAKILY, CULTURE

Moscow SWA PM in Russia No 1, Jan 82 pp 14-19
[Article by LG. Khsrchsv: ”The Panily and Culture")

successes and the tremendous difficulties of building comnisn in our country.
Considerable danage to the Soviet fonily was inflicted in particular by the
consequences of the war, the large losses of the Isle population, trenendous
destruction or housing and economic difficulties. The inertia of individual
consciousness nd its lag behind being are nost strongly nanifested in the
personal life of people; it is less accessible than other spheres of huaan
activity to social regulation and control.

which follow fro- ita nature. The chief result of. these changes is the weak-
ening or the influence of cultural notes on intinate life, utilization of the

tion of vonsn. A well-known Antican feninist, Ellen Peck, energetically pro-
pagandises, tor eagle. a "meant of nonparents," that is intended in her
words to tree the vonan iron the “lost cardinal source of her inequality”-
children. Such noods are mituted in attespts to consider professional ac»
tivity as a kind of antithesis to neurnity,as a note inportant fora of its

The bourgeois alienation of relations bemen the sexes finds expression
in the so-callad aeml revolution, propagandited in ultrsleft literature as a
'bdern alternative" to the traditional fanny, a radical' expression of

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"freedom of the individual." The "aamal revolution" is a typical angle of
ideological nimicry.

As K. Marx wrote, "the aninal is naturally identical with his life activity....
Man sakes his own life activity I: object of his will and his consciousness.
His life activity is a conscious one“ (Han, K.and Engels, L, "I: rannikh pro-
irvadeniy" [Iron Early works], bacon, 1956, p 565). Consequently, the well-
known expression "he behaves like an animal“ has only utaphoric leaning. Bu-
nan behavior, right to the satisfaction of his natural vital needs, is condi-
tioned by social factors. In nature there is nothing base, as everything in it
is natural. Violation of the natural is only possible to nan. And no setter
how vile a bean act nsy be, behind it, in the final analysis, these or these
social circumstances are to be found. 0n the other had, there is nothing in
human behavior which directly stem fron material production in whose condi-
tions the individual lives and develops. Everything is nediated by the con-
sciousness and is connected through the type of culture to production relations.
Private ownership of the sons of production is not sinly extrapolated for the
relations of the sexes, as theoreticians of "freedoa of love" assume but direct-

1y influences these relations, forning a consular psychology and abeolutizing
its role in notives of behavior. ‘

The initiators of Her-nan, criticising attants continuing today to usoeiats
this "fr-sedan" with the co-unist nova-ant, have qualified than as "vulgar,"
"crude" col-uni“. Relations between man and woman reflect in their develop-
nent not econonic changes by theaselves but social progress as a whole; conse-
quently, it is possible to judge on the basis of these relations the charac-
ter of spiritual culture and the level of aoral naturity of society and nan.

The alienation of relations of the semen fron outstanding aural traditions
and iron spiritual-esthetic principles is frequently justified by references to
fashion. As a cultural phenomenon, fashion is the synthesis of social note and
the desire of the individual for self-expression and the self-affirmation of
his individual tastes. Fashion stens iron the ideas of society concerning
hunan beauty, honor, dignity, manliness, wonanlineas. But influence is also
exerted on it by elenents of the ease psyche and the desire not to repeat that
which has becons a standard. "Grimac'es of fashion" are neat frequently dis-
played at this level.

Fashion is one of. the laws of human behavior, a mans of regulating certain
relations anong individuals. But there are spheres of human relations to
which fashion is not subordinated. Among than are to be found the intimate
relations between nan and wonan, maternity, paternity. A norally healthy per-
son will never pernit into this holy of holies ”legislators" fron the outside.
Real love dictates to people its own loge of behavior. for this reason,
fashion perverts and coarsens sexual behavior not by itself but in interaction
with noral feelings and esthetic taste, with the inability for real love.

K. Marx wrote of the richness of the hunan psyche as a soot inortant quality
of social behavior, having in nind "such feelings which are capable of hnnsn
enjoyment and which assert the-selves as huaan essential forces" (Marx, K. and
Engels, P., Ibiden, p 593). Ila included among them love, eqhasising that in
distinction to instinct it has a spiritual, moral-esthetic character.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The need for love is far free the equivalent of sexual need. It has its
origin in the whole structure of the individual, his interest, smathies,
tastes and value orientations. the persistence and stability of these con-
ponents sake love constant, resoving the difference between the conjugal state
and narriage. Under the conditions of socialiu, freedon of love is actually

the equivalent of freedoe of ssrriage and does not oppose responsibility but
rather supports it.

The social changes carried out in our country have led to the rejection by
young people of the system of values found in prerevolutionary hssix. connected
with relations between the sexes: subordination and subdssiveness, identifi-
cation of carriage with childbearing and the advantages of a sparse in setters
connected with ownership and inheritnce of private property. hang the notives
determining relations, the forefront is occupied by such values of world noral
culture inherited and developed by socialist hunanisn as love, fidelity, re-
sponsibility, honor and dignity of the individual. One of the chief values of
socialist society is the Easily and the specific enstional atnosphere created by
it. The data of a nusber of surveys of persons entering into narriage show that
the decisive factor in the adoption of a decision on sarriage is love and con-
nunity of interests of the future narried couple (see: Kharchev, 1M). and
Hatskovskiy, 11.5., "Sovrenennaya sea'ya i yeye probleny" [The Contenorary Pan-
ily and its Problem], Moscow, 1978, p 87). The social value of the fa-ily is
identified with its educational function, with the role of the fully collec-
tive in the developnent of the individual. -

According to the data of a survey once-passing about one thousnd workers of
industrial enterprises, sovkhores and kolkhoses of Vladinirskaya (blast, the
educational effect of different social factors was named in the following order:
(1) fsnily; (2) school and ease intonation sedia; (3) public organisations,
labor collectives. coarades and friends; (6) self-education; (5) literature and
art. Preference for the family over other social factors was also provided by
persons surveyed by staff workers of the sector of problem of mint educa-
tion of the ISI [expansion unknown] of the USSR Acade-y of Sciences; these were
students of “12's and of tekhnikuu (1,669 replies were received). The persons
surveyed usually relate a large part of their good points and defects to f-ily
upbringing. Such an assessnent is an eloquent confirsation of the conclusion
of Soviet scientists that the fully is a necessary and deeply specific cowo-
nent of socialisation of children. In this process, the child interacts at
least with four groups of factors, each of which significantly affects the
for-nation of its personality—influence of the social environ-ant, activity,
upbringing ad self-education.

The fanily as II i-ediate social surrounding possesses nasisal possibilities
for gradual fuiliarisation of children with social values and roles and the
introduction of the child to the large and coqlex social world.

In a socialist society, the fanily's educational potential is significantly
strengthened by the antagonist arising free private ownership between the per-
sonal and social interests and tendencies of ”self-isolation of the fully.”
In its net general fora, this potential cm be described as a aggregate of
factors nan-ally favoring the estélishnent and develop-ant of the individual.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ova. v.0-..“ .-- opus-o

The chief of then are: the specifically intinats. trusting character of the
noral and psychological clinate of the fanily: the presence in it not only of
a “horizontal" but also of a “vertical" (vith respect to age) contact that
plays a decisive role in the intellectual developnent of children: the my-
sidednesa of its educational influence. One nay agree with the conclusion of

Activity as a conponent of the educational process is present in the flaily in
the tors of play and household labor. Play in the eyes of a child is identical
with his life activity and is an effective pedagogic scans of the develop-ant

tions, how to inculcate in than the taste for occupational activity. albeit in
its nore simple fem. Sociological studies show that in the solution of this
problem certain faniliea are only in the initial stage; parents even doubt the
practicality of familiarizing children with any fora of feasible labor. Thus,
according to the data of a study carried out by the sector of social problens
of fanily and node of life of the 181 of the 0888 Acedew of Sciences, in 1980
only 56 percent of hoacov schoolhoys and 70 percent of schoolgirls have parla-
nent household duties; the great najority of parents (92 percent) consider

that teenagers should ayatenetically tats part in household labor, but far

from everyone achieves the realization of this preacription. Only a little

note than half of the surveyed echoolhoya (57 percent) replied that they have

agreed to give lo-S hours a week of their free tine for paid occupational labor
(at the post office, at a store and so forth).

The desire to participate in such labor does not depend on the natarial posi-
tion of the fanily, as one night expect, but on the labor activity of the
schoolboy in work at hon (a direct dependence). Youngsters of L'~l7 years of
age need noney (even if only for entertain-ant), and their refusal of paid
work can be qualified as a device for "seeking" noney tron parents, for ”get-
ting" it some other way. what doeo the idea of spread of paid labor of

school children provide for education? ”First, a schoolboy will feel that his
labor is indeed useful. Second, even if it not he for long, let hin star in

the worker's pot. And third. he will get a concrete lesson of a respectful

12
1’08 OFFICIAL US! MY
attitude toward the labor ruble“ (Aliyev, ‘r.A., ”tomrwaiye aktivnoy shir-
nennoy poritaii: opyt i aktual'nyye problesy nrsvotvcnnogo vospitaniya” [The
Porsation of a Active Life Position: Experience ad Actual Problem of Moral
Upbringing], lioscow, 1979, p 37).

Frequently, not uithout the influence of the parents, the attitude tovard le-
hor ssong school children in say cases is fond to be selective: acknowledg-
ing "creative,” ”prestigious“ occupations, they consider any other work to he
sosevhst degrading. this in point of feet bourgeois position even affects
interpersonal relations in clue. ad the selection of conrades for leisure
hours. Mdsntly putting into operation reserves of the labor upbringing of
school children requires a significant rise of the cultural level of a sipif-
icant nusber of fasilies, since there is not nor can there he a socialist cul-
ture without a respect for labor, "...no setter how dirty and difficult it
“sh: basses. (m. Vole ”P013. .Obre .Me” [mlcta 00110ch of mm].
Vol bl, p 318). The fact is that labor is a for-s of serving society, the cause

of MCI, a seat durable tie connecting see with the society that has given
rise to his and fostered his.

Labor activity is a sost effective seans of for-sing in san feelings of citizen-
ship, responsibility—the first and chief elesent of ell other social value-
and initiative, without which he, in turn, is unable to develop the capacity
for creativity and perception of life ad the labor process of culture. for
this reason only a really active participation in the affairs of the faily
and then school ad the production collective ensures san'e integration with
society and his trasforsstion into a socially active, creative individual.

In a proper organisation of the activity of the child lies the chief stisulus
for enrich-ant of knowledge ad the developmt and satsifaction of soral and
esthetic requiresents, that is, for self-education. Orientation toward self-
educstion predetersines the relation of the child and youngster to educational
efforts of the parents, their personal exasple, school study, sass infer-nation
and propagads.

The educational activity of the fasily, its purposeful influence a: the child
by its sdult sesbers constitute essentially only one cosmonaut of a dynssic
systes effecting the forcing personality. Social existence and spiritual
values are apprehended by the child a a role not directly but through the prism
of fasily relations, prescriptions, orientations and way of life of the faily-
Depending on the psychological clisate. this influence can be "broken down"
into the verbal and real level, collieiorshetueen which sharply reduce the
effectiveness of upbringing even in socially happy failies, not to speak of
dieorganised ones. Such collisions could include not only contradiction be-
tween statesent and action, word and deed, but even the presence of ”forbidden
tones” in actual dealings asong adasrs of the faily, which forces the child
to look for other sources of inforsstion.

Such prohibitions can he the consequences or realisation by people of their
incospetence with respect to these or those questions or a lack of correspond-
ence of certain aspects of fasily life with a soral (or sosstisss even a legal)
nors or a fellacious pedagogic idea of what a child should or should not know.
Particularly widespread—and in this sense pedagogically pertinent—is the
last nased circuutance. The accelerated developsent of children- ii ‘a" (Te?

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
that is not only physiological but also psychological. The accessibility for
children of the neat diverse information stimulates their intellectual natura-
tion, which also neans the need for knowledge. In regard to children there is
often observed. a reverse. tendency: the latest are too long considered little
for the purpose of knowing nore about life than the parents theaselves knew at
the sane age. hereover, the older generation usually soeewhat partially assess-
es its own ignorance; actual incorrectness is to be found in the given
comparison.

The nost iqressive end saturating infornation is visual. ‘i'he pretelevision
generations of children differ significantly free the present generation: their
visual knowledge of the world was inconparably nore limited and the effect of
a lag in explanation and cowrehension of ever new iqmassions reaching due
awareness of the child was nanifested less acutely. At the present tine, the
role of the family is growing as the authority explaining and adding to the
infornation already received by the child. And it should be said outright here
that silence here would be nore harnful than my confidential candor.

Any intonation strives, as it were, for consu-ation. If a f-ily does not re-
ward this striving and does not use it in the interest of education, the child.
especially in the adolescent period, looks for and finds other groups for ex-
change of perception and colprehension of life experience. A significantly
greater interest in such mutual perception and coqrehension exists than in
adults-«his is one of the features of children's and adolescents' understand-
ing of life and culture. The effectiveness of both fanily and school education
depends to a significant degree on how accessible to social regulation and
control such an important element as_inforsal contacts is in nels'Hig'tha con-
nection of the child to the cultural values of society.

with respect to infernal groups, the understanding of social regulation and
control acquiresan especially specific leaning. It is a question of serial
use of the leisure tins of ‘youngsters in'the inte‘rest'of educatiin, of organ-
ization of children's clubs and wider involve-ant of the public in work with
children where they live. To prevent such work possessing the character of a
brief campaign, it should be directed by staff pedagog-organisers.

The realization of the social possibilities of inforsal contacts acquires a
special iI-ediacy in connection with the weakening—fro- intensification of the
process of urbanization—of the systen of external. visual public control and
also because of growth of divorces and oonsequntly because of a increase in
the nuaber of children with respect to when the educational potential of the
fanily is realized far fron conpletely. But we are far free the thought that
infernal contacts of children, even with the best possible organisation of then.
can conpensate for the losses which our society bears because of the growth of
the wave of divorces. The more science knows of the treundous and deeply spe-
cific possibilities of the fanily as a factor in the foreation and develop-ant
of the personality, the larger do these losses appear. School education, which
formerly had a decisive aignificmcs in "spiritual production," has today been
transforned into only one of its aspects. These changes increase still sore
the influence of the fanily on the cultural developsent of the individual. as
it is here in particular that a foundation is laid for those feelings, value
orientations, ideas. which then begin to fulfill the functions of criteria“

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
selection of intonation and of preference of son of these for. and sources
'20 others and so on.

Family upbringing hes a neat breed and practically dlqenconpassing range; it

in not reduced to didactic suggestion but includes ell {one of influence on
the toning personality: contacts end direct coalition, lehor end the personal
exenple of those sround hin, eveluation of reel behavior, reverd end punishment.
It can he acid that the develop-eat of the child is orgmically written into the
life activity of the fenily. This educational activity is distinguished by
neximn diversity and includes feniliariaetion with culture through television.
radio, prom, hooks end the like. Such perception is nediated hy the psycholog-
ical etnosphere of the fenily group; it is connected with the desire for com-
ity of reection, for exchmge of opinions.

13‘. this nenner culture is aaeinilated by were of the tenily, especielly by
children of the youngest age, through the prise of already existent isnily tre-
ditions. this is why the ideological-educational activity of society oust be
oriented not only toward the individual but toward the fenily en a whole. Re-
elizetion of the directives of. the 26th CPS!) Congress, sined et further raising
the well-being end culture of the people and at strengthening of the family,
will increase still nore its role in the solution of both econonic-desogrephic
and cultural-ideological tsske todsy facing Soviet society.

COPYRIGHT: "Sovetskeya pedagogika". 1982

7697
C80: 1828/57

15

FOB. omcm. US! MY
PBRI-‘EC‘I'ING ORGANIZATION OF ENCATIONTN ”PSI NMOIBMOZBH 70?!!!
Moscow SOVETSKAYA PBDAGOGIKA in Russia No 1, Jan 82 pp 56-57

[Article by v.6. Aronatov]

[Text] The inrovensnt of the organization and planning of public education
is a continuous process that is conditioned to a significant degree by social-
econonic demographic, cultural and pedagogic organisational factors. The ex-
tent of influence of each of them depends on the total aggregate of local con-
ditions. For the Nonchernosen Zone of the 1!st (a territory of 2,824,000
square kiloneters), its specific character is determined by: shallow contours
and dispersion of fields; presence of acidic and water-legged soils with a
small content of nutritive substmcea; insufficient concentration and special-
ization of agricultural production; existence of a large nutter of small resi-
dential centers and their dispersion. Overcoming of the lag of agricultural
production nade necessary the development of a complex progra- that was formu-
lated in a decree of the CPSU Central Co-ittee and the USSR Comcil of hinis-
ters "0n lieasunas tor the Further development of Agriculture of the Noncherno-
zen Zone of the RSPSR" (1974). The decree specified three ways for the real-
ization of this programs for the period to 1990: couples land iaproveasnt,
specialization and concentration of agricultural production, iaproveaent of
rural social-everyday and cultural construction. Eventually, cardinal changes
are expected in the econony and allocation of the region's inhabitants. includ-
ing a significant reorganisation of the econony as a whole.

Fulfillment of the program of agricultural develop-ant of the Nonchernosen
Zone requires a significant rise in the general educational and vocational
level of rural workers. An iuportant role in this belongs to educational in-
stitutions called upon to carry out universal obligatory secondary education,
especially in rural general educational schools. An analysis of the present
state of the school netvork in rural areas of the RSPSR Nonchernosen Zone
showed that it is constantly being isproved. but as yet there has been no
qualitative change. Despite the fact that the total number of rural schools
is not being reduced, they still renain stall, and this inevitably results in
a number of serious consequences: it is responsible, on the one hand. for a
lowering of the quality of knowledge of the students and, on the other, for
the retention of a relatively high level of expenditures for the obtaining of
an education. Such a situation must be overcome on the basis of a reorganisa-
tion of the sone'a economy and improveaant of organisation of public education

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the next 15 years. Experience, however, shows that the solution of this
problem would be practically impossible solely through the ilprovelaent of the
network of general educational schools; the further rise of the country's na-
tional economy outlined by the party and the govern-ant is cost closely con-
nected with the question of all young people obtaining an obligatory secondary
education. For this reason, a sost inortant problen at the present tins is
continued improvement of the network of both rural general educational schools
and other educational institutions (vocational-technical schools, tekhnikuns)
under the conditions of a reorganization of the economy of the Nonchernozen
Zone. For this purpose, rcgionalisation of this territory into three subsones
was carried out, the basis of this being natural-geographic, economic, demo-
graphic, national and pedagogic organisational factors.

The first subzone includes: Chuvashskaya assn, Moscow, Leningrad, Bryanskaya,
Vladimirskaya, Gor'kovsltaya, Ivanovsksys, Kaliningrsdskaya, Pernskaya, Tu1'-
skaya and Yaroslavskaya oblasts, the territory of which comprises 25 percent

of the Nonchernozen Zone (706 .000 square kiloseters). There has. cone into
being here a mltisectorial economic complex with stable specialization. The
subsone is distinguished by a high level of industrialisation; about 60 percent
of all persons engaged in the sphere of uterial production in it belong to
industry. In agriculture, animal husbandry prevails. In farming, potato grow-
ing and fruit growing are the most developed. This subzone is characterized
by high density of the population—two-thirds of the zone's entire population
live in it. It is also characterized by intensive development and settle-ant
of the land, rapid concentration or rural inhabitants in central settlenents

of kolkhozes and sovkhoses (the average size of a residential center in 1980
was 130 persons). The network of educational institutions is distinguished bv
big enrollment and good organization of pupil transportation. Thus during the
1979/80 school year, the average enrollment of. rural general educational
schools in this group of districts was: elesentary school—18. 8-year school-
130. secondary “hook—355 pupils. For 98.2 percent of the school children
living at a distance of note than 3 kn from school, regular transportation has
been organized. It is the prevailing for- of. providing accessability to school
for the territory. The average enrollment of vocational-technical schools was
680 pupils, rural vocational-tedmical schools-400 persons, secondary special-
ized institutions-4,120 persons and rural tekhnikuns—990 pupils.

The second subrone includes: Hariyskaya, Mordovskaya and Udnurtskaya assn.
Kaluzhskaya, Kalininskaya, Smolenskays, Pskovskaya, Novgorodskeys, Vologod-
skays, Kostronskayn, Kirovsksys, Orlovsltaya. Ryasanskays and Sverdlovskaya
oblasts. Industry plays a ssaller role in the economic conplex of this sub-
zone than in the first subsone. Its share of the total number of workers en-
ployed in the sphere of material production does not exceed two-fifths of the
indicated subsone. Agriculture is of a sectorial character, but without clear-
ly expressed specialization and concentration of agricultural production.
This subtone is characterized by somewhat larger territory (7210,000 square
kilometers) than the first and but 2.3-io1d snallsr population size (average
size of a populated place in 1980 was 110-115 persons). It is characterised
by moderate develop-ant and settlement of the land. Small schools predominate
here with an average enrollment which in the 1979/80 scbol year was in ele-
nentary school—l3, 8-year school-~110 and secondary school-325 pupils. The

17-

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Un vrs'svuu. yen. um...

average enrollment of vocational-technical schools is 1036 pupils, rural voca-
tional schools-460 individuals, secondary specialised educational institutions
«830 persons. agricultural tekhnikuu—OOO pupils. A weak link in the school
network is the existence of small elementary and 8-year schools and in the net-
work of vocational-technical schools—vocational-tedmical schools that do not
provide a secondary education. The chief form of access to school in the ter-
ritory is organized transportation of pupils and preschool boarding schools
arrangenents.

The third subaone includes: Karel'skaya and Koni assa, Arkhangel'skaya and
l-mmanskaya oblasts; their territories nake up about half of the entire area
of the zone (about 1,400,000 square kilometers). The chief direction of de-
velopnent of the productive forces of this subsone is developnent of natural
wealth: nineral-raw material, fuel-power, forest and water. Growth possibil-
ities and agricultural developmnt are limited because of severe, unfavorable
natural-climatic conditions. This subsone is characterised by slow settlement
and considerable migration and movement of the population and its low density.
The population is nainly concentrated in the larger populated places (the
average size of a populated place in 1980 was 200 persons). For this reason
the network of educational institutions is distinguished free the first two
subzones by 1 larger enrollment of rural general educational schools and inad-
equate development of secondary educational institutions. The average enroll-
ment of rural schools during the 1979/80 school year was: elenentary school—l9,
8-year school-455 and secondary-4:34 pupils. The chief form of school ac-
cess in the territory is preschool boarding schools. The average enrollment
of vocational-technical schools was 120 persons, rural vocational-technical
schools-310. secondary specialised educational institutions—980 and rural
tekhnikuns—ISO pupils. A differentiated approach is required for the organ-
ization of public education and long-tern planning of the school network and
other educational institutions depending on the special features of the sub-
zones and individual areas.

One of the directions of inproving the organization of public education in

the rural localities of the Nonchernorem Zone is development of a network of
schools of the optimal type and the establishment for then of the moat ped-
agogicslly advantageous structures. The researches of school specialists

0].". Dnitriyev, HJ. Kondakov, AM. Novikov, v.5. Selivanov and others) have
established that that structure of the general educational school is optimal
which makes it possible to correctly place pedagogic cadres and to provide an
established educational-training load for all pupils and the scientific organ-
ization of their labor; it contributes to the achievenent of the best organi-
zation of the pedagogic process and its high results as well as the isprovenent
of the economic indicators of school education. With the present teaching
plan and with the class-lesson system of organisation of the teaching process
and prescribed class enrollment, optimal school structures should he considered
three-complcmnt [trekhcomplektnyye] elenentary schools. 8-year and secondary
schools in a composition of three parallels loch-8th. 4th-lOth(llth)-year class-
es and three or nore lst-3rd-year classes.

The rural secondary general educational school has assumed a solid place in
the system of functioning types of general educational schools. Their network

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Nonchernosea Zone in cowarison to other types of general educational '
schools is quantitatively not large—15.1 percent, but the quantity of pupils
in then conprises 53.9 percent (by our calculations). The optinslity of the
secondary school is deternined by it's big role in the social developnnt of

the countryside. The secondary school pronotes growth of the educational level
and culture of the rural population. It eaerts a sipificat influence on the
activity of libraries ad sass educational work of rural clubs and does consul-
tation work with the adult populatim in- regard to raising its general educa-
tional level. The secondary sdlool contributes to the econonic developnsnt of
kolkhoees and sovkhoses. More than half of the rural secondary schools of the
Noncheraosen Zone already train pupils of 9th-lOth-year classes as qualified
nachine-Operator workers, aninsl-husbandry workers and field workers. At the
sane tine. in elucidating the causes of nigration of young people fron 'curel
localities, for crawls, in Penovakiy Rayon of Kalininskaya (blast, it was es-
tablished that one of then is to be found in the absence of secondary schools
for a large part of the territory of the rayon (there are only two secondary
schools for the entire rayon). For this reason, the nain portion of the grad-
uates of 8-year schools, in order to continue its education, is obliged to go
to different educational institutions providing secondary education, but lo-
cated outside the limits of the rayon and even the oblast, and, as a rule,

they do not return hone. Consequently, the developnent of secondary schools
in rural localities will contribute to keeping the young people at kolhhozes
and sovkhozes by providing then with the opportunity of obtaining their second-
ary education here.

The optinality of the secondary school is also deter-ined by the fact that it
neets to the greatest possible degree the objects of inproving the organisation
and developing universal conpulsory secondary education of the youth and con-
tributing to sound and planned curtailment of snail elenentary and 8-year
schools. But on the basis of location of the population in connection with the
new econonic and organisational planning of productive forces, we cane to the
conclusion that in the forecast period (to 1990) elenentary schools in the Non-
chemozen Zone will retain their place in the systen of public education (in
this connection it is expected that their structure will be inroved). Calcu-
lations showed that it would be advisable to plan for all the econonic-
geographic subsones (in accordance with the size of school contingents)
intersovkhoz-kolkhos secondary general educational schools. As for the per-
nissibility of nonoptinal types and structures of general educational schools
for the subaones, research shows that in the first subaone, on the basis of the
character of distribution of the population and nunber of inhabitants in settle-
nents, it is necessary to plan in additional to optinal schools two-cowlenent
elencntary schools. 8-year and secondary schools in a nakeup of .two parallels of
ath-Sth-year,loth-9th(llth)-yesr classes. In the second subsone, in addition to .
optimal schools, there would be pernissible one-and-a-half conplenent elensntary
schools and secondary schools without parallels of 4th-8th-yesr classes with two
parallels of 9th-lOth(llth)-year classes. In view of the demographic conditions,
it would be inadvisable to plan 8-year schools in this subsone. It would be possi-
ble to have in the third subzone three-conplenent schools, 8-year schools with two
parallels of 4th-8th-year classes and secondary schools with two-three parallels
of 6th-8th~year classes and two parallels of 9th-lOth(llth)-year classes.

FOR OFFICIAL EB! ONLY
assurance of accessibility of general educational schools in the territory. The
state has established a radius of walking accessibility of 3 Inn for rayons of
elementary schools. For rayons of 8-year and secondary schools, no official de-
cision on radius exists and school accessibility for pupils in the territory
is provided by school regionalisation, free rides of pupils of rural localities
to school and from sch . -l and well-provided dormitories attached to schools
("Osnovy zakonodatel atva Soyuaa 853 i aoyuanykh reepublik o narodnon obrazova-
nii" [Fundamentals of Legislation of the USSR and Union Republics on Public Edu-
cation], Moscow, 1973, p 21). School boarding facilities now occupy a lasting

and to bring the planning and reserves of buildings into accord with the number
of pupils and needs of their node of life. Of inortant significance to pro-
viding accessibility in the territory is organised transportation of pupils
from home to school and back again. Econoeiets have calculated that with the
establishment in 1965 of free transportation of pupils of rural localities to
school and back again, an annual saving of state funds of up to 20 million
rubles has been achieved for the RSFSR (Basov, V., "Certain Questions of the
Economics of Public Education,” ANS! 8882. No 5. 1967. pp 15-19), inasmch
as transportation sakes it possible to reduce a significant nutter of nonpres-
ising elementary schools. Cowarable data were obtained in Kalininskaya Oblast

the zone, determining in then the radius of walking accessibility of the
schools. In this connection, we took into consideration the condition and in-
portance of roads, organization of availability to the schools of special notor
transport directly at the disposal of the school or other organization and, on
the basis of a formula developed by V.A. Zhanin, calculated the ties of noving
the school children from hone to school and back again (see: Zhanin, V.A.,
"Optimizatsiya razneshcheniya seti obshcheobratvovatel'nykh shkol" [Optiniza-
tion of the Distribution of the Network of General Educational Schools], Hos-
cow, 1975, p 100). Calculations showed that the tine of motor transport ac-

-abJ.e number of young men and women do not have a secondary education. For
example, in Kinrskiy, Kashinskiy, Kalyaainekiy, Sonkovskiy. Krasnokholnskiy
and Pcnovskiy rayons of Kslininskaya Oblast 8~lO percent of rural working

youth of up to 20 years of age do not have a secondary education. Study of

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

this problem shows organizational pedagogic reasons pri-arily lie at the basis
of negative features in the operation of evening (shift) general educational
schools. The fact is that existing conditions of operation of evening (shift)
schools with conpulsory attendance of classes 4-5 tines a week do not take into
account the real possibilities of working youth. In rural localities, educa-
tion of the youth is hindered by the remoteness of evening (shift) schools from
place of residence for a significant portion of the students, a shortage of
evening classes at day schools, lack of develop-nut of correspondence schools
and education consultation centers and also the seasonal character of the la-
bor of workers of agricultural production who study. For the purpose of ir
proving the education of working youth at evening (shift) and correspondence
schools and overcoming existing difficulties, it is first of all necessary to
create optinal organisational conditions of study, which would nexinally take
into consideration the interests and possibilities of the students, the specif-
ic character of their production activity, living conditions and the budgeting
of their spare time. The network of intraaural and correspondence education

of the working youth nust be oriented toward nexinal proximity of corre-
spondence and evening schools to enterprises and a codination of study of the
fundamentals of the sciences with improvement of qualifications.

khoaes and sovhhoses. It is essential to have in each rayon a correspondence
school with affiliates (education consultation centers) at each secondary
general-educational school. In the second subsone, which has cowared to the
first a relatively low population density (23 persons per square kilo-eter),
it would be advisable to plan per rayon one-two evening (shift) schools, a
correspondence school with groups (of not less than 9 persons) and affiliates
(education consultation centers) at each day secondary general educational
school. In the third subsone, which has together with low population density
(4 persons per square kilometer) large population places, it would be advisable
to plan at each secondary day school classes ad groups of working youth (of
not less than 25 persons) with a correspondence for: of study. lhere where no
possibility exists for the creation of such classes and groups, it would be
possible to have education consultation centers. At the sauna tine, it should
be emphasised that in accordance with the plan of develop-ant of public educa-

Together with general educational schools, a significant contribution to the
attainwent of universal compulsory secondary education is node by secondary
vocational-technical schools and secondary specialised educational institu-
tions, which have sins and tasks in con-on with secondary schools in the ful-
‘fillnent of a provision node by the USSR Constitution of providing youth with
universal compulsory education and training then for socially useful and

21

MOWMONLY
e9“ valssyuw ~u~ vaeus

productive labor. In 19w, as provided by the program for develop-eat of the
Nonchernosen Zone, the training of qualified workers solely within the system
of the RSPSR State Committee for Vocational and Technical Education has reached
120,000 persons a year. But the nework of vocational-technical schools and
secondary specialized educational institutions was formed here without adequate
consideration of the needs of the national economy for qualified cadres of
agricultural production workers and middle-echelon specialists. host of the
zone‘s rayons do not have such educational institutions. For the purpose of
rational distribution of vocational-technical schools and secondary specialized
educational institutions while taking into account the requirenents of the
economies of the zone's republics, oblasts and rayons for training of workers
for agricultural production and of niddle-echelon specialists, they must be
improved. Let us examine certain possibilities of their further inprovenent.

In rayons of social-econonic and cultural developnsnt of the first subsone,
there was already provided in 1980 a sipificant volume of construction of pub-
lic education facilities. Thus, for crawls, solely through the seals of state
capital investment more than 280,000 places have been made available. Output
of qualified workers for agriculture in the systen of vocational-technical
schools has increased to a yearly 50.000. The USSR State Cot-ittee for _Voca-
tional and Technical Education proposes that each administrative rayon have one
rural vocational-technical school. Analysis of these secondary specialized -
educational institutions of this subsone shows that they do not provide for

the training of a sufficient nudper of specialists for new sectors of the econ-
ony, that is, such persons as technicians for hydroeelioration, mechanization
and electrification of animal husbandry. construction and operation of notor
highways and so forth. Calculations for ﬁddle-echelon cadres confire the con-
clusion that this problem can be solved without an increase in the amber of
specialized educational institutions by opening in then new divisions for
training middle-echelon specialists for the most needed agricultural vocations.

Certain measures have been specified for the further development of educational
and training institutions in rural localities of the second subsone. Thus, the
general growth of construction of public-education facilities in it during
1975-1980 with state capital investment conprised about 300,000 places. Local
soviets plan to increase the output of qualified agricultural workers for this
subaone within the system of vocational-technical schools to 60,000-65,000
annually. Calculations for the network of vocational-technical schools and
secondary specialised educational institutions up to 1990, based on a f. :ecast
of the RSI-‘SR State Committee for Vocational and Technical Education, shtw that
it is necessary to increase here the number of rural vocational-technical
schools to 2-3 per rayon; it would also be advisable to have on the base of
each farm an educational course center for raising the class level of nachine
operators and animal-husbandry workers. Prospects for the developnent of the
productive forces of the third aubsone to 1990. aside fron orientation toward
development of natural wealth. propose in an agricultural oblast to take steps
for increasing and expanding reindeer breeding. fishery and hunting operations.
In accordance with this there will have to be built a network of vocational-
technical schools and secondary specialised educational institutions.

22 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

The fulfillment of the entire complex of enumerated unsure: will contribute to
the satisfaction of the requirenenta of the economy of each aubzone and the

Nonchernozem Zone as a whole for cadres of workers and second-echelon
specialists.

COPYRIGHT: "Sovetskaya pedagogika”, 1982

7697
(:80: 1828/58

23.

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DEHWRAPﬂY

LEGAL REGULATION 0? 0900mm PROCESSES DISCUSSED

Moscow PRAVO I DMRAFICHESKIY PRO'ISBSSY V 8588 in Russian 1981 pp 1. 200,

30-35, 40-61. 68-49. 62-63, 65-67, 11(0-115

[Title page. table of contents, and selected passages from book "Law and Demo-

graphic Processes in the USSR" by Galina Il'inichna Litvinova, Izdatel'etvo

"Nauka", 3,100 copies. 200 pages]

[Text] Pravo i Denograficheskiye Protsessy v 8883 (Law and Demographic

Processes in the USSR)

Signed to press: 25 August 1981

Number of copies: 3,100
Pages: 200

Table of Contents

In!r0duct10n....o..o.._......oa...........

Chapter 1. Law and Demographic Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. The Origin and Develop-ant of Ideas on Controlling Population
2. Methods of State and Legal Influence on Demographic Processes
3. Demographic Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. State and Legal Influence on the Birth Rate
1. Controlling the Level of the Birth Rate: the Historical Aspect

sense...

2. Causes and Consequences of the Decline in the Birth Bate . . . .
3. Legal Influence on the Birth Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6. Social-Legal Status of women and the Birth Rate

Chapter 3. The Role of the State and Law in Increasing Longevity and
Reducing the Mortality Rate . . . . . . . . . . .

l. The Right to Preservation of Health and Social Security

2. The Human Right toallealthy Environment . . . . . . . .

Chapter 6. Migration and Labor Resources . . . .
1. Control of Migration . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Legal Influence on Labor Resources . . . .

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

FOR‘OFFICLAL lEﬂE(NVLY

eeeeeee

0....

cove.

16
24

37
37
63
51
81

103
103
122

137
137
155

185
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Refinement of legislation. which developed broadly in connection with adop-

tion of the new constitutions of the USSR and the republics, cannot be done
without rigorous consideration of the demographic situation that has come about
in both the USSR as a whole and in each particular Union and autonomous republic,
oblast, and tray. Many legal norms that affect demographic processes were
adopted 30-40 years ago when the demographic situation in the comtry was dif-
ferent, and they now need to be updated. Demographic correlations have not yet
been fully reflected in legislation. Specifically, the relationships discovered
by researchers between the level of the birthrate and satisfaction with housing
conditions is still not fully considered by housing legislation.

Legal support for demographic policy presupposes the following:

- determination of the place of law in the syste- of other
(nonlegal) measures to influence the demographic behavior
of citizens; interdependence of legal methods of influence

and others (economic, psychological, and the like);

— adequate reflection in the law of the requirements of op-
timal influence on demographic processes;

- a well—founded selection of concrete forms of legal enact-
seats to influence particular demographic processes;

— the elimination of "gaps" in legal influence on specific
demographic processes;

- as Inch as possible, giving nondemographic legal norms a
dengraphic character;

- refining the form of legal regulation (passing laws in-
stead of adopting decrees and so on).

Consideration of these criteria by Soviet legislation will promote efficient
demographic policy.

It should be kept in mind that the potential for legal (just as econodc,
medical. and the like) influence on demographic processes is not unlimited.
ior example. with respect to influencing the birth rate the law is not all-
powerful, and this is even more true of the mortality rate. In the first

stage, it appears, we can only speak of preventing a trend toward decline in the
birth ratein certain regions and the growth of the mortality rate in certain

age groups .

Legal influence on demographic processes may be either direct and planned (for
exasple. banning abortions by law influences the level of the birth rate, while
legislation opening up new regions to development and giving privileges to
settlers there influence the direction and vigor of migratory streams) and in- .
direct, mediated by nonlegal relationships, for crawls economic, psychological,

25.

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MOFHCIALUSEONLY

and moral relationships.* It must he considered that this is an arbitrary di-
vision and that the realization and degree of effectiveness of legal norms
depend on the level of sophistication, the extent of female labor. historical,
ethnic, and moral factors, and the like. Sometime these factors can nullify
the impact of particular legal norm on the demgraphic behavior of the citi-
zens, especially with respect to migration processes and the birth rate. There-
fore, the degree of influence of a particular legal norm on a concrete demo-
graphic process cannot always be established with sufficient accuracy.

The effect of various legal norm on demographic processes is an interdependent
and interrelated phenomenon, just as the demographic processes theaselves are
interdependent and interrelated. A change in the course of one process is usu-
ally reflected in the course of others. and steps aimed at imroving certain
demographic characteristics can have a negative effect on others. Thus, the
active migratory flows of young people from the rural regions of the RSPSR to
the cities help supply labor resources to fast-developing industry, and at the
same time led to an "erosion" of the reproductive strata of the rural population.

It has been established that there are conflicts not only between the trend
toward population concentration in large cities and changes in the age structure
of the rural population, but also between other processes, in particular between
the tendency toward maxim involvement of woman in public production and the
birth rate. The horns of constitutional, labor, and other fields of law which
envision a guaranteed, equal right to labor and wages for men and woman, prov
tection of female labor with due regard for the distinctive characteristics of
the female organism, labor and pension advantages for women, and the like helped
draw women into public production and promoted comprehensive development of the
individual women. But the level of employment of women in the child-bearing
ages in public production has an inverse effect on the level of the birth rate.

The existence of conflicts between trends in the development of demographic
processes demands that any legal enactment intended to stimulate (or discourage)

a particular demographic process be adopted with due regard for the goals and
general lines of demographic policy of the Soviet State, so that the influence

on the particular process promotes optimal development of the aggregate of all
demographic processes.

The growing importance of denographic problem made it essential to work out a
plan for population development as a constituent part of the plan of social
development.

This pattern is reflected in the developmental trend of legislation on planning:
in the transition from plans for development of the national economy to plans

* For example, the mjor advantages in tax policy and state purchases prices and
the faster rates of economic, cultural, and naterial developnent that the

Soviet State gave to certain Union republics to make the peoples more even in
development were one of the reasons for the extremely low rate of dgration

of the rural population in these regions and caused a surplus of labor in
the countryside while it was scarce in the cities.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL use on“

for economic and social develop-est. "Under conditions of mature socialism,"
L. I. Brezhnev esphasises in the Accomtability Report to the 26th congress of
the CPSU, "the interdependence of scononic progress with society's social-
political and cultural progress is' becoming closer and closer. a

The problem of working out criteria for evaluating social and denographic de-
velopment and devising ways to insure coordination and balance in the plan of
denographic development of a republic as a part of the plans for econonic and
social develop-eat of the USSR is becoming a tinely issue.

Working out the basic directions of desographic development end fixing then in
law denands a clear orientation to the final invest: establislnent of a com-
nist type of population develop-ant. As D. I. Valentey observes. this concept
covers may coqonents, each of which list have optimal characteristics from
the standpoint of the long-term interests of society."9

Hex-king out and iwlenenting cowrehenaive, scientifically founded demographic
policy presupposes taung interrelated steps at all levels of the state and

social organise, and this cannot be done without resolving a nder of organiv
sational questions.

Thus, the questions of labor resources, including migration, are under the
authority of the USSR State Co-ittee for Labor and Social Problem and the
labor co-ittees of the Union republics; the questions of improving the status of
women are in the jurisdiction of the standing con-issions on questions of labor
and everyday conditions for women of the Soviets of Peoples Deputies. The

family divisions which have now been established in the encutive co-ittees of
certain city Soviets are expected to play an iqortant part in strengthening

the family. Their working experience deserves generalisation and broad dissed.-
nation. Public organisations can give more help in solving denographic problems;
the potential of these organisations has not been fully used yet. The activities
of all these organisations nust be coordinated and subordinated to attaining
basic denogrsphic objectives.

The ministries and departnents that nanage economic development in their ac-
tivities sonetines not only fail to consider the interests of denogrephic de-
velopment, but act in conflict with then. For exasple, it is co-aon knowledge
that enterprises and depertnsnts whose activities are ultinately evaluated by
volume of output produced do not have an interest in feesle eqloyees who have
three or sore children. because this ukes it nore difficult to fulfill plan
assignments since women with many children are absent fron work for reasons of
illness and child care more often than wonen with no children or one child. but
the state and society as a whole,.as already nentioned, do have an interest in
wide distribution of faniliea with three children.

There nust be a single fully ensured state body to nanage the development of
a comprehensive denographic program and the conduct of denographic policy and
to coordinate the work of all ninistries. departunts, and organisations that

have any influence on danographic processes. Most countries today have such
governsental bodies. They also exist in the socialist countries. It would seen

27. ‘

”NEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wise to establish such a USSR-republic body at the USSR Council of Ministers

and in the Councils Ministers of the Union republics, with a definition of
its objectives, tasks, jurisdiction, and authority. This body could insure

the development of the basic lines of demographic policy and its iaplememta-
tion and work out steps to bring the demographic characteristics of the popula-

tion of different republics closer together. which would help strengthen the
unity of the Soviet people.

and are interdependent require special caution and prudence in adopting legal
norms that influence change in demographic processes. In this respect. the
demographic legislation of the European socialist countries, especially laws
adopted in the late 1960‘s and early 1970's to encourage a higher birth rate

is of great theoretical and practical interest. During this time the birth rate
in most of the European socialist countries rose. But we should realize that
with a clearly defined trend toward decline in the birth rate even a stabilisa-
tion of the level of birth can be viewed as a positive result.

Needless to say. the demographic legislation of the European socialist countries
cannot be mechanically transferred to the USER with its enormous population
which differs sharply by deaographic characteristics both on the regional and
on the ethnic levels. At the sane time. we must not overlook the existence of
many common features in the nature and course of demographic processes. above
all in the area of increasing the economy of population reproduction: because
of the sharp decline in the mortality rate, natural population growth occurs
with a lower birth rate. The existence of common features not only in the
course of demographic processes in the USSR and the other European socialist

The precepts of Islamic law (the Shariat), which determine the family law of
aost of the Eastern countries and until the October Revolution also prevailed
in the territory of Central Asia and parts of the Volga region, Caucasus. and
Crimea, aim at maximum encouragement of large families. According to Islamic
law women without children are the most important reason for divorce and for
taking a second wife. Abortions and any limitations on birth are strictly pro~
hibited. In its operation through the centuries Islamic law, by encouraging
the birth of children, reinforced the tradition of large families which were

supported by the belief that Allah himself takes care of children, who have come
into the world by his will, and will provide them with food.

But Islamic law also contains rules that can lower the birth rate. This refers

above all to polygamy. The Shariat permits Islamic men to have as many as
four legal wives, and this does not count slave-concuhines. Eich Islamic men
have had dozens and even hundreds of concubines. Although the woman in a

polygamist family has less work. which has a positive effect on her health and
may be beneficial for reproduction, polygamy in general has a negative effect

28»

FINIiJFIICJAl.lI§E§(HﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the birth rate. The number of wives in a polygamous family usually in-
creases as the husband grows older and his socioeconomic status inroves.

But men of middle and advanced age are less sexually active.* It should be
observed that polygamy is not the predominant form of marriage in the Islamic
countries. In Iran at the beginning of the 20th Cantu , for examle, five
percent of the population lived in polygamous families. Polygamy today is
prohibited or restricted by special laws in many Islamic countries such as,
Pakistan and Turkey and exists chiefly in concealed form.

Islamic law has certain precepts which can restrict the birth rate even though
they are not directly intended to do so. One of these is "Kaitarma," the
right of parents to keep a married daughter in their own home until the bride-
money for her has been fully paid. The "Ksitsrms" period my be quite long.

Polysndry (having many husbands) as a form of marriage is much more unusual
than polygamy. It was found in Tibet, chiefly among the impoverished strata
of the population, and in the llimslayas and Southern India. The effect of
polyandry on reproductive rate has not been carefully studied. In any case,
there is no data which showed that the birth rate in regions where polysndry

is found is higher than in neighboring regions. At the present time polyandry
has given way to monogamy almost everywhere. In large part this was fostered
by the institution of legal bans on destroying newborn daughters, which miti~
gated the existing disproportion between the sexes.

The widespread belief that the main reason for the decline in the birth rate
the remote consequences of world War II is doubtful.“ This explanation for
the decline in the birth rate is illogical, if for no other reason, because the
birth rate in the last 20 years has become lower and lower, and if we were to
tie its decline to the remote consequences of the war we would have to assume
that the negative consequences of the war are becoming stronger with each
decade of peace. Is there any need to show that this proposition is wrong?

The hypothesis that the consequences of the war are the most important reason
for the decline in the birth ratecan divert attention from the search for the
true causes of this phenomenon and eliminating or mitigating their effect.
Moreover, if we analyze the inset of the remte consequences of the war on the
level of the birth rate. their effect today is more beneficial than negative.

In fact. during the 1970's the generation born in the so-called compensatory
postwar period,“ the period of the peak birth rate after the war, entered the
child-bearing ages, in fact the ages of highest fertility (20-35 years). In
other words, the most numerous generation was in the age of greatest fertility
in the 1970's, which should have led to a growth in the birth rate. Considering
this factor, the current level of the birth rate must be recognised as alarming.

 

* In certain cases polygamy can raise the birth rateby increasing the per-
centsge of married women. Heavy losses of men as the result of war in some
cases forces European peoples to resort to polygamy. In 1650, for example,
after the Thirty Years' War in which many man died, the District Council of
Nuremburg adopted a resolution permitting men to have two wives. See 8.
Heater-ark, "The History of Human Harriage," London, 1925, Vol 3, p 25.

** It has been observed that the birth rate rises sharply after all Imjor wars.
which is the so-cslled compensatory period in which population is restored.

29

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This does not mean that we can deny the negative consequences of the war.
They are enormous, but we should not today see them as the main cause of
the complicated demographic situation.

The marriage rate. and through it the birth rate.depend on the ratio of men
and women living in a particular region. The law is capable of effecting an
improvement in this ratio. It has already been pointed out in the literature
that demographic requirements are often disregarded in planning industrial
enterprises. There appear "cities of girls" where female labor predominates
at the enterprises and "cities of boys." with enterprises using chiefly male
labor.* It would be desirable for legislation on the fundamentals of planning
to provide for this aspect and for the law to contain a requirement of an op-
timal ratio between male and female labor in the commity, city, or region.

The 12 September 1974 decree of the CPSU Central Co-ittee and USSR Council of
Ministers entitled "Further Increasing Material Assistance to Poorly Supported
Families with Children“6 envisioned a monthly grant of 12 rubles a month per
child to families where total per capita income was less than $0 rubles. This
will unquestionably bring the material situation of large and small families
closer together. play a large part in improving conditions for raising children,
and possibly foster a rise in birth rate in certain families. But this applies
mainly to large families.

Let us recall that the average wages of workers and eaployees in the USSR are
more than 160 rubles a month."7 The average wages in a family where the husband
and wife work (almost all able-bodied women in childless and small families
work) are 300 rubles a month. Therefore, a family which has one, two, or even
three children will not receive a grant under this decree. Thus. this decree
mainly inroves the position of large families and will stimulate a further
rise in the birth rate in precisely such families.“

In other words, existing legislation is in fact aimed at encouraging the maxi-
Inn number of children in certain families, whereas the demographic situation
in the country for a long time has dictated the need to direct it to insuring
an optimal number of children in most families. Achievement of this goal will
be promoted by carrying out the'resolutions of the 26th Congress of the CPSU

on institution of an outright grant for the first and second children and a
significant increase in the grant for the third child. The amount of the grant.
100 rubles for the second and third children, is larger than the grants for
other children in the order of birth."8

in the contelporary world large families can hardly be the standard or even the
norm encouraged by the state. In the opinion of demographers. with the decline

 

* Disproportions in the teoyed population by sex are especially pronounced
in small and medium-sized cities. In the RSPSR. for example, there are 70
small and media-sired cities with very high percentages of men in the labor
force. See A. E. Kotlyar and 3. Ya. Turchsnova, "Zanyatost' Zhenshchin v
Proirvodstve" [Employmt of "omen in Production]. Moscow, 1975, p 120.

** The first year of operation of this decree showed that most of the money
spent under it went to regions with high birth rates.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the mortality rate, especially for children, in the 0‘88! and society's orien-
tation toward full development of productive force and coqarehensive develop-
ment of the harm individual, the large family is becoming an outdated demo-
graphic type whose continuance cannot be mccessful and could hardly be desir-
able."9 A woman burdened by 7-10 children cannot become actively involved in
socialist production.* Raising children and caring for them demands 'a great
deal of time. It is difficult to give children in a too-large family the -
opportunity for comprehensive development and upbringing. but the state is in-
terested not just in the nmer of citizens, but also in their quality. The
state does care about the kind of population growth and growth in labor force
under discussion, whether the people are highly trained or not, highly mobile,
and numerous other circmtances (including traditions of large families and
language barriers) linked to a certain region.so

Beginning from the tasks of optimizing demographic processes in the world in
order to avert an ecological crisis and considering that too frequent births
are harmful to the health of both the mother and child,“ in 1975 the 0. ll.
nulmn Rights Conittee adopted a resolution to add to the Declaration of human
Rights a restriction on human rights to reproduction because "the right of a
baby to be born physically and mentally healthy outweighs the right of parents
to reproduction."5

The arguments and studies of demographers which have been cited illustrate once
again the wisdom of using legal, economic, and other levers to encourage the
optimal family with two or three children. It is precisely the birth of the
second child. and especially the third child, that should be encouraged by maxi-
mum benefits and grants.

Because the birth ratein families with high incomes is frequently (but not al-
ways) lower than in families with low incomes, made demographers believe that
raising family income by paying grants for children is hardly likely to raise
the birth rate. But such arguents often confuse cause and effect. One fre-
quently meets families today which put off having children or decide not to
have another child in order to avoid a worsening of their material situation.
Steps which bring the material situation of families with two and three children
closer to those of families with no children or one child will unquestionably
promote a rise in the birth rate in small families. The effectiveness of such
legislation has been tested and confirmed by the experience of other countries,
above all the European socialist countries.

when we are discussing giving material aid to families to raise children. of
course, we must not overlook the fact that the Soviet state as a whole spends
more than many other countries in the world to protect mother and child. The

 

* It appears that A. G. Vishnevshiy is correct when he writes: ”ﬂow can a
wonn be free and equal when she is forced (objectively forced!) to devote
20 years of conscious life to pregnancies, birth. breast-feeding. and the
like? The demographic revolution radically changes the entire life cycle
of the women, and thus creates the key material conditions for her mute
and final social liberation." (See A. G. Vishmevsﬂy, "Demgraficheskays
Revolyutsiya" [The Demographic Revolution], p 233).

31

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

decree of the CPSU Central Connittee and USSR Council of Ministers entitled
"Steps to Strengthen State Aid to Families with Children" envisioned Insuring
allout developnent of the system of nursery schools. daycare centers. extended—
day schools and groups. Pioneer cans, and other sunset institutions in the
11th and 12th five-year plans. The Soviet State asanaes virtually all ex-
penditures for construction and maintenance of children's preschool institu-
tions. sanitsriuas for children. and Pioneer and other health caqs for
children. But as has been correctly noted in the literature. the question
should be raised of restoring its paramount position in direct material aid to
the family for maintenance of children. "This is not just a question of the
prestige of the world's first socialist state.” writes N. G. Yurkevich. "It
is also s question of simple necessity. and at the same time fairness.”3 An
increase in expenditures for public forms of family service is certainly
necessary. but considering that public upbringing nust be conbined with family
upbringing. expenditures by society should be increased in both directions.
harmoniously cowlementing one another.

The strength of marriage and the reproductive goals of the fanily also depend
significantly on provision with housing. The lack of housing and poorly or-
ganized housing create difficulties for the young family which many spouses
did not experience before entering marriage. Fear of these difficulties is
often a reason for refusing to marry. and the encounter with them often leads
to disintegration of the family.

Housing conditions are iuportant not only for deciding whether to get married.
but also for deciding whether to have children. Sociological studies show
that the paramomt reason comelling spouses to decide not to have children or
to postpone then is dissatisfaction with housing conditions. A study done in
Moscow illustrates the relationship between the level of the birth rate and pro-
vision with housing. It showed that there are 29.7 children per 100 women of
child-bearing age living in comaunel apartments; for women of the same age
living in separate apartments there are 32.1 children per 100. In new resi-
dential areas of Moscow where most families live in separate apart-ants. there
are 839 children per 1,000 faeiliss; in old residential areas where nest of
the families do not have separate apartments there are 1.76 children per 1.000
families.

Injuries. including fatal injuries. are often the result of intoxication by
alcohol. Iwroving legal steps to conbat alcoholism are another possible
way to influence the rate of decline in the nortality rate. Medical scien-
tists believe that abuse of alcohol shortens lift: by 20 years. One out of
three deaths from cardiovascular illness is caused by abme of alcohol.15

Alcoholis- leads to moral and social degradation of the individual. Drunken-
ness and the scandals that go with it are one of the main reasons that mar-
riages break up. Practically all cases to terminate parental rights are occa-
sioned by the drunkenness of the parents.16

In view of all these factors the state devotes great attention to measures to
combat alcoholism. including legal measures. The Fundamentals of Legislation
of the USSR and the Union republics envision the possibility of sandstory

32 _

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

treatment of chronic alcoholics (Article 36). This rule of USSR law has been
included concretely in republic legislation. For sample, a 1 Earth 19710
Ukase of the 3818! Supreme Soviet entitled "Mandatory Treatment of Alcoholics"
provides a procedure for mandatory treatment of persons who abuse alcoholic
beverages.1 The Councils of Ministers of the USSR and the Union Republics
have issued decrees that envision conditions for and the possibility of
employing mandatory treatment of chronic alcoholics and procedures for sending
them to preventive health institutions for treatment end labor indoctrination.
Article 62 of the RSPSR Criminal Code and the corresponding articles of the
criminal codes of other Union republics give courts the right to assign persons
who abuse alcohol to mandatory treatment.

On 7 December 1979 the Plenum of the USSR Supreme Soviet adopted a decree which
urged the courts to make full use of the opportunities given then by law to
combat drunkenness and alcoholism.” It seems that it would be wise to

modify the procedures for examination of persons suspected of abuse of alcohol,
not restricting them to persons who have been in a medical sobering-up institu-
tion two or three times within a year.

One cannot disagree with V. N. Kudryavtsev and other participants in the round-
table meeting of the journal SOVE‘I‘SKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO devoted to the
social and legal problems of conbatting drunkenness and alcoholism. They be-
lieve that we need a program of measures figured for the medium and long run

to combat drunkenness and alcoholism with the eqhaeis on preventing these phe-
nomena, especially among young people. According to data from medical exami-
nations, 95 percent of the persons who abuse alcohol began drinking before the

age of 15. It has been proposed that the Society to Coﬁat Drunksnness and
Alcoholism, which existed in our country in the 1920's, should be re-established.

It could be very useful today as well, as the experience of Bulgaria and other
socialist countries illustrates. It is possible to adopt local legal norms
which institute "dry laws" in certain territories.”

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 1981

11,176
650: 1800/ 320 END

33-

l-‘OI OFFICIAL USE ONLY