FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10173
9 December 1981

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 29/81)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(Pouo 29/81)

CONTENTS
INTERNATIONAL

Nationalism: Tool or Imperielist Ideological Diversion
(0.8. Redznepovs; Izvm'mm WI MU]: mm 881?, BERIXA
OBSHCHESTVMIIGI RAUK, Apr 81)
Soviet Experience Applied to Nationality Problems in Developing Countries

(I. Khnlmursdov; Izvrsrm WI IIAUK mm! sen, emu
onsawmvmm NAUK, Apr 81)

Book on South Yemen's Social, Economic Development
(Imomum mmncrmcursnu mun mum: mom I
Tomovomoxmamsnn 0mm, 1981)

Book on Domestic Factors Affecting u.s. Foreigi Policy Reviewed
(V. F. Petrovskiy; VOPROSY ISTORII, Sep 81) ......................

NATIONAL

Western Views on Soviet Econcnic Development Attacked
(Yevgeniy Sergeyevich Troitskiy; VOPROSY HMOMIKI, Oct 81).......

Soviet Ethnographic Theories Outlined
(Go Eu MarkOV; SOMSKA!‘ mmmYA’ Jul-A08 81) o e o o o o o o o I u o o o o

RNIONAL

Lack of Armenian Literature in Central Press Deplored
(Koren Simownn; LITERATURNAYA mm, Jul 81) .................

- a - [III - USSR - 3S 9000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

KATIONALISH: 1'00]. 0" INFERIALIST WIN DIVERS!”

Aahkhshd WITA AKADDHI "AUX W 383. MA 0mm MW
No ‘6. Apr 81 pp 10-16

[Article by 0. s. Redshspova. Departnent of Philosomy and Law. when 88]! Ace-
deny of Sciences: 'Nationalisnu‘l‘ool of Inperialist Ideological Diversicn']

frext/ Natiomlisn has always been a tested and universal weapon of inperisliss in
the struggle against the forces of peace and progress. It could not be otherwise.
inasnuch as the bourgeois class essence as the contents of inpuialist policy is
inextricably bound up with nationslien as its fora. It is not by chance that every
major social conflict or exacerbation of the stmggle between the two opposing sys-
tens provokes a flare-up of bourgeois nationalism in one or another of its varie-
ties. This is testified to by historical practice. in particular. that of the pe-
riods of world liar I and World liar II. as well as by the present-day situation in
the world. when the incitesent of chauvinisn is directed at Justifying the unpre-
cedented scope of the Vest's nilitsry preparations. Under the cover of desagogi-
cal declarations about “defending national interests." the following action are
being carried out: the us intervention into the interml affairs of 81 Salvador
and Iran. the occupation of Northern Ireland by British troops. Israeli aggression
sainst the Arab countries and a course sined at annexing their lands. as well as
the ispsrialist support of terrorist and racist regines. He met recall today the
words of V. I. Lenin: 'Ilars are favored by nationalist ”juices. which are syste-
satically cultivated in civilised countries in the interests of the ruling classes
for the purpose of distracting the proletarisn assess frcs their own class b-

1”ng to sales thes forget their debt to internatioml class solidarity” 1.
p 1 .

In the struggle against modern-day sccialiss present-day anti-couuniss places

special hopes on nationalisn. "It is precisely on nationalist tendencies and. in
particular. on those of then which take the for- of anti-Sovietiss which the hour
gs )1s idsologists and bourgeois propaganda dost will place their bets in the
struggle against socialise and the ccnsunist noment" 2. p 339]. herything is
taken into consideration: the growth of the peoples' national consciousness in the
present-day period. especially in the young. developing countries. as well as the
easily vulnerable and use nature of the national feelings at which the national-
ist propaganda is directed. and the possibility of a sulti-purpose utilisation of
nationalisn. 1he latter is expressed in the fact that, in the first place. na-

tionalies serves as a basic seans for splitting up the internatioml conunist and
labor movement and also the national-liberation struggle of peoples and breaking

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

then apart tron each other. In declaring the 20th centiu-y to be the "century of
nationalisa.u the anti-conuniste hasten to proclain thssselves as its advocates.
and socialism as the lost salicious toe of the natioml. which the bourgeois ideo-
logists consider as a synonys of the mticnalistic.

In the second place. nationaliss is used to under-nine the unity of the socialist
coasunity. 0n sore than one occasion the isperialist strategists have openly de-
clared that the “explosive substance which threatens the unity of the ccuunist
bloc is natiomlisn." In appealing to the natioml feelings of the peoples of the
socialist countries. the bourgeois ideologists are exploiting in their subversive
propaganda the concepts of national independence. national interests. and national
culture. which are treated in a nationalistic spirit. They utilize any probless
or difficulties which arise between individual socialist countries or in any one
of then. Thus. the Heat's "psychological warfare" services reacted operationally
to the events in Poland: during the period iron 19 through 25 August 1%0 they de-

voted. on an average. as any as 25 oceaentariee a day in broadcasts in Russian
alone.

Finally. the third significance of nationalies in the Vest‘s ideological diver
sionsuundenining the sonolithic unity of the peoples of the USSR. Tens of radio
stations broadcast round the clock in the sore than 23 languages of the Soviet
peoples. The task of the bourgeois propagndiste is to transfers national charac-
teristics into national barriers. with the aid of nationally colored phenosena to
turn national feelings into nationalistic passions. concerning what kinds of de-
vices and aethods are being utilized in this. an idea is provided by the following
excerpt free Washington's official instruction entitled “new to Cospoae Propaganda
Broadcasts": "Use the device of setting one people against another. one group of
the population against another. it po'ssibley-a talerity against a ninority--this
is very iaportant.... Always find and take a position on the side of these when
you can best use to carry out your purpose. If there is no one for you to support.
create such a group yourself“ [as quoted tron It. p 1:15]. As practical experience
has shown. the anti-couunists have followed the letter and the spirit of this in-
struction. let us illustrate this by using the emple of Soviet Central Asia.

The foreign centers of lies and disinfornaticn pay a great deal of attention to
the Central Asian region of the USSR. and in the mediate future their subversive
activity will undoubtedly be activated even sore. Testifying in favor of such a
forecast is an analysis of the works of the Sovietologiste. who have developed for
the promuda services a strategy and sethcds of ideological diversions. as well

as the plans based on their reconsendations for these services theaselves during
tn. 1%0'8.

Thus. on p 8 of the report of Radio Liberty and Radio Free lurope. prepared in
1979. the following is stated: "...Ile sust pay sore attention than in previous

years to preparing mars-s for the Soviet peoples of Central Asia...". 1. e.. the
Central Asian peoples. In this ease report it is noted on p 1? that '...fhnds
have been allocated to further enlist the cooperation of the scat experi-

enced consultants and researchers on Russian questions and questions of the natio-
nality groups within the Soviet Union."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

achieve-ante in the socioeccnceic. political. and cultural spheres; the.'scoialis-
tic transfomtione in the life of the Turban people are evaluated free a na-
tionalistic point of view. The goal of such hostile propaganda. as was noted at
the 18th Plenun of the m cc (July 1979). is to fan within the republic “an in-
ternal opposition with a nationalistic hue." which our fees are tryiw to create
themselves in accordance with the above-eeutioned instruction. For this

they are trying year after year to instill in the peoples of Central Asia the idea
that they are without rights and the objects of diacriaination by the oolonialist.
chauvinistic policy of the Russians. that their national spiritual values are be-
ing destroyed. and that in the future they can anticipate ethnic. cultural. and
linguistic asaiailaticn by the Russians. The syths of "Soviet colonialis.‘ “Rus-
sification." and 'assiailation.“ as fabricated by Western and Beijing prom.
are calculated to affect the national feelings and national dignity of the Gen-

tral Asian peoples. to arouse in the. a national egoisn and a striving toward
national self-lieitaticn and isolatic .

is so mat that the bourgeois ideologists frequently accept the desirable instead
of the reality. During the last few years the myth of the "nationalisa' of the
non-Russian peoples has become fundaaental in the works of Sovietologists. The
word 'nationalisn" already figures in the very titles of these works. such as H.
Seton-latson. "Nationaliss and Ccenunise' [11/3 8. Allworth, "Central Asian Pub:-
lishing and the an. of Nationalisn" [6]: 'r. Rakowsh-ﬂarlstcne. “Russia and we-
tionalisn in Central Asia: The can of redshiklstan" [10]: L. Snyder. "The New Na-
tionalisl" [1h]; 0. Ziaon. "Nationalisa and National Policy in the USSR after sta-
lin" [13]. and others. as well as an enonous nusber of articles.

guages and literatures. the growth of the population. and other phenoeena are in-
trepreted in a nationalistic vein.

And it is not Just a matter of distinguishing the sethcdclogy of bourgeois socio-
logy. which quite often sixes up the concepts of "rational“ and 'nationalistic.‘
fro- the scientific nethcdology. according to which these concepts are polar. The
nationalistic is an egotistical. one-aided. false reflection of the national. car-
rying the latter to its extrese and distorting it. leading to an opposition between
the national and the international interests. The socialistic flourishing of the
national has nothing at all in con-on with the growth of nationalisa. inasauch as

it originates on the basis of and by means of the rapprOehenent of nations under
the conditions of their growing internatioml unity.

attempts to depict socialise as "not of long duration.“ "incapable of adapting to
life." Harxisa-Isninisn as "obsolete.” and the USSR as a ”disintegrating aspire."

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The argusents of history have proved to be sore substantial; they have overturned
these appraisals and forecasts of the bourgeois ideologists. who are now conpelled
to sake adaptations. to twist and turn in ordea- to extricate thouselm free the
obstructions of their own lies and slander. Year after year the anti-conunists
have expounded on the "assisilation' and 'Hussification' of the non-Russian peoples
of the 0353. on the destruction of their cultures. natioml languages. and tradi-
tions. They have passed over in silence or have distorted the truth about the
well-targeted work of the party with regud to creating national statehood. the
preservation and develop-ant of the cultural values of each Soviet people. devel-
oping a written literature. scholarship on the national languages and literatures.
training personnel of the national intelligentsia. a national press. creating a
systes of education and health care in the national republics. and overcoaing any
sorts of evidence of aistrust or sanity along the peoples with regud to their
consolidation into a unified. friendly mm. low. when the fruits of this ti-
tanic activity are at hand and cannot he denied. there renins nothing left for
the anti-conunists to do but proclai- theee fruits not to be the result of the
CPSU's mtionality policy but. on the contrary. sanifestations of natiomlisn
which are in contradiction to this policy. But there is a substantial flat in the
given class logic of our ideological opponents--the derived supposition concerning
the 'assisilating." "anti-natioml" nature of the party's policy is false. and.
therefore. the conclusion scheming the mticnaliss of the Soviet. in particular.
the Central Asian peoples is invalid. In order to provide support for the nth of
the "mtionslisa' of the non-Russian peop . use is also nade of our press's cri-
tical ssterials concerning individual sanitestations of looalisn. mtioml lisit-

zealous Sovietologists. such as the Vest Conan. 0. 31-01:. reach the point 0! ut-
tering such absurdities as the following: that ”opposition nationalist somente
exist today in the Soviet Union on a large scale" [12. p 1I8]. and that “the desands

In order to refute such isaginings. it is sufficient to refer to those bourgeois
scholars the-selves who (11: contrast to c. Siaon) have visited the Land of the So-
viets and had opportunities 'to convince the-selves with their own eyes of the ac-
tual state of affairs. Thus. Professor 0. hontgosery. who spent six sonths in
Tashkent. did not discover any sort of sanifestations whatsoever of tension or en-

to aention am! aythical "natiomlistic soverente.“ Here is ﬂat he writes: “In

my meetings with Uzbeks and aesbers of the other Central Asian peoples in Tashkent
I did not hen any sort of expression of sanity or negative attitude toward the
Russians or other Soviet Europeans" [15. p 301]: “in Usbekistan there exists a high
den-es of harsony ssong the ethnic groups" [15. p 299/; “in Tashkent I never en-
countered anything that could be interpreted as an anti-Soviet attitude or dissa-
tisfaction with the general systee of political and econoeic organisation" [15. p
292/. It should be noted that the statements by the professor quoted above are

certain instances. patently exaggeratee then.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another Aserican professor. who also visited the USSR in the sun-er of 1976. writes
as follows: “The dissident sevenent in the 0383 has received extensive coverage in
the western press. Alas. seat of what the sass sedia are talking about is not so
such actual as desirable" [8. p 161]. Further on this author esphasisss that there
are very few Soviet dissidents. that these elesents do not express the interests of
wide circles of the population. nor do they constitute an organized seveaent with
con-en goals and interests.

And even if one has not visited the USSR but has a sober head on one's shoulders.
one can acre or less objectively judge the Soviet reality.

As an example. let us refer to such an experienced political scientist. well-known
in Sovietolegical circles of the Host as a specialist on Asian prebless. as G.
Iheeler. who. despite his anti-Soviet bent. has been ceapelled to resark en the
”absence of any evidence at all of an organized dissident aoveaent' in Central
Asia. ”Under present conditions there are no prospects for a Huslis nationalistic
moment similar to the nationalistic soveaents of the Huslis peoples of the Hiddle
East and South Asia." 0. wheeler esphasizes in his article entitled “Isles and the
Soviet Union." ”It is undoubtedly true. however. that despite Soviet efforts. or

even as a result of then. there has been a growth of national awareness in recent
years anew: Soviet Muslias" [15. p 250].

These last few words aust be particularly eaphasised. for it is on the seﬁaistic
substitution of the concept of national awareness for the polar concept of natieiﬁ-
119- that most of the anti-cesaunist constructs rest. If the socialist systea is.
in principle. underlining the foundations of natiemlisn and elisinating the social
class soil which nourishes it. then it opens up bread possibilities for the growth
of natioml awareness. The creation of national statehood for previously oppressed
peep1es. the free development of national languages. cultures. traditions. the
enmeus socioeconoeic successes. achieved in international unity with fraternal
peoples and other factors of this flowering have facilitated the develop-cut of
national pride and socialist national awareness along the peoples of the USSR. The
anti-conunists are also atteapting to direct this healthy youth of national
awareness into the distorted riverbed of nationslisa.

Sovietolesists seeking nationalist or racial disturbances and dissatisfaction in
the land of the Soviets would do better to pay attention to the situation in their
own countries. It would not cost Anericsn Sevietelogista any efforts at all to
discover such phenesena in their own country. Suffice it to say that. according
to Anerican sources. approxiastely 330 instances of racial conflicts to one degree
of severity or the other were ascertained in the United States free Nevenber 1979
through April 1%0. The ease outbreaks among His-1's blacks in Hay 1%0. which
were drowned in a sea of blood. reverberated widely within the country and abroad.

History has confirmed tine and tine again imperialisa's fidelity to the traditions
of racisn and colonialisn. which sanifest theaselvee in sea-eatien. apartheid.
racial and national discrisination. as well as other ferns of eppressinc and de-

aeaning sinerity peoples. An authoritative international cenaission of Jurists.

working in the United States free 3 through 20 August 1979 in its report presented
to the UN found the United States guilty of criniml genocide against the conni-

try's indigenous population-~the Indians. The planned physical externination of

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Indians on reservations. where poverty and diseases are raspnt. the sterilisa-
tion of Indian wosen. the nurder of activists free the novseent for the rights of
red-skinned Asericans--all this is a sad tradition of Anerican reality [5]. As a
result. the nueber of Aeerican Indians has been reduced free 12 nillion to 800.000.

The events in Iran and Afghanistan revived the hopes of our opponents for galvani-
zing the nationalistic soods in the Soviet republics bordering on these countries.
However. acquaintanceship with the life of the peoples of these republics after
the Iranian and Afghan revolutions disillusioned the bourgeois ideologiste. who
were cospelled to state the following: “In the basic Muslin regions (i. e.. the re-
pubiioo of Central Asia and Transcaucasia--0. a.) there is no visible anti-Russian
nationalist soveaent' [16. p 55/. At the seas tine. it should be noted that the
events in Iran and Afghanistan. along with the national-liberation soveeent in
other countries. inspired the bourgeois Sovietologists to revive the concept of -
the so-called 'huslin national connunisn."

The gist of this concept. which is based on the idea of ccsbining harxisn. nation-
alias. and Isles. asounts to an eassculaticn of the class contents of hemis- as a
unified international theory and to the exaggeration of naticml specifics to the
detrinent of the internaticml interests of the peoples. Sultan-Cally” in his own
tine developed sinilar ideae. and historical practice has confined their errone-
ousness and reactionary nature. The failure of the idea of 'natioml monies"
has also been very clearly deecnstrated by present-day China. in which a correct
Marxist position on taking national characteristics into consideration in solving
international problees. exaggerated and Mt to the point of sbmrdity. has led
to a serious detox-nation of the foundations of the socialist structure. Evidently
Just such a result is being counted on by our ideological adversaries. who are at-
tespting to reaninate in our own days the ideas of Sulun-Galiyevise [9]. For
exaeple. it is to the sencry of this rationalist that a book published in 1979 has
been dedicated. It is by A. A. Benningsen an! 3. I}. Vinbueh and is entitled “luv.
lie National Counnise in the Soviet Union.“ with the provocative sub-title “A
Revolutionary Strategy for the colonial Uorld' [7].

The concept 0! “Muslin national. coesuniss' is one of the variants of a some general
theory of the bourgeois political scientists and sociologists on rationalise as an
all-encoepassing ideology. capable of swallowing up even hernias.

Large arnies of ideological diversicnists. instructed and equipped with the latest
techniques. have been thrown into the fronts of the propaganda “cold war" which
isperialiss has now developed against the 033 . In no way should we underestieate
this reactionary force nor its potentials for exerting an influence on the sinds
and hearts of people. A particular responsibility in the struggle against hostile
ideology and propaganda rests on the intelligentsia. And not only because the ex-
posure of the lying. slanderous nature of bourgeois propaganda is its direct duty
to the people and the party. but also because the intelligentsia itself is one of
the principal objects of ideological treatnent by isperialien. It is precisely
asong the intelligentsia that our opponents seek out potential dissidents. atteept-
ing to play upon such strings as the intellectual'e striving for a critical wider
standing of social and cultural life. The role of the intelligentsia as the crea-
tor. guardian. and tranesitter of the mtion's spiritual values conditions the re-
ceptivity of individual eenbers of this social stratun to mtionalist propaganda.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Especially important under the given conditions is the high soral position of the
intellectual. his communist world-view. his ability to con-ectly determine what an-
swers to and what is harmful to the genuine national interests of his people.

nationalist conceit and arrogance. while concern for the developsent of one's own
people becomes narrow-minded nationalist egoisn. In true internationalisa the ge-
neral and the particular always act in an indivisible unity within which the inter-
national is of determining importance for the developent of the national. ﬂore-
over. practical experience has shown that even in our own tines one encounters both
underestisation and overestination of the national factor. which is a basic cause

Socialisa guarantees the de Jute and de facto equality of nations and nationality
groups. thereby depriving of any seanine of the past division of peoples into
large and shall according to the criteria of quality and contents. within the uni-
fied international family each Soviet people. regardless of its numbers. size of
its territory. etc. has equal rights and equal opportunities for its can develop-
ment: this has been established by law in the Constitution of the USSR. In an
ethno-denographic sense. however. nations are not eqml. and this objective fact
has its own definite importance. This is unitested in the fact that that indivi-
dual members of nunerioally large nations have an inherent tendency to underesti-
mate the national factor. when they see the prospect for social developent out.
side of the rational maneuver): and national for-as. as a result of which the devel-
opment of national relations scene to be sosething secoruiary and extra. At the
ease tine certain nesbers of the minority peoples are inclined to view the devel-
opment of national relations outside the social changes of the cos-unity. and. to

ing. no setter ”hot. to preserve inviolate the various attributes of the national

life. to halt the development of its customs and habits. and to raintain it in a
state of unchangeabilit .

The psychological basis for the underestiaation or overestimation of the natioml

factor is the different degree of national'eensitivity along the ushers of the
large and shall nations. its relative aufrling along the former and exacerbation
along the latter.

lows: along the working people of the large nations the accent aust be placed on
showing the dependence of the rapprochement of the mtions on their prosperity.
while along the working people of the ssall nations the someie ought to be Iade

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on disclosing the reverse dependence--that of the developent and prosperity of aa-
tions and nationality groups on their actual cooperation and rapprocheaent. The
exclusion of a one-sided approach to the solution of nationality problem. the cor-
rect ccsbination of the general and the particular. the international and national
in social develcment. the skillful and flexible regulation of mtional relations
«this is what serves as a pledge for the succesrlal struggle against individual
manifestations of nationaliss and its vestiges under conditions of socialism as a
guanntee against their rewoduction in our society.

mm
1. v. I. Lenin. "Pclnoye sobraniye sochineniy“ [Go-plots works]. Vol 1?.
2. L. I. Brezhnev. ”0 vneshnsy pclitilne 1033 i Sovetskcgo gosudarstva. Rechi i
stat'i" 0n the Foreign Policy of the CE!) and the Soviet Stats: Speeches an
Article . Hoecov, 1973.

3. H. V. Ionian. "Internatsiomlisa protiv natsicnalina" [intermtionalisa versus
Nationalisnl. Moscow. 1%0.

lb. 1.. V. Hetelitsa. "Nationaliza v sovreoenncy ideclc cheekcy bor'be" [Interna-
tionalise in the Present-Day Ideological struggl . hosoow. 1971.

5. PRAVDA. 19 Hay 1%0.

6. BééAllworth. "Central Asian Publishing and the Rise of Nationalism" New York.
1 5.

7. A. A. Benningsen and S. B. Eli-hash. 'huslis National Consumes in the Soviet
Union: A Revolutionary Strategy for the Colonial World." Chicago-Janna. 1979.

8. Leo Hecht, "The USSR Today: “etc and Intsrpretations". Springfield, 1978.
0. "harxisn and the Kuslin Uorld". Zed Press. Icndon. 1979.

10. Rakowska-Harsstone. "Russia and Nationalisa in Central Asia. The Case of
Tadshihistan [s1c1". London. 1970.

11. Seton-Watson. ”Nationaliss and Conmniss". London. 1961:.

12. Simon Gerhard. "Die Nichtrussischsn Volksr in Gesellscmft und Innenpolitik
dsr UdSSR [The Non-Russian Peoples in Society and Donsstic Policy of the
ussn1". Cclcanc. 1979.

1'3. Sincn Gerhard. "Nationalist-us and Nationalitatsnpclitik in der Sowjetunion

ssit Stalin [National inn and Nationality Policy in the Soviet Union since
Stalinl“. Colovne. 1979.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1h. 1. Snyder. "The New Natlonalisu". Ithaca. New York, 1965.
15. Asm AFFAIRS, 1979. Vol x. part 3.

16. ECONG‘IIST. 1979, Vol 272. No 7097. 8 Sop.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

SOVIET EAVHIENCE APPLIED 'I‘O NATIONALITY PROBLEIB IN DEVEIDPING COIMRIES

Ashkhabsd Izm'rm moan mm 11mm 3312. seam 0mm max.
No a. Apr 81 pp 18-22 -

[Article by I. Khalnuradov. Turknen sum Institute ineni v. I. Lenin. “Soviet
Experience in Solving the National Problen and the Developing Countries']

[Text] The Great October Socialist Revolution laid a fire fonmdation for the flow-
ing together into a single riverbed of the loving forces of the world revolutionary
process: that of the world's first socialist state (now a world systee of mi;-

alias). as well as those of the internetioml labor novenent and the national-libe-

ration struggle. The developent of this process is taking place under the enor-
mous influence of the experience of the Land of the Soviets. where the revolution-
ary-transfornational ideas of Met-x. Engels. end Isnin are being inplesented.

In the eyes of the toiling nasses of the test our country is the embodisent of the
ideals of Justice and liberty. of the struggle for a better future for the working
people and for all sankind. The ideas of the October Revolution and the experience
of building socialise in the USSR have becone attainable by the working people in
countries all over the worldnin the West as well as in the last.

The tremendous successes and achievenents of the soviet republics. of ell the pee-
ples of the USSR. are the result of carrying out the heninist nationality policy.

an inportent factor of the revolutionary national-liberation novenent in the last-
ern countries.

The ideologists of inperialiss are applying great efforts to hinder the use of our
experience by the developing countries. They are striving to distort it in all Ian-
ner of ways. while. at the ease tine. inposing various ferns of neo-colonialisa on
these peoples. In the ideological sphere neo-colonialisn has nanifested itself as
anti-connunisn. In other words. the ideology of nee-colonialism is a part of anti-
connunisn. it. Xolarz. for exanple. writes that the oonnunist theory on the natio-
nal probles was created on the basis of saterials of narope. North Caucasus. Trans-
?ucssie. joviet Central Asia. and that it cannot be acceptable for other countries
13. p 13? .

After the victory of the October Revolution Russia conprised a oosbimtion of peo-
ples who were at various levels of develepent. Here were regions with his: and
niddle levels of capitalist developent. as well as regions where feudal. seei-
feudal. and even patriarchal relations existed. Hence. the experience of the soci-
oeconcsic and cultural-political changes along our peoples are acceptable not only

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the industrial but also for the developing countries. The successful solution
or the national problee in our country has shown that the policy of the Goa-unist
Party and the Soviet state is the truly correct policy. ensuring liberty. sovereig-
ty. and equal rights of all nations and peoples. L. I. Brezhnev ..as reaarked as
follows: "sunning up the results of the heroic achieve-eats of .ne past halt-cen-
tury. we are entirely Justified in stating that the national problem in that fora
in which it has coae down to us fro- the past. has been fully resolved. resolved
finally and once and for all. This achieve-ant. which can rld’itflllly be placed
alongside such victories in building a new society in the USSR as industrialisation.
collectivization. and the cultural revolution“ . pp 11-12].

Bourgeois ideologists. refer-late. and revisioniats have striven to prove that there
can be no coason principles in building socialisa. including any in the field of na-
tional relations: they have stepped up their attacks on proletarian internationaliem,
lads absolutes out of national characteristics. and pushed other peoples onto the

peoples of the newly liberated countries. The ideologists of the bourgeoisie dis-
seainate the {articular traits of the "mastic aocialisa” or "lyrical socialism“
of L. Sendaor. which is directed against genuine socialise.

Today "African socialise" is lauded to the skies by the ideologiets of neo-coloni~
alien. especially by the leaders of eooial-refonisa. The Socialist International
is striving to unite "African socialise" with the international social-deaocratic
sovenent on an anti-cmunist basis. That sane Senghor. appearing at a conference
of 26 political parties of Africa, held in Tunis in 1975. spoke about the unadapta-
bility of Harxiea-Leninisa to the conditions of Africa. He even denied the decisive
role of world socialise in the revolutionary struggle and accused the conunist
movement of attempting to iapose a "unifora sodel' of developsent on the young
states. etc. [12. p 53/. However. new leaders of the liberated countries under-

ter-tribsl conflicts and the consolidation of the population on the basis of a re-
volutionary progru: the conduct of a consistent peace-loving and foreign-policy
course and the struggle against isperialiea and egg-esaion. for cooperation with

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL: U35 Ulla!

and many of the secondary traits of our revolution are of international importance
in the sense of its influence on all countries" [2, p 3].

In fornerly backward countries socialist Reduction relations are being for-ed on
the basis of weakly developed production forces. As a result there arise difficul-
ties in creating a saterial-technicsl taco “or socialise. hence. the necessity for
industrialisation. Building socialism canntt be considered coepleted if industry
does not exert a substantial influence on agriculture. but depends on agriculture.
and if a systes of nachine production has not taken shape.

As is known. prior to 1917 two-thirds of unkim was living in feulal and seei-
feudal countries. hos this fact it is obvious what ispcrtance pertains to the ex-
perience of asking the transition to socialise tar-passing capitalise.

ietrstion. the development of a written literary hostage based on the popular-

spoken language. the econoeic developent of lining and desert regions. irriation
and land reclasation. carrying on a struggle with the aid of sedicine against such
widespread diseases in the East as nalaris. trachoaa. Iange. and others. or great
interest for the progressive forces of Asia and Africa is the solution of the wo-
sen's question in Central Asia and the liberation of the men of the Soviet East.

pendent countries. The head of the first Afghan niesion. upon arriving in hoscou
stated the following: ”My governsent has devoted its principal attention to the in-
dependence and self-sufficiency of all Muslin republics. And so (we) greet all
these elevated ideas. all these lofty slogans which have been put into practice.

The experience of resolving the national nobles in the Central Asian repuuics and
certain other parts of our country has shown that the couple: problens of the de\-
veloping countries. connected with the regulation of inter-national and interotri-
bal relations can be successfully solved by leans of building a new. socialist so-
ciety. free of all forms of exploitation. One of the results of proeulgating the
Leninist nationality policy has been the rise in our country of Union and autono-

12
FOR OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H. Kolars also admits that with regard to economic and cultural development the re-

puhiics of Central Asia stand much higher than the developing countries of Asia and

Africa. He writes that the number of schools in Uzbekistan,, the industrial devel-

opnent of Azerbaijan. the extensive irrigation structures of Turkmenistan. and the

Pighly org;nized health care of Kirghizia cannot be compared with Iran or Pakistan
13. P 126 e

The reactionary bourgeois ideologists declare that the economy of the Central Asian
republics was deve10ped by means of force. Some of them even assert that the Gen-
tral Asian peoples would have preferred to live in poverty and ignorance [15. p
112], whereas c. Hheeler considers the Soviet experience to be successful in many
material aspects, but he accompanies all this with the words "colonial exploits-.-
tion." "imperialist domination." etc. [17. p 250].

Thus. even those bourgeois authors who have been compelled to acknowledge the suc-
cesses of the Soviet nationality policy strive to conceal the true sources of these
successes or are silent about them. And these sources comprise proletarian inter-

nationalisn. the friendship and maternal mutual aid among peoples. the overcoming
of economic and cultural backwardness, the nature of the socialist system itself.

and the implementation of the Leninist nationality policy. The experience of the

Soviet multi-national state teaches that the unification of material and labor re-

sources speeds up the cconomic and cultural progess of each nation individually
and of the country as a whole.

The Soviet state has made widespread use of the unified state budget for redistri-
buting the country's financial resources in order to equalize the level of the eco-
nomic development of the individual republics. This is testified to by the follow-
ing data: the proportion of outlays on the national economy amounted to the fol-
lowing in the period 1925/26 in the state budget of the RSFSR 11.6 percent, the
Ukraine 15.9 percent. the Turkmen SSR 33.1; percent, and the Uzbek SSR 215.3 percent.
In the next budget year these figures amounted respectively to 16.7. 21.3. 36.5.
and 33.1 perCent. Also testifying about the redistribution of funds is the differ-
ing proportion of revenues from the All-Union budget within the total sum of the
incomes from the republics. For the RSFSR this indicator amounted in 1931 to 18
percent, the Ukraine 21. the Turkmen SSR 80, the Uzbek SR 56. the Tajik 58R 82
percent [7. pp 36-39].

In pre-revolutionary Turkmenistan industry was poorly developed. But now this re-

public's territory is covered with a dense network of industrial enterprises. The
leading branches of industry are the petroleum. chemical. gas-extraction, and ma-

chine-building industries. Over the 60 years of the Soviet regime the volune of
industrial production in this republic has increased by a factor of 75. In 1977
six times as much electric power was produced in the republic for one day than was
produced throughout all of the year 1913 [5. pp 26-28].

In the struggle to overcome de facto inequality in the sphere of culture as well as
in the sphere of economic development the Soviet state redistributed the total fi-
nancial resources of the country for the benefit of the previously backward pee:-
plea. Fraternal aid in developing education was expressed not only in the allo-
cation of the necessary funds. It also manifested itself in such forms as the de-
velopment and printing of textbooks. the transmitting of pedagogical experience,

assignment of teachers. and reserving places in the VUZ's of the country’s central
cities.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of the concerned care of the Communist Party and the Soviet state. the
aid of the Great Russian peeple and that of the country's other peoples gradually
overcane the inequality in the spheres of education and culture. By the end of the
Second Five-Year Plan the number of pupils in the general-education schools. as com-
pared with 191h/15 had increased on the whole throughout the Soviet Union by a fac-
tor of 14.7, while in l‘urknenistan the figure was 23. in Kirghizia--32.l&. Uzbekis-
tan-49.x», Tajikistan--68.2 [6, p 250].

In 1911: the Trans-Caspian Province had 58 general-education schools. where about
7,000 children of tsarist officials and local landowners were enrolled. There were
no technical schools nor any other secondary special educational institutions, with-
out even mentioning higher educational institutions. Only 15 kopecks per capita
were allocated for public education [8, pp 18l+-18§]. During the year of its forsa-
tion the Turknen SSR stood near the bottom of the entire country with regard to the
level of literacy. Now Turkmenistan has been transformed into a republic of solid
literacy.

The economic and cultural achievements of the previously baclmard peoples of the
USSR have a magnetic force for the developing countries. The following words of

V. I. Lenin are coming true: “For all of Asia and for all the world's colonies.
for thousands and millions of people the attitude of the Soviet republic of workers
and peasants toward the weak, up-to-now oppressed peoples will be of practical im-
portance" [1. p 301+]. One of the testinonies of the growing interest on the part
of the world community in our achievesents is the holding of a UNESCO conference in
Ashkha‘oad in 1972. Such conferences, synposia. and seminars are also being held in
the capitals of the other Central Asian republics.

Works by honest, objective bourgeois scholars also constitute an answer to the fal-
sifiers. The progressive {merican bourgeois historian C. Ianont has Justly re-
marked that the Soviets have put an end to all forms of ethnic discrimination [1“,
p mu]. He emphasizes the great international importance of attitudes toward the

national minorities in the Soviet Union [11}. p 80].

In such countries as Turkey, Iran, Pakistan the population even now is approximately
at the sane stage as were the peoples of Soviet Central Asia under tsarisl and the
donination of the feudal lords. They are Just as deprived of their rights, in just
as much darkness and ignorance as they were half a century ago. The erploiter clas-
ses there are to blame for prolonging the national emity between the nembers of the
various peoples.

Hunger. need, diseases. and a high infant nortality rate were the lot of the peovi'
ples of the underdeveloped countries of 60 years ago; their situation is no better
even now. The infant mortality rate remains high in 'hzrkey. 0n the average 150 out
of every 1,000 newly born infants die before the age of one year. In certain of the
most backward countries of Asia and Africa only one-third of the children in the ap-
pmpriate age group are enrolled in the elementary schools. One of the reasons for
this is the difficult material situation. In many families the incomes are so low
that the parents are not able to acquire textbooks or a school uniform for their

child. In Turkey a school uniform, textbooks. and writing materials cost at least
1,000 liras, whereas the average wages of a Turkish worker amount to 1,100 liras

[93 PP 15'16]'

11.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

History has confirmed the correctness of V. I. Lenin‘s foresight that ”with the

aid of the proletariat of the advanced countries the backward countries can make
the transition to the Soviet system and through specific stages of develo en --

to communism, lay-passing the capitalist stage of developent" [2. p 2156 . The suc-
cessful solution of the nationality problem in our country serves as one of the in-
dicators of social ism, vivid and accessible to the understanding of the broad masses
of the people.

COPYRIGHT: Tzdatel'stvo 'Ylyln", 1981

238“
650: 1830/29

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

BOOK 0N SOUTH YEMBN'S SOCIAL. ECONOMIC DBVEIDP'HENT

Moscow NARODNAYA DEMOKFATICBESKAYA ansruntm mama: momma I roseovo-
mmcaxsxuz omosuaunm in Russian 1981 (signed to press 24 Apr 81) pp 1-2, 175-176

[Table of contents and brief description of book by v.u. Burmistrov]

[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: NARODNAYA DEHOKRATICHESKAYA RESPUBLIKA YEMENA: EKDNOHIKA I
TORGOVO-EKONOHICHESKIYA OTNOSHENIYA (The People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen: the Economy and Economic Trade Relations)

Publisher: "Nauka"

Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981

Signed to Press Date: 24 April 1981
Number of Copies Published: 2000
Number of Pages: 176

Brief Description:

The main directions in the development of South Yemen's economy in_the colonial
period. after winning independence. and at the present stage of implementing reforms
in South Yemen are covered. The foreign trade policies, means of state control of
the republic's foreign trade, and basic trends in the development of foreign eco-
nomic trade ties are examined.

3 ble of Contents

lntroduction.................................................................... 3

Chapter 1. Characteristics of the Social-Economic Development of the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and the Role of Foreign
Trade in the Country's Economy...................................... 11

1. Characteristics of the social-economic development of South Yemen
in the period of colonial enslavement.................................. ll
2. Social-economic reforms in the period of South Yemen's independent

development............................................................ 22

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. General characteristics of South Yemen's present economic atate.......
4. The role of foreign trade in the country's economy....................

Chapter 2. The Basic Principles of Foreign Trade Policies and the Means of
State Control of South Yemen's Foreign Trade.......................
1. The basic principles of South Yemen's foreign trade policy............
2. The role of the state in South Yemen's foreign trade..................
3. The means of state control of South Yemen's foreign trade.............

Chapter 3. Basic Trends in the Development of South Yemen's Economic
Trade Ties.........................................................

l. The dynamics, structure and geographic distribution of South

Yemen's foreign trade.................................................
2. Characteristics of South Yemen's economic trade ties with

capitalist countries..................................................
3. South Yemen's economic trade ties with developing countries...........
4. South Yemen's economic trade cooperation with socialist countries.....
5. South Yemen'3 economic trade cooperation with the Soviet Union........

Conclusion......................unuooaooo.u...o............................
Appendixes.....................................................................

Footnotes.. ......... . ..... .....................................................
COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redaktsiya vostochnoy literatury izdatel'stva "Nauka", 1981

C50: 1807

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

39
60

65
65
71
78

89
89

113
122
128
134

1101
152
172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. .__——-—.

 

INTERNATIONAL

BOOK 0N DOMESTIC FACTORS AFFECTING 0.5. FOREIGN POLICY RBVIENED
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 9, Sep 81 pp 152-155
[v.r. Petrovskiy review of A.A. Kokoshin book on 0.5. foreign policy*]

[Text] The monograph by A.A. Kokoshin, candidate of historical sciences and head
of the Domestic Policy Problems of the United States Department of the USSR Academy
of Sciences Institute of the United States and Canada. is the result of a thorough
study of the domestic factors of American imperialism's foreign policy. This is

the first comprehensive work on such an important and pertinent subject in Soviet
American studies since the publication in 1965 of the collective work "Dvizhushchiye
sily vneshney politiki SShA" [Driving Forces of u.s. Foreign Policy].

A study of the domestic factors of the formation of 0.5. foreign policy with the ac-
cent on superstructure! phenomena in American society helps us get to the essence

of the complex processes currently occurring in u.s. political life and understand
the ongoing turnabout toward the country's militarization and the exacerbation of
confrontation in the international arena. Concentration of attention in the 1970's.
that is. in a period when many processes and phenomena ripened which have been de-
veloped in our day, makes it possible to ascertain long-term trends in American

foreign policy.

Systematizing a vast amount of material. the author has concretely shown the connec-
tion between 0.5. foreign and domestic policy, revealed the imperialist nature and
content of this policy and attempted to determine the trends of its further develop-
ment. A.A. Kokoshin devotes much space to the change in the United States' inter-
national positions in the 1970's and its impact on domestic policy and socioeconomic
processes in the country. And this is perfectly Justified inasmuch as there was a
marked increase in the United States' dependence on the outside world in the said
period. It is becoming a long-term factor which is exerting and. to judge by every-
thing. will continue to exert an ever increasing influence on the development of.
domestic processes in the United States. The depth and extensiveneas of the relations

*"SShA: za faaadom global'noy politiki (Vnutrenniye faktory formirovaniya vneshney
politiki amerikanskogo imperializma na poroge 80-1 godov"[The United States: Ba-
hind the Facade of Global Policy (Domestic Factors of the Formation of the Foreign
Policy of American Imperialism on the Threshold of the 1980'a)]. Moscow, Politic-
dat. 1981. p 368.

18
FINlCNﬂﬂCJAI.USE13NLY
between external, international processes and the trends of the United States'
domestic development have in recent years come to approach what Nest Europe, for
example, has been experiencing for many years now.

The examination of the change in the United States' international positions and their
impact on the domestic political and socioeconomic processes in the country serves
as a point of departure for the author for an analysis of the domestic factors of
American imperialism's foreign policy. The book attempts to synthesise this analysis
with the results of a study of the changes which occurred in the United States' in-
ternational positions in the 1970's. True, this is not entirely successful, which
has to be explained to a considerable extent by the complexity of the task set by
A.A. Kokoshin and also the insufficient number of sources and material.

The book examines the singularities of the United States' current domestic economic
situation. the main social problems and the trends in the development of mass public
movemengs. The multilevel analysis of the energy crisis as the most acute domestic
and foreign policy problem of the United States, and not only economic but also so-
cial problem, moreover, is of particular interest. Unfortunately, the author has
concentrated almost all his attention on oil imports and oil and gas prices and

paid insufficient attention to the struggle over questions of the development of
nuclear power engineering, which was characterized by considerable sharpness in the
1970’s. Its results were reflected in the energy policy of the monopolies and the
J. Carter administration.

The book's analysis of the struggle in the United States over the question of the
order of priority and correlation of the state's foreign and domestic tasks, that
is. "national priorities" may be considered successful. The author examines the
activity of the military-industrial complex as the main force of imperialism and
reaction in 0.8. domestic and foreign policy, studies the dynamics of the alignment
of forces in the ruling elite in connection with the discussion of "national priori-
ties," traces their reflection in the federal budget and describes the role of numer-
ous public-political movements in the struggle on this problem. The monograph's
analysis enables us to comprehend in greater depth the reasons for the U.S. ruling
circlcs' transition to a policy of detente at the start ofthe 1970's. The author
establishes. for example, the existence of a definite connectionbetween the switch
from a poliCy of confrontation to negotiation and a certain restructuring of the
federal budget. particularly the reduction and limitation of military spending. In
the same way the author also reveals the factors of the U.S. ruling elite's depart-
ure from this policy in the latter half of the 1970's, which are characterized by
the start of a new buildup of military preparations and increased appropriations

for military needs.

Investigating the crisis of power and its foreign policy significance, A. A. Kok0h
shin devotes paramount attention to the "Watergate affair"v-its sources, dynamics

and consequences. The author is far from having simplistic ideas about this affair.
He shows the entire complexity and at times ambiguousness of the factors which
brought about this biggest crisis of presidential authority in the country's history,
which also had a considerable impact on its foreign policy. The book shows con-
vincingly that Hatergate cannot be viewed as a phenomenon typical only of the poli-
tical life of 1973-1977: the consequences of this crisis were reflected not only

in the position of the administration of 0. Ford but of J. Carter also. The author

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

us to compose a more profound idea of the formation-and practical implementation- of
American imperialism's foreign policy. Taking into consideration the fact that the
formal structure of the American foreign policy mechanism has been studied in great
detail by a number of Soviet scholars (A. . Hishin. n.c. Bogdanov. Yu.A. Shvedkov,
P.T. Podlesnyy and others). the author puts the accent on how this mechanism operates
in practice and. what is of particular interest, how foreign policy is shaped at

the highest level of federal power. The monograph justifiably pays particular at-
tention to organizations of the ruling class. particularly the activity of the for-
eign policy lobby and its role in the power mechanism in the United States.

highest level. There are among these not only the president himself, his national
security adviser. secretary of state and defense secretary but also the White House
chief of staff. domestic policy adviser, legal adviser and others. The author

how in the "purely" foreign policy logic of decision-making on international issues
are interwoven domestic policy. inlcuding purely business. considerations which
increase the unpredictability and zigzag appearance of 0.5. policy in the interna-
tional arena and make the United States an even more unsuitable partner for construc-
tive foreign policy acts.

R. Reagan administration. in which there is an incessant struggle for influence-
among the secretary of state. leaders of the White House staff. the vice president
and certain other figures and their groupings.

The monograph's analysis of the domestic factors of the formation of 0.8. foreign
policy helps us understand more deeply the essence of the present global strategy
manipulations of American imperialism. which are perfectly definitely based on
achieving world domination. For this purpose U.S. ruling circles are setting them-
selves the task of securing military superiority over socialism. achieving leader-
ship in the capitalist system and resisting the social renewal of the world with
every means. At the same time this analysis shows what an effect domestic policy
processes are having on 0.8. strategy and diplomacy.

1he monograph under review. which contains much very useful and hitherto little- .
known material. will undoubtedly attract the attentionnrall who are interested in
contemporary problems of American imperialism.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii". 1981

8850
050: 1807/7

20
FOR‘OFHKJAI.US£1ONLY
WESTERN VIEWS ON SOVIET ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ATTACKED
Moscow VOPROSY EKONOHIKI in Russian No 10. Oct 81 pp 100—109

[Article by Yevgeniy Sergeyevich Troitskiy. doctor of philosophical sciences.
Institute of Harxism-Leninisn of the CPSU Central Committee: "Economic Unity of

the Peoplescﬁ the USSR and Bankruptcy of the Bourgeois Falsifications")

[Text] The resolution of the national question. formation of socialist national
relations. and formation of a new historical community.'the Soviet people. are
important results of building socialism in the USSR. "Fraternal friendship of a
all the peoples of our multinational motherland is being steadily strengthened."
the Accountability Report of the CPSU Central Committee to the 26th Party Congress
stresses. "Our course is to increase the material and spiritual potential of
each republic. and at the same time. its maximum use for the harmonious develop-
ment of the entire country. We have made truly historical advances on this path."

With a radical change in the correlation of forces in the international arena in
favor of the socialist system. and strengthening of the world revolutionary
process as a whole. the imperialist reaction places great stakes on undermining
ideological work in the socialist countries. In particular. the spokesmen for
its interests distort the essence and the forms of manifestation of the processes
of strengthing the economic unity of the socialist nations and nationalities. For
example. the French "sovietologist" B. Carrere d'Encausse compares the USSR with
a "colonial empire."1 The Swiss professor. L. Raves: and other anticommunists2
repeat over and over the "colonial nature" of the economic policy of the CPSU.
The antisoviets try to slander the economic and national policy of the Leninist
party, the relations between different socialist nations and nationalities. and
in this manner to shake their solidarity and friendship. and the monolithic
economic foundation for the social international community. Their goal is to

weaken the great magnetic force of the economic and national policy of the CPSU
and its influence on the progress of mankind.

Palsification of Socioeconomic Fundamentals of Friendship of the Peoples of the
USSR

Deepening of national economic cooperation of our republics under conditions of
mature socialism is characterized by a further increase in the significance of
the socialist system of public relations. and the role of the national and kolkhoz-

cooperative property. Speaking about the accomplishments of the Soviet people
in economics. culture and other spheres of life. and the blossoming of the Uzbek

21

FOR¢NNHC1AI.USE(MVLY
FORl0‘?1(1Al.USE(MNLY

socialist nation. candidate for membership to the CPSU Central Committee Polit-
buru. First Secretary of the Uzbekistan Communist Party Central Committee Sh.
Rushidov noted: "when you really make an evaluation of what has been accom-
plished and you look into our socialist reality. you involuntarily ask the ques-
tion: where did these rich fruits come from? There is one answer: they are the
natural result of the development of the Soviet society. the result of indispu-
table advantages of socialism. the Soviet way of life. our social and state struc-
ture over capitalism."

The essence of national relations of the socialist type. and their progressiveness
are primarily determined by the nature of the socialist social structure. This

is why the anticommunists advance the thesis that public ownership of the means

of production in the USSR, and centralized national economic planning supposedly
cause difficulties crisis phenomena in the economy. in the sphere of social and
national relations . createéobstacles to the improvement in the “quality of life"
of the peoples of the USSR. Some “sovietologists.” counting on the degeneration
of our society, assert that the interests of development of the peoples of the

USSR are supposedly incompatible with communism. with the production relations
existing in our country.

These inventions clearly contradict reality. The volume of industrial production
of the USSR in 1979 was l57-told greater than the 1913 level, while in Belorussia
it was correspondingly 221. in Kazakhstan 238. Moldavia 281. Khirgizia 3hb-fold.

etc. The advanced rates of development of previously backward regions, and their
Comprehensive socioeconomic progress have become possible namely under socialism.

Kazakhstan. at one time the poor outskirts of Russia. has now taken third place
among the union republics for the level of industrial development. and has he-
come a region of the coal. oil, mining. light and food industry. In the years of
the lOth Five-Year Plan alone. 250 industrial enterprises. shops and industries
were started up here. In the framework of the Pavlodar-Ekibastuz territorial
production complex. tractors, ferroalloys. alumina. and products of the chemical
and oil refining inductries are produced. After development of the virgin land.
the Kazakh SSR occupied one of the leading places in the Soviet Union for the
production of agricultural products.

Public ownership of the means of production and centralized economic planning in
which all of the peoples of the USSRactively participate is the basis for the
economic achievements of the socialist nations and nationalities. However. ‘
certain bourgeois ialsifiers of the development of socioeconomic and national
relations in the USSR. defending the "theory of convergence." view socialist
ownership and the ownership of capitalist monopolies as factors which supposedly
have equal importance in solving the national question. Proponents of this
theory often say that the nature of relations of ownership does not fundamentally
affect the development of national relations and international conflicts.6 For
example. N. Glaser and D. Moynihan (United States) believe that in the modern
world. social stratification primarily depends on the ethnic community. while the
nature of ownership in this case supposedly plays a secondary role.7

This type of "methodology" however cannot serve as the basis for a scientific
analysis of the mutual influence of economics and national relations. Marxist
science proved long ago the radical. fundamental difference between socialist
and state-monOpolistic ownership. State enterprises in the capitalist enter-
prises serve in the final analysis to enrich the monopolies and extract an

22
FOR OFTWCIAI.USEINVLY
additional cost. Under socialism. man's exploitation of man is eliminated. The
all-power of the monopolies, especially the transnational ones. is the source of
class and national oppression. The enterprises of the transnational corporations
which control about half of the industrial production of the capitalist world
exploit millions of workers of different countries. The immigrant workers and
the national minorities are in an especially difficult position. According to
the estimates of the National Chairman of the 0.8. Communist Party 6. Hinston,
almost 50 million Blacks, people of Asian and Latin American extraction. American
Indians and representatives of certain other national minorities suffer from
racial oppression. The income of half of the Black familes is below the officially
established poverty level.

The situation of the national minorities in Canada. Great Britain and other
countries is slightly better. The transnational corporations subject the workers
of Asia. Africa and Latin America to neocolonial exploitation. The profits for
the invested capital of foreign companies in the liberated countries is much
higher than in the developed capitalist states. The imperialist monopolies
generate international conflicts and frictions.

Public ownership plays a completely different social role. The founders of
Hnrxism-Leninism the convincingly proved that the common interests of the people
who have beeg liberated from oppression and exploitation lead to their actual
unification. Public ownership unitesthe working people of different nations-
lities and is the basis for the success of the Soviet people. The national economic
complex of the USSR and the unity of the Soviet people will be strengthened on

the basis of the socialist system of public relations. National differences in

the Soviet Union do not result in conflicts since all peoples have common interests.
The souialist social structure guarantees steady economic progress of different
nations and nationalities.

Achievements in the economic development of a number of union republics in certain
cases have forced recognition even from the agencies 38 the bourgeois press which
are far from sympathetic towards the socialist states. Certain Western re-
searchers. in analyzing the problems of socioeconomic and national relations under
capitalism reveal a picture which is disquieting for it. At the same time, they
indicate weighty advantages of the socialist economy. and the achievements of the
peoples of the ESSR. "The Soviet national policy." wrote 6. Zimon. "promoted

the attainment of that level of development of the Asian peoples within the
federation and in the direction of civilization. which considerably surpasses

the leveloof development of the Asian peoples beyond the border, from China to
Turkey."

As is known. it is precisely the national minorities. the immigrant workers and
the workers of the developing countries who become the first victims of economic
crises in the capitalist world. Hundreds of thousands of immigrant workers have
lost work in the FRO. France and other countries of West Europe because of the
economic crises affecting the capitalist system. Thus. in 1976-1978. 650,000
Spaniards who had been working outside the country returned to Spain. The unem-

ployment level in the United States among the Indians on the reservations is
9 times higher than on the average for the country.

Some representatives of bourgeois science do not distinguish between the two

opposite types of national relations, capitalist and socialist. Thus. the

23
FOR'OFFNJA1.US£iONLY
FORi0FTHCJAl.USE¢JNLY

American professor R. Pipes who has become one of the advisers to the new U.S.
administration. believes that the national policy and national problems in the

Soviet Union supposedly have the same nature as in the capitalist countries.

However, the practice of economic interrelations of the peoples of the USSR
refutes such conjectures. The classics of harxism-Leninism revealed that socio-
economic relations determine the processes of formation of international and
national relations and ties. This is why V. I. Lenin stressed that "under capi-
talism. it is impossible to eliminate national (and political in general)
oppression."I The friendly and fruitful cooperation of Soviet socialist repub-
lies does not know the antagonisms that are inherent to capitalist society.

Bourgeois ldeolognes on the Unified National Economic Complex of the USSR

ignoring the constructive role of the unified national economic complex of the
USSR is one of the main trends in distorting the essence of Soviet economics and
the socialist national relations. "The unified economic organism which has
formed within the entire country," L. I. Brezhnev stressed at the 25th CPSU
Congress, "is the strong material foundation for friendship and cooperation of
the people." The national economic complex is the foundation for the indestruc-
tible international unity of the socialist nations and nationalities. Its develop-
ment makes it possible to unify and efficiently use the resources of the country
for the purposes of successful construction of communism, steady strengthening
of the unity of the Soviet people as a social and international community of
people. and improvement in the level of life of the Soviet citizens.

The Western economists ignore all of this, however, asserting that centraliza-
tion of the economy and national economic planning supposedly have a "totali-
tarian" nature and violate the "freedom of economic activity" of the people.
They contradict the national and international interests of the peoples of the
USSR. In the opinion of some "sovietologists," because of centralization of
economic control and the development of a unified national economic complex. the
economic interests of a number of nations and nationalities of the USSR are
supposedly infringed upon. The British bourgeois economist A. Nova. for example.
wrote that the rights of the peoples of the USSR to solve questions of economic
development are mainly fictitious.)3 Kh. Yu. Hibopuu (Austria) believes that
the national minorities in the USSR are supposedly deprived of the ri ht to
determine their economic. political, social and cultural development. a He is 15
echoed by the mentioned Revesz who wrote about "Soviet colonialism“ in economics.

Reality completely refutes this type of assertion. The Western ideologues do
not take into consideration the deep organic interrelationship between the
socialist ownership and political power which is in the hands of the people. The
unified national economic complex in our country is characterized by a combina-
tion of centralized basis with freeing of local initiative, the national
Interests of the socialist nations and nationalities with international. The
economy in all the union republics is controlled on principles of democratic
centralism. This provides complete scope for the development of productive
forces in the union and autonomous republics. the maximum utilization of the
achievements of the scientific and technical revolution. and strengthening the
common character of the life of the socialist nations.

2b

FORiDFFKJAl.USE(MVLY
Inc MHIKIIHPCIBO ﬂrllVliV or the sov1ets or people's deputies ans tne active
pnriiripuiiun or [he collectives of socialist enterprises in production control
indiunlc the ilimsiness oi the attempts to present the USSR economic system as
undemocratic. Socialist competition has become an important lever in involving
the workers of all the union republics in control of the economy. The "worker's
relay race" was thus born at the construction of the Nurek CBS in Tajikistan.
This is a unique form of socialist competition which rallied many enterprises of
the RSFSR. the Ukraine and other republics. "Nurek sections“ were set up at
enterprises of 250 of the country's cities where the workers on mutual contracts

with the builders search for reserves for early manufacture of industrial equip—
ment of high quality.

The CPSU and the Soviet government have always focused and are focusing consider-
able attention on the development of a unified national economic complex. In this
case they take into consideration both the national and the specific interests of
all the union republics. In particular. the "Main Directions for Economic and
Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985 and for the Period to 1990" set the
task of guaranteeing an "improvement in the disposal of production forces in order
to increase the efficiency of social production on the basis of further speciali-
zation and proportional development of the economy of the union republics and
economic regions in the unified national economic complex of the country."

The attempts to cast a shadow on the economic unity of the socialist nations and
nationalities are manifest in the fact that the Heat distorts the essence of the
USSR Constitution which supposedly limits the rights of the union republics in the
area of control of the economy.1 At the same time. article 77 of the USSR Consti-
tution clearly states that each union republic provides the integrated economic

and social development for its territory. The rights of the union republics in
control of the economy have been seriously expanded in recent years according to
the decisions of the CPSU and the Soviet government. The new USSR Constitution.

in addition to the former guarantees of the rights of the union republics. stipu-
lates their right to participate in solving questions referring to management of
the USSR. coordination and control of activity of enterprises, institutions and
organizations of union subordination. and the right to legislative initiative in
the USSR Supreme Soviet. The union republic constitutions have sections on

the State Plan for Economic and Social Development and the State Budget. Thousands
of state enterprises are under union republic subordination.

The peoples of all the union and autonomous republics are actively participating
in solving questions of the socioeconomic development of their republics and the
country as a whole. Thus. discussion of the draft of the CPSU Central Committee
of "Main Directions ior Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985
and for the Period to I990" involved over 121 million people. representatives of
all nations. nationalities. and national groups of our motherland. A large number
or suggestions. additions and refinements were made, in particular in terms of
satisfying certain economic needs of different union and autonomous republics.
Many of these suggestions were adopted. and at the same time. the contents of

this important document were enriched.

Expansion of the economic rights of the union republics is organically tied to
strengthening of the centralized planned principle. According to the USSR Consti-
tution. the competence of the USSR includes conducting a unified socioeconomic

25

FOR 0FF1C1A1.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy. determination of the basic trends for scientific and technical progress,
formulation and approval of the plans for development of the national economy

and social-cultural construction. The centralized economic policy is conducted
in the interests of improving the efficiency of social production and perfecting

the efficient disposal of production forces. This provides direct benefit to all
peoples of the USSR.

The organic unity of the labor efforts of the socialist nations and nationalities
in the framework of a unified national economic complex is based on cooperation
and specialization. The bourgeois economists. acting on the method of "the end
justifies the means." falsify the processes of both cooperation and specialization
of production. in the opinion of the authors of the article in the British
journal THE ECONOMIST. specialization of the economy of a number of Soviet repub—
lics in the USSR national economic complex is supposedly done to prevent the
creation in them of a multisector economy that could become a "base" for the
separation of these republics from the USSR.‘7

However. the peoples of the Soviet Union do not think about leaving it. since

real life demonstrates that unification of resources on the scale of a unified
national economic complex in combined with the harmonious and comprehensive develop-
meat of each republic. They implement production specialization in order to
satisfy the constantly growing material and cultural needs of the population with

regard for the national specific nature and cultural traditions. These processes
are characteristic for all the union and autonomous republics. _

Thus, in Azerbaijan before the revolution there were two developed branches of
industrial production. oil extraction and oil refining. During the construction
of socialism. this monotonous marketability was overcome through the creation and
accelerated growth of other sectors of industry. Industry was set up with a
broadly differentiated structure. The volume of industrial production in Azer-
baijan in 1979 increased as compared to mo 11-fold, and the production of
electricity rose from l.8 billion to 15.2 billion kW-h. The volume of production
of the chemical and petrochemical industry increased bOO—fold. metallurgy.
machine construction and metal working 10-fold. etc.1 "Azerbaijan. in the past
one of the backward Transcaucnsian regions of tsarist Russia," the Turkish
iournnlist A. Dora noted. " is now a prosperous and industrially developed kray."

The "Main Directions for Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-1985
and for the Period to 1990" notes the further improvement in the structure of
Azerbaijan industry through the advanced development of electrical engineering,
instrument making. rndio engineering, electronics and other sectors of the industry.
Production in the light and food industry of the republic will rise 1.3-fold in
1985 as compared to 1980.

Socioeconomic progress of nations and nationalities of our country promotes the
further strengthening of their economic unity, reinforcement of the solidarity
of the Soviet people and refutes the conjectures of the bourgeois fslsifiers
who cherish the vain hope of disintegration of the Soviet society. The deepening
internationalization of economic life and the growing economic interdependnece of
the nations and nationalities of the USSR is a factor of the solidarity of the
Soviet people. All. of them are vitally interested in a further improvement in
cooperation of their labor efforts.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Endeavoring to search for antogonism in the sphere of international economic
relallons of the peoples of the USSR, the anticommunists distort the nature of
their cooperation. Thus. R. Pipes reiterates the economic "competition" which
supposedly occurs between different union and autonomous republics.l9 slanderous
slogans of "competition“ and "antagonisms" in the economic ties of the nations
and ngsionalities of the USSR are disseminated by other Western ideologues as
well.

These assertions are groundless however. The unity of the national economic
complex of the USSR which was organizedon the principles of democratic centralism.
is predetermined by the public ownership of the means of production, separation
and cooperation of labor. common character of the basic interests and goals of
all the nations and nationalities of the USSR that do no know any antagonistic
contradictions in their development. The quality level and efficiency of their
economic cooperation are steadily rising. "The life of today's Dagestan is
unthinkable without machines. automobiles. and turbines sent from Russia, without
coal of the Ukraine. oil of Azerbaijan and Siberia. and bread from Kazakhstan."
wrote Dagcstan resident H. Cadzhiyev. CPSU member since 1926. "without the
Russian and Ukrainian teachers we would not have our schools, five VUZ's and

30 technical schools. If there were no friendship. we would never have had our

powerful industry and hydrelcctric power plants, of which a whole cascade is
currently being erected on the Sulak."2l

Strengthening of the national economic complex of the USSR. further deepening of
mutual complementing of the national economy of all republics. and the successful
work of the laborers in each republic is the guarantee of their further prospering
and convergence. Mutually advantageous cooperation of the efforts of the
socialist nations and nationalities is displayed in many forms. For example. the
material production of the Kazakh SSR uses the products of 96 sectors of the
economy of other union republics, while Kazakhstan in turn supplies them with
products of 76 sectors. Major industrial enterprises of all the republics are
interlinked by thousands of ties. Thus, the Minsk tractor plant which sends
products to many union and autonomous republics.receives set—completing items from
274 subcontracting plants from the RSFSR, Ukraine, Armenia. Latvia, Uzbekistan.
etc.

By the way, these lacts of the actuality of economic cooperation of the peoples
of the USSRare hardly capable of changing the mind of the anticommunists. They
try to distort them as well. Even some of their colleagues who are trying to keep
in step with the times speak ironically of such "dinosaurs" which are acting in
the spirit of the "cold war" and are not capable of more refined methods of
ideological struggle. Nove has noted. in particular. that in the opinion of
curtain Western authors. the "center (government of the USSR, Ye. T.) can not be
fair. If capital investments are made to the development of the economy of a
certain region. then this is to exploit the local residents and confiscate their
resources. if the investments are not made, then, in the words of these
nationalists. this is to purposefully leave the region poorly developed and a
backward appendage or the center."

Our country is constantly conducting a course to equalize the levels of economic
development of different peoples. This task has fundamentally already been
resolved. At the same time. a number of bourgeois ideologues exaggerate the thesis
that in the USSR special attention is supposedly never given during the planning

to equalization of the economic development 053a11 peoples. and today this task
has been altogether pushed to the background.

2?
FORiOFFRJAl.USE(MVLY
mi: omcm. use ONLY

in refuting this slander. candidate for membership to the CPSU Central Committee
Politburo. First Secretary of the Georgian Communist Party Central Committee

[-2. Shevardnadze wrote: "Our enemies. class enemies abroad are spreadinga lie
about Soviet Georgia. about the other union republics and about their
economy and culture. asserting that the USSR supposedly ignores the economic
interests of individual republics and nations. The facts. however. speak of
something completely different." In 1970-1979. the national income of the USSR
rose by 571. and the Georgian SSR by 762. The total volume of production of
industry increased in the country by 722. and in Georgia by 802.24 There is
roughly the same situation in the sphere of ppoduction of the gross agricultural
products and in capital construction. These leading rates of development of the
republic's national economy are the direct result of the Leninist national policy
of the CPSU. In 1979 for [.000 people 10 years old and older, the following

had higher and secondary education: 665 in the RSFSR. 698 in Georgia. 645 in
Latvia. 639 in Uzbekistan. 7l3 in Armenia. etc.

The "Main Directions for Economic and Social Development of the USSR for 1981-
1985 and [or the Period to 1990" notes the further rise in the economy and
culture of all the union republics and economic regions. improvement in the
integration of their economy.and deepening arthe all-union division of labor.
The development of industry in the republics of the Transcaucasus, Moldavia.
Belorussia and Uzbekistan is envisaged at higher rates than for the country as a
whole. In evaluating the importance of this document. member of the Presidium of
the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia Central Committee. Chairman of the Govern—
ment of the Slovak Socialist Republic P. Tsolotka noted that it "reflects the
leading achievements of the USSR in implementing the principles of socialist
internationalism. The Soviet Union has attained true equality of people of
different nationalities and has created all the conditions for their full and
equal participation in the life of the Soviet society."

Individual bourgeois scientists refute the falsification of the policy of
proportional and harmonious development of the national economy of all union and
autonomous republics. The British sociologist S. White who has been to the
Soviet Union many times has indicated the higher rates of economic development
of Armgnia. Moldavta. Kazakhstanandthe Baltic republics as compared to the
RSFSR. ’

A brilliant example or the concern for comprehenaize progress of previously
backward peoples is the decree of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council
of Ministers "On Measures for Further Economic and Social Development of the
Regions of Residence of the Nationalities of the North" which was adopted in
February 1980. The economic hackwardness of the former national regions of our
country in the times of tsnrism and capitalism have been completely and entirely
eliminated. All the republics have attained enormous success in developing

industry. agriculture. transportation. They are no longer divided into industri-
ally developed and agrarian.

The flimsiness of the falsification of the economic unity of the peoples of the
USSR is clearly manifest in the fact that the "Sovietologists" often use contra—

dictory "arguments." Thus. setting hopes on the nationalistic moods, S. Shrayok
(United States) writes that supposedly in the Baltic region "economic progress

28
FOR OFFNJAL.USE(MULY
may cause pride. bordering on the feeling of superiority over other nations."
striving to attain autonomy.26 But with these words he involuNtarily refutes many
fabrications of his colleagues. His recognition of the progress of the Baltic

republics contradicts the assertion of "Russian" and "Soviet colonialism" in the
sphere of economics, etc.

As for the calculations of provoking nationalism. they are completely groundless,
since it is precisely cooperation of efforts and cooperation of sovereign Soviet
republics. and all the socialist nations and nationalities that serve as one of

the main sources of economic advances in Lithuania. Latvia and Estonia. and equally
in other republics. Two heat and electric power stations were built in Riga. a
plant of chemical fiber in Daugavpils and many other facilities as a result of the
cooperation of efforts in the framework of the unified national economic complex

in Latvia. At the same time. the workers of Latvia are helping to build a giant
automotive plant in Naberezhnyye Chelny. the Sayano-Shushensk hydraulic power
engineering complex. and many other facilities. The production process of the Riga
“VEF” plant supports 900 enterprises of other republics. “Without the fraternal
international support and unselfish help on the part of the peoples of the Soviet
Union. without reliable support on the unified national economic complex of the
country. small Latvia which has been suppressed for centuries would never have been
able to even approach the level of these achievements which are now evident to the
entire world." said the First Secretary of the Latvian Communist Party Central
Committee A. Voss at the 26th CPSU Congress.

Bourgeois Concept of "Modernization" in the Service of Antisovietism

Socialist society affords the broadest outlook for scientific and technical pro-
gress which serves as one of the main levers for creating the material and technical
base for communism, strengthening of the unified national economic complex of the
USSR. prospering and convergence of all classes and strata of society. all nations
and nationalities of the USSR. Realization of the achievements of the scientific
and technical revolution has become one of the chief areas of competition of other
systems. This is why the bourgeois ideologues cast a shadow on the processes of
evolution of the scientific and technical revolution in the socialist countries.

including the Soviet Union. They widely advertise the so-called concept of
"modernization," in particular.

In the opinion of the authors of one of the collective works, "modernization" is
the process of evolution from agrarian to industrial society. which results in an
improvement in the level of knowledge and strengthening of man's control over
nature.27 This concept. using the methodology of the theories of the “industrial"
and “post-industrial“ society. "convergence." "stages of economic growth.“
supplements and develops them. In contrast to the theory of "unified industrial
society." the theory of "modernization" seems to have a complicated nature. It
focuses attention not only on the problems of industrial growth. but also on the
development of social. national relations. modern culture. urbanization. science.
public health. means of mass communication. etc. The apologists of "modernization"
generally ignore the role of socioeconomic formations and social-class factors.

The "sovietologists." armed with this concept. strive to undermine the friendship
of the peoples of the USSR. The mentioned 6. Zimon thus asserts that industriali-
zntinn. urbanization. increase in the level of education. development of national

29
IN)! 0511C1A1.lﬂﬂE(NVLY
INDR‘OFFICIAL.USEZOBHJ!

elites. and creation of a network of interregional conmmnications all psgmote the
growth of nationalism in the USSR and disintegration of Soviet society. "Moder-
nization and its accompanying demographic shifts which occur in Central Asia and
Kazakhstan.“ R. Levis. R. Rowland and R. Klem believe. "can result in social and
political tension."29

In this case they start from the bourgeois sociological concept of "ethnic strati-
fication“ which is based on the false idea of the long age of nations and national
antagonisms. "Ethnic stratification." in their opinion, "is concerned with the
hierarchical division of peoples in the sphere of socioeconomic relations. and is
the universal characteristic feature of all states which are populated by more
than one ethnic group. that is. essentially the overwhelming majority of countries
in the world."30 These "specialists" classify the United States and the USSR
among these states. ignoring the class structure of society and absolutizing the
ethnic and scientific—technical factors.

The experience of social development of mankind has shown against the assertions
of the falsifiers that national inequality is the inherent feature of any
exploiting structure. The objective foundations for national inequality have been
eliminated under conditions of socialism. It is precisely the unification of
peoples in the Soviet multinational state. their consolidation into a unified
historical community which have provided really reliable guarantees for equal
rights. the prospering of all nations and nationalities.and their truly free and
sovereign development. Each union republic independently implements state power
on its territory. with the exception of the rights in the competence of the USSR.
The communists successively support the free will of the peoples.

The bourgeois apologists often assert that "different ethnic groups do not enjoy
the results of modernization to an equal degree."3l By their words. only the
Russians are supposedly the "most modernized" nation of the USSR, whils the nations
and nationalities of Central Asia are poorly exposed to modernization. 2 The
flimsiness of these conjectures is evident. however. in studying reality. Before
the victory of the Grunt Octoher Socialist Revolution. the peoples of the Caucasus.
Central Asia. Kazakhstan and other national regions were economically and culturally
poorly developed. No nmjor industrial enterprises had been built in Central Asia
before the revolution. and agriculture was in an extremely neglected state. In

all or Central Asia there were no more than 58.000 industrial workers. The number
of literate people in Kazakhstan in 1906 was about 22 of the population.

Under socialism. especially under conditions of its maturity. scientific and
technical progress has become an important factor of the true modernisation of

all nations and nationalities. primarily the previously backward. Practical imple-
mentation of the national program of the CPSU has eliminated national oppression

in our country. achieved actual equality of all nations and nationalities. unpre-
redented prospering of their economy. political and cultural life. Today at one
Tashkent textile kombinat alone there are more workers than there were before the
revolution in all of Uzbekistan. The industry that has been created in the re-
public during Soviet power is represented by over 100 sectors. including metal-
lurgical. anchine building. power engineering. chemical. gas. gold extracting. etc.
Tens of thousands of Uzbek workers labor in industry jointly with the representa-
tives of other nationalities. In Central Asia. the power saturation for 100 ha of
arable land is double the average union indicators.

30
KNOWKMLWEOMX
The eastern Soviet republics have attained unprecedented success in training
personnel. developing pnhlic education and culture. Essentially 1002 literacy

of the population has been attained. In Uzbekistan in 1978 there were 33.636
scientific workers as compared to 3026 in 1940. There were no higher educational
institutions in the republic before the revolution. but in 1979—80 school year.
43 VUZ's were in operation. It is characteristics that the rates of training
specialists in many union republics is higher than the union average.

This is why the American "sovietologist" M. Shorish could not help but admit:

"The Soviet strategy for developmenthas converted Central Asia in 50 years from a
society defeated by poverty and illiteracy into an economically developed region,
where at least the basic needs of the population have been provided for and almost
1002 literacy has been reached."33 The USSR does not have those contrasts in the
level of economic development of different regions, as the developed capitalist
countries. Zones at "economic disaster" are sometimes named in Great Britain.

for example. Scotland. Hales and North Ireland. In Italy the incomes of the
residents in the southern regions is twice as low as in the north.

The attempts of certain proponents of the concept of "modernization" to3gontrast
the Russians to the other peoples of the USSR are completely unfounded. Analysis
of the achievements of the peoples of our country in the development of economics
and culture shows that this success is very much the result of mutual cooperation
of all peoples of the USSR. and primarily the Russian people. The workers of
Russia have given enormous help to the other peopls of the USSR in their socio-
economic development and national liberation. in attaining true modernization of
the economy and society. "We feel special love and boundless gratitude to our
sensitive and concerned older brother. the great working Russian people." the

First Secretary of the Bashkir CPSU obkom H. z. Shakirov said at the 26th CPSU
Congress.

The ideologues of anticommunism do not cease their attempts to belittle the
universally historical role of the Leninist party in uniting the Soviet people. and
to falsify such factors of its unity as the USSR national economic complex. public
ownership of the means of production. and centralized economic planning. The
"sovictologists" distort the processes of internationalization of the economic
life of the socialist nations and nationalities. and balancing of the levels of
economic development of the union and autonomous republics. Life has demon-
strated, however. that participation in a unified national economic complex

makes it possible for the socialist nations and nationalities to make the

maximum use of their resources. Unification of material and labor resources of
all peoples of the USSR meets their basic international and national interests.

reflecting the important advantage of socialism over capitalism.
FOOTNOTES

1. H. Carrere d'Encausse, "L'Empire Eclaté: La Révolte des Nations en URSS."
Paris. 1978.

2. THE ECONOMlST, March 19. 1977, pp 62-63; L. Revgpz. "Volk aua 100 Nationali—
thten. Di sochtische Hinderheitenfrage." Bern. 1979. p 409.

3. A JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE POLITICS, No 2, 1978. p 140.

31
FORIOFFKJAL.USE(N§LY
10.
11.

12.

I3.
14.
15.
16.
l7.

18.

19.

20.

21.

23.

24.

25.

26.

FINICIWﬂCJAl.USE¢MVLY

"The Ukraine within the USSR: An Economic Balance Sheet.“ New York. 1977. p 311.
"The Future of Cnmmunism in Europe." Detroit. 1975. pp 175-177. 236-261.

"Nationality and Population Change in Russia and the USSR." New York. 1976;
"Ethnic Conflict in the Hester“ Horld." Ithaca. 1977.

"Ethnicity. Theory and Experience." Cambridge (Haas.). 1975. p 17.

See K. Marx and F. Engels. "Soch." [Works]. Vol 6. p 371. Vol 35. p 221.

0.5. NEWS AND WORLD REPORT, 25 September. 1978. p 44.

OSTEUROPA . No 6. 1979. p 448.

"Nationalities and Nationalism in the USSR: A Soviet Dilemma." Washington. 1977.

Lenin. V. I. "Polnoye aobraniye aochineniy" [Complete Collected Works]. Vol 30.
p 22.

A. Novc. "The Soviet Economic System. " London. 1977. p 67.
"Review of Soclnlist Law." No 6. 1976. p 226.

L. Révész. 0p. cit.. p 409.

H. Carrere d'Encnusse. 0p. cit.. OSTEUROPA. No 6. 1979. pp 455-657.
THE ECONOHIST.19 March . 1977. p 63.

See "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979" [National Economy of the USSR in 1979].
Statistical Annual. Izdatel'stvo "Statistika." 1980, p 152, 168.

"Ethnicity. Theory and Experience." p 663; “Handbook of Major Soviet Nation-
alities." New York-London. 1975.

THE ECONOHIST. 19 March, 1977. p 63: INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS. No l. 1976. p 119.

IZVESTIYA. 26 January 1979.

. A. Nove. 0p.cit.. p 68.

N. Ponknitls. "Dcr Finanznusgleich in der Sowjetunion und seine Bedeutung far
dic Wirtschaftsontvicklung dcr Unionarepubliken." Berlin. 1977. p 191; "Soviet
Studies." No 3. 1980. p 368.

See "Narndnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1979." p 605. 163. 136.

"Political Culture and Political Change in Conmmniat States." New York. 1977.
p 51.

"Nationality Group Survival in Hulti-Ethnic States. Shifting Support Patterns
in the Soviet Baltic Region." New York-London. 1977, p 95.

32
FINICHHHCJAI.USE!NNLY
27.

28.
29.

30.

3|.
32.
33.

3h.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE RUSSIAN REVIEW. January 1979, p 117. H. Kahn interprets the content of
this theory in roughly the same way (R. Kahn. "World Economic Development 1979
and Beyond." Colorado, 1979).

OSTEUROPA. No b. 1979. pp 649-450.

CANADIAN SLAVONIC PAPTERS. Nos 2 and 3, 1975. p 300.

"Change and Adaptation in Soviet and East European Politics," New York, 1976,
pp 217-218.

lbid. p 218.
"Nationality and Population Change in Russia and the USSR." New York, 1976.
CANADIAN SLAVONIC PAPERS, Nos 2 and 3. 1975. p 413.

"Ethnic Russia in the USSR: The Dilemma of Dominance," New York, 1980.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonomiki", 1981

9035
C50:

1800/99

33
IKNROFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

SOVIET BTHNOGRAPHIC THEORIES OUTLINE!)
Moscow SOVETSKAYA E‘l‘NOGllAl-‘IYA in Russian “0 lo, Jul-Aug 81 pp 176-178.

[Review by G. 8. Markov of book "Sovraaennyye problemy etnografii (ocherki teorii
i istorii) [Contemporary Problems of Ethnography (Essays in Theory and History” by
Yu. V. Bromley. Moscow, Nauka, 390 pp.)

[Excetpd The development of Soviet ethnographic science during the past few
decades has been marked by great successes in the elaboration of theoretical and
practical problems, in the study of the peoples of the world, and. first of all, in
the study of the peoples of the Soviet Union. New significant directions have de-
veloped, the contacts and interactions with a number of adjacent sciences have been
strengthened. In the development of these processes the works of Academician Yu.
V. Bromley have been of outstanding significance, in particular his book "Ethnic
Cmunity and Ethnography".

In the introduction of the book the author defines the contents and task of his
work in the following way: "With all the difference in profile (approach, subject,
and scope) of the different essays, as a whole they are all in the final analysis
subjected to one general idea: To the further substantiation and development of
conceptions about the subject sphere of contemporary ethnography as the science of
ethnic coununities and at the same time to the more precise definition of the range
of its most important current problem" (p 6).

In the examination of one of the key questions of ethnographic theory--the nature
of the ethnic community and its basic types-~Yu. V. Bro-lay introduces a great deal
that is new by comparison with his earlier research. Noting the multi-plane char-
acter of such a complex phenomenon as the ethnic cos-unity. he clearly fortnulates
its most characteristic features. Yu. V. Bromley writes: “As the common external
reference point for the determination of the phenomena standing for the term
"ethnic coununity" we may take the circmstance that it is applied to those cases
of the use of the word "people" (and correspondingly of the terns "tribe", "nation-

a

slity" and "nation“) when it signifies the coauunxty of people who have their own
self-designations" (p 12). It must be noted that with the whole simplicity of this
criterion, he accurately characterizes the concept of "ethnic cousunity" 'in all
stages of its historical development. And later the author examines the question
of how one can distinguish ethnonym from toponym and politonym (a new and, it

appears, successful term proposed by Yu. V. Bromley for designating the develqpnsnt

310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of power [potestarnyy] or authority [politicheskiy]. In connection with this. it is

noted: "If an appropriate group of people persistently from generation to generation
preserves its self-designation, then most likely this self-designation is an ethnonym.
But a politonym. . .gOes out of use comparatively quickly. . . Frequently the fate of

the toponym is analogous" (pp 13, 14). The author points out that, apart from the
ethnonym as an external criterion, the community of self-consciousness (the anti-
thesis “we"--"they“) suggests the belonging to a certain ethnic community. More-
over, by ethnic self-consciousness is meant the conceptions of people about their
own ethnic community, while "ethnic consciousness includes the whole complex of

the ethnically colored components of social consciousness" (p 15). Thus, the ethnic
community is characterized by the stability of criteria and the presence of a
specifically ethnic culture.

In connection with the determination of the criteria of the ethnic community, Yu. V.
Bromley enters into a polemic with authors who have tried to advance biological
(racial) features as ethno-differentiating criteria and convincingly shows that the
ethnic community does not represent a biological population and that the existence
of ethnic conmmnities is called forth not by biological, but by aocio-cultural
factors (p 18). As in earlier works as well. the author emphasizes the significance
of endogamy for the self-reproduction of ethnic communities and examines the mecha-
nism of its manifestation in different historical situations.

0f exceedingly great theoretical significance is the proposal by Yu. V. Bromley to
distinguish the concept of ethnic comunity in the broad and the narrow meaning of
this term. Properly. ethnic community (in the narrow meaning of the term) is de-
termined in this connection as "a historically developed stable aggregate of people
on a defined territory. possessing common and relatively stable peculiarities of
culture (including language) and psyche, as well as consciOusness of its own unity
and difference from all other similar formations (self-consciousness), fixed in the
self-designation (ethnonym)" (p 27). Already in earlier works the author proposed
to call this narrow concept of the term "ethnic community" "etnikos" (ethnokos).

It is proposed to consider "ethno-social organisms" (ESO)--synthetic formations, in
which ethnic communities are linked with social organisms of a territorial-ethnic
character (tribes. states) (pp 31, 32)--as a more general type of ethnic formation.
The author distinguishes three basic varieties of such ethno-social organisms:

(l) theethnic community and the social organism coincide; (2) from one ethnic com-
munity some ethno-social formations are excluded from membership by social organ-
isms; (3) several compact and relatively independent ethnic cmmmunities exist within
the boundaries of one sociopolitical community (state) simultaneously (pp 35, 36ff).

The delimitation of the narrow and broad understanding of the term "ethnic commun-
ity" is of great significance, as Yu. V. Bromley correctly emphasizes, for the
solution of the debatable problem of the interrelationship of the concepts of
"nation" and "nationality". In connection with the multiple meaning of the term
"nationality" the proposal is advanced to render it more precise through a special
"indicator" which emphasizes the strictly ethnic meaning--"ethnonationa1ity" (p 40).

Exceedingly promising from the standpoint of further research is the author's idea
of the necessity of the delimitation and terminological fixation of the types of

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ethnic communities that have developed in conditions of different socio-economic
formations. In so doing, the ethnic communities of the primitive-communal period,
it is proposed. are to be called "paleogenetic", those of the pro-capitalist period
--"archogenetic", and those which developed later-"neogenetic" (p 62). That kind
of historical classification will play a positive role in further ethnogenetic re-
search.

Yu. V. Bromley arrives at a number of important conclusions in the analysis of the
problem of the hierarchical nature of historical-cultural communities. The author
notes that ethnography is called upon to study all varieties of historical-cultural
communities, their basic features and tendencies of the dynamic of development. By
historical-cultural communities are meant communities which are characterised by a
whole complex of distinguishing characteristics. one of which may be regarded as
the system-forming one. These communities are subdivided by the author into two
categories: ethnic communities which have stable, historically-developed traits of
Culture, and "metaethnic" communities, which subdivide themselves into ethno-social
and strictly ethnic communities (see pp 46, 47). In addition, micro-ethnic units
(for example, the family) are distinguished, which represent the limit of the divi-
sibility of the basic ethnic community. An intermediate position between micro-
ethni: units and ethnic communities is occupied by "subethnic communities", the
existence of which is connected with the "realisation of group peculiarities of
these of those components of culture" (p 48).

Yu. V. Bromley emphasizes that all varieties of ethnic communities must be distin-
guished from ethnographic communities, which appear in two varieties: "Ethnogra-
phic groups” and’historical-ethnographic regions". Also noted is the presence of
a distinctive hierarchy of historical-ethnographic (traditional-cultural) units:
(1) the ethnographic group; (2) the historical-ethnographic region; and (3) the
historical-ethnographic province (pp 49, 50).

0f exceptional interest for theoretical ethnography is also the analysis and
general characterization of ethnical processes, the theory of which for a long time
remained one of the least elaborated questions in ethnographic science. In recent
years, thanks to the works of Yu. V. Bromley and his followers, this important gap
began to be rapidly filled. The work under review contains new and exceedingly im-
portant conclusions and generalizations.

As the author correctly notes, ethnography is confronted with the task of making
known the typical peculiarities of the dynamic of ethnic processes (p 63). The
author has in mind, and this must be emphasized. not only the change of ethnic
membership, but above all the change of ethnic salfconsciousness. The change of
ethnic membership takes place at the rate of the change of individual components of
the ethnic system. This process has an evolutionary character. The change of
ethnic self-consciousness is the break of gradualness and the transition to a new
state. Yu. V. Bromley proposes to call the first of the processes mentioned
"ethnoevolutionary" and the second "ethnotransformationsl"--which is completely
acceptable. Exceedingly important is the conclusion about the general character
of the ethnic processes, which, as the author indicates, flow in two directions:
processes of ethnic division (ethnic divergence) and ethnic unification (pp 65,
66). Yu. V. Bromley defines these general theoretical propositions concretely,

36
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
examining the course of ethnic processes in the conditions of various socio-
economic formations. Thus, for pre-class societies ethno-divisive processes were
most characteristic. With the formation of class society, ethnic unification
emanating in the course of the consolidation, assimilation and intetethnic inte-
gration becomes the main direction of ethnic processes. Besides the two types of
consolidation processes proposed earlier--ethnotransformstion and ethnoevolution--
Yu. V. Bromley establishes the presence of a third type of process, viz., ethno-
genetic intermixture. The author emphasizes in this connection the possibility of
the transformation of interethnic integration into ethnogenetic intermixture.

As a whole. the typology of ethnic processes proposed by Yu. V. Bromley is as
follows: (a) ethnic divergence; (b) interethnic consolidation; (c) ethnic inter-
mixture; (6) intraethnic consolidation; (e) interethnic integration; (f) and ethnic
assimilation. In connection with the typology that has been examined, the author

especially emphasizes that of six enumerated processes five have a unifying charac-
ter (p 70).

of great theoretical and practical significance is the typology of the ethnic struc-
ture of the ethnosocial organisms of mankind throughout world history proposed by
Yu. V. Bromley. It appears that he is completely right in considering that the
basic ethnic subdivision of primitive society was not the family, but the tribe.
incidentally, the author of the present review, in investigating the question of
who was the bearer of the specific way of life in the primitive period, in due
course arrived at a similar conclusion.*

With the disintegration of primitive society, as Yu. V. Bromley shows, nationality
becomes the basic ethnic subdivision in the pre-capitalist period, having arisen
mainly as the consequence of unifying processes.

And. finally, the book examines the process of the transformation of nationalities
into nations-~which was accompanied by the further increase in the homogeneity of

culture and the increase of the strength of internal cultural and information rela-
tions (see p 75).

of special significance are the parts of the book which deal with the problems of
ethnography which have remained a subject of sharp discussions for so long in
science at home and abroad. And although some questions may the subject of discus-
sion in the future, on the whole Yu. V. Bromley was able in a convincing way to
generalize the experience accumulated by Soviet ethnography and, in our view, per-
fectly correctly outlined the subject sphere of ethnographic science.

Continuing research begun earlier, the author of the work under review defines more
precisely the place of ethnography among the adjacent sciences-~history and socio-
logy. Correctly regarding ethnic communities and peoples as the subject of ethno-
graphy, Yu. V. Bromley concludes that “the examination of the components of the
ethnic community through the prism of their fulfillment of ethnic functions, above

*See 6. E. Markov, “Etnos, etnicheskiye protsessy i obraz zhizni" [Ethnic Community,
Ethnic Processes and Mode of Life" in RASY I NARODY, vyp. 7, Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

37
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all under the aspect of ethnic specificity, is the basic criterion for the isola-
tion of the subject sphere of ethnography (p 83).

Yu. V. Bromley graphically and convincingly shows the urgency of ethnographic re-
search, refuting the current notion according to uhich it is proposed that the
weakening of ethnic specificity will lead to the disappearance of the subject of
ethnography. In this connection he writes: "As long as peoples and ethnic conun-
ities exist, ethnography will preserve its research subject, and besides not only
as the historical past, but also as the living reality" (p 85).

While sharing the basic ideas developed by the author in connection with the prob-
lems under review, we must, however, note a certain disputsbility of some particu-
Isr questions. We shall touch above all on the correlations between the particular
and the general, in other words, the ethnic, i. e., the particular, and the typical
(the general) in the economic-cultural types and historical-ethnographic regions.
Yu. V. Bromley sees the most urgent task in the research on the first of these
aspects. lts importance, indeed, is so evident that it does not need any further
discussion. However, the chief accent on this aspect of the life activity of
peoples is nevertheless somewhat one-sided since the second aspect is no less
essential for its ethnographic characterisation. Regardless of the ethnic peculiar-
ities of different groups of the population living in similar natural conditions and
finding themselves on approximately the same level of development of socio-economic
relations, the features of couununity in their ethnographic characterization are no
less significant than the particular ethnic features. Re have in mind, above all,
the community of the economic-cultural type, social structure, social organization,
etc. There are very many examples of this: It is sufficient to refer to the groups
that are known to us, such as the hoe cultivators, the taiga and tropical hunters,
the nomads, etc. of course, among each one of these ethnic groups one can find a
multitude of specific peculiarities in material and spiritual culture. But all the
same, the main thing In their vital activity is a cannon type of economy and social
structure.

Thus, within the limits of ethnography as a unified science, two subject spheres
exist and interact in the closest manner: The sphere of the ethnic community and
ethnic processes, and the sphere of comparative research on culture. The synthesis

of these two spheres leads to an exhaustive characterisation of the vital activity
of peoples in terms of ethnic and economic-Cultural aspects.

or theoretical and historiographical interest are the parts of the book in which
bourgeois cultural and social anthropology is subjected to a profound and detailed
critique from the perspective of Soviet ethnography. In this connection the author
again returns to the question of the subject matter of ethnographic science and
notes in addition that in our time ethnic specificity is increasingly displaced in
the sphere of spiritual culture and psychological phenomena (p 109).

The assessment of the significance of the work by Yu. V. Bromley ha' in essence al-
ready been given in the course of reviewing its individual parts. P will, without
a doubt, become a handbook of every ethnographer. Unfortunately, we must note the
intolerably small edition of the book (5,000 copies). Already on the day on which
it went on sale it became a bibliographical rarity. At the same time, I want to

emphasize the urgent necessity of the republication of another work by Yu. V. Brom-

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ley--"Etnos i eunografiya" l'rhe Ethnic Comunity and EthnOgrnphy], which already
long ago became s bibliographical rarity and for this reason inaccessible for a
wide circle of readers who.hnve experienced a constentdeunnd for this publication.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'scvo "Nauka", "Sovetskays Etnogrsfiyn", 1981

8970
C80: 1800/66

39
F!)lt()FFICIAI.IJSEZ(NQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

LACK OF ARMENIAN LITERATURE IN CENTRAL PRESS DEPLORED
Yerevan LITERATURNAYA ARMENIYA in Russian No 7, Jul 81 pp 80-84

[Article by Karen Simonyan: "The Critic and the Contemporary Armenian Literary
Process"!

[Text] First Article Perhaps there are other vorks
which deserve attention. but I
have not read them.

Suren Agababyan,
critic

There is no doubt that the time between the writers' congresses and all of the
1970s were sterile and poor years for Armenian Soviet literature in achievements,
but nevertheless they were not, as the critic asserts, a period of losses of the
"frontiers conquered earlier," i. e., a period of deviation.

And of this we can be convinced, having remembered the numerOus books of Armenian
authors published by the union republic publishers. This qualitatively new approach
to our national literature arose from the efforts of the leadership of the Union of
Writers of Armenia and thanks to the initiative and supportive attitude of the pub-
lishers "Sovetskiy pisatel'", "Khudozhestvennaya literature", "Holodaya Rossiya",
and "Dctskays literatura". Let us add to this also the publications of our journal
LITERATURNAYA ARMENIYA. Especially in recent years, the journal has striven to
present in Russian practically all of the best that has appeared in Armenian lite-
rature. Thus, the all-Union press now has a greater opportunity to judge the
features, developmental tendencies, creative search nnd--and why not?--failures and
shortcomings of our national literature.

And in essence, it seems, there are no grounds to regard our literature isolated, to
think that it does not take part in the all-Union literary process or does not march
in step with it. And really all the more it is not “representative" as in the recent
pastﬁ

But let us leaf through LITERATURNAYA GAZETA and the journal DRUZHBA NARODOV. Let
us turn the pages and be convinced that, judging by this paper and periodical,
Armenian Soviet literature does not exist or hardly exists on the general map of our

ho
FOR‘OFEK1AI.USE10NL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national literatures.

This circumstance alone must compel us to ponder seriously, to attempt to discover
the reasons for the given phenomenon. And to find them is very important since many
misunderstandings, having formed against each other, create the impression as if
Armenian Soviet literature really does not exist, but there are "individual writers!’
By the way, "individual writers" exist also in Estonia, Georgia and Lithuania, but
side by side with them, you know, there exists also the phenomenon of Estonian,
Georgian or Lithuanian prose, for which the same distinctiveness and individuality
is characteristic as for every representative of this prose.

Our search naturally leads us to the critics and specialists in literature who study
Armenian Soviet literature, some of whom for many years running already are engaged
in a deplorable business: to prove by whatever means, both inside the republic it-
self and beyond its boundaries, that contemporary Armenian prose as such is a fic-
tion.

Thus, for example, the critic Suren Agababyan asserts in his article "Once Again on
the Alarms of Criticism" that no literary process exists and that the so-called

literary process was invented, as it were, by some malefactors as a peculiar "shield'
with whose aid they "smooth over individualities" and “justify false and superficial
pulp literature“.

Hell, but since the "literary process" is only "a shield for the smoothing over of
individualities," it is also precisely because of the existence of this very literary
process that our literature yielded to "frontiers conquered earlier."

Hhat indestructible logicl.
And all the same, we will raise the question--but why?

Because, explains Suren Agababyan, our literature "in the best case reflects only ex-
ternal, visible aspects of reality, but not its. . . inner picture."

What of it, every critic, as well as every individual, can have his own opinion, even
if they are unsubstantiated. And I would not ascribe significance to such private
opinion if. . . if this conviction--that there is no contemporary Armenian national
literature, that there is no literary process--had not already outgrown the limits

of merely personal opinion and had not become transformed into a fully determined
frame of mind.

Here is still another example. Peliks Heloyan, who in his article "Style and Styli-
zation" cited an extensive list of our well-known prose writers actively taking part
in the contemporary literary process, after enumerating one by one, raises the
question: "who among them has established the frontiers of his world and confirmed
the laws controlling this world that are characteristic of it alone, who among them
has shown us their own life experience and his own world view interpreted by this
life experience?" And he himself answers this question-nobody. Of course, a
critic can put the question in this way, we have already long ago become used to
such'Vacillations of literary criticism." However, the whole point is that no one,

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

literally no one among the enormous list cited by Malayan is perceived by the critic
as a full-fledged prise writer, as a real writer.

I believe that the reader is sufficiently prepared, therefore I will present him with
still another dubious judgment.

In one of his articles ("Criticism in Retreat"), Suren Agababyan writes: "Our prose
--I am thinking not of individual works of it, but of the general level--having in-
dulged in the element of abstract-moralizing maxims, has moved away from the solu-
tion of contemporary reality and the contemporary hero. It contains no real life
with its complex heroes, with its breathing and colors."

And in order for no one to appeal this declaration, the critic, after the prublica-
ti0n of his "sentence", hastily saddled the creative work of the prose writers with
such labels as /"technocratism", "Kafkaesque tendencies", "cosmopolitan symbiosis",
and "biological pessimism" (22).] And these labels were hung on talented representa-
tives of our contemporary prose, whose works are not only known to readers through-
out the Soviet Union, but have become noteworthy phenomena of the Soviet multi-
national literary process--alth0ugh for the critic it simply does not exist.

However, the fears of Suren Agababyan that someone will attempt to contradict him
are in vain. 0n the contrary, he is aided on the spot by another "specialist on
Armenian literature"--Yelena Aleksanyan, who maintains that, yes, "0n the whole,
Armenian Soviet prose, having indulged itself in the element of abstract-moralizins
maxima,‘ has moved away from the solution of the problems of contemporary reality
and the contemporary hero." He shall be lenient towards her and not call attention
to the fact that, after having repeated the idea of a colleague in entirety, she--in
a fit of inspiration, did not enclose it fully in quotation marks. But what of it,
we will leave this to the conscience of the author.

But let us return to Suren Agabahyan.

Having become enticed by the possibility of making a "discovery", he attempts to
prove in his article "The Meaning of Struggle“ that "there is an important difference
between a "writer of life" and a'hriter of reality". Hhile the "writer of reality",
he explains, recreates the chain of the lines of the actions of occurrences, events,
and things that are evident (precise translation, K. 8.), the writer of life in-
merses himself, penetrates into the depths and interprets life in all its unity."

Let us leave this inspired terminological discovery on the conscience of the critic,
a discovery which prior to this was unknown in the history of world literature and
about which neither Aristotle and Henel nor Losev and Asmus managed to know. Let

us only say that after this it is at least understandable why Armenian Soviet prose

"does not exist." It turns out,because our writers who are engaged in the writing
of prose are only "writers of reality", who'ao not immerse themselves," "do not
penetrate," "do not interpret life in all its unity."

It seems to me that some of our critics simply became confused in their contradictory
"discoveries" and were mistaken in the diversity of the means of thematic, genre

and artistic embodiment of life in Armenian prose. And it is precisely out of this
confusion of theirs that such unsubstantiated declarations arise.

h2
F03‘0F?1C1AL.US£|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By way of illustration, one of them, laven Avetiayan, is convinced that "in our
time not only the city penetrates the village, but the [village also penetrates
the city in its turn/ (?!--K. 8.). The reason for this, it turns out, is "the so-
called scientific-technical revolution." And since this scientific-technical
revolution is "a so-called one", the concepts of urban and rural prose, in the
opinion of Zavena Avetisyan, are relative concepts. Let us agree for a minute that
this assertion of the critic is true and let us listen further: "One of the
secrets of the force and power of the literature conditionally called rural prose,
lies in the fact that, by comparison with the other (i. e., urban literature; at
the same time we call attention to how bashfully the critic circumvents the word
"urban"--K. 8.), it does not ignore. . . the objective process." However, condi-
tionality thrOugh conditionality, and “one of the secrets of village prose lies in
the fact that it does not ignore the objective process." Consequently, "urban
prose” not only does not possess strength and power, but also "ignores the objec-
tive process."

In the not so distant past, these critics regarded as real literature only those
works whose theme was the village. But not the contemporary one, with its people,
problems and concerns. No, as real models of prose they regarded only those works
in which the rural reality of the Thirties and Parties was made contemporary.
Lately they have begun to convince those who are gullible: They say, everything
we aay--we say conditionally.

This ”weakness" of the critics towards rural prose is not, of course, anything new.
The fact is that in their delusion they regard morals and morality as values which
are inherent only in the peasant. And even more: They also assert that it is the
village which is the source and well of virtue.

The matter even goes so far that some critics who speak of the "people's" or of the
"national“ mean the village.

But the city is bad, it is the nest of all sorts of vices, since there is nothing
national in it, and the inhabitants of the city represent a formless amoral mass.

Such direct or disguised assertions first of all are antihistorical, and their ex-
posure are very important for the organic development of national literature.

I imagine the bewilderment or even doubts of the reader. And what, if the author
errs and exaggerates, can he think--for is it possible, really, that a critic or
even a number of critics would devote themselves to such an unworthy cause? You
know, the role of the critic is by far more responsible and noble than some of our
critics imagine who occupy themselves only with the denial of the literary process
and national prose.

I must disperse all possible doubts by the following fact.
The fact is that some of our critics not only do not see, more correctly, peristenc-

ly try not to notice the noteworthy phenomena of the Armenian literary process, but
also feverishly try to refute what others have said.

1&3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In her article "Theatrical Armenia," T. Chebotarevskays exposed the developmental
tendencies in the development of Armenian Soviet drama and, having analysed and
given an assessment of several plays and productions 0n the Armenian stage, came

to the following conclusion: "Every one of the works I have named can--I am con-
vinced--be played in many theaters of our country. For all of these plays, written
on the basis of the material of the life or history of one people, bear extended
interpretation, raising questions which trouble wide circles of Soviet spectators."

The successes of the Armenian drama were also given a high assessment by V. Frolov,
doctor of art criticism, in the newspapers KOMHUNIST and SOVETSKAYA KUL'TURA. "For
the Armenian drama the elaboration of the intellectual drama is characteristic," he
wrote. "In their creative work the authors take the most difficult boundaries:
They penetrate into the psychology, the moral world of contemporary man, they rise
above the narrowness of everyday life, above the centuries-old traditions and try
to perceive the "latent" movements of history." And again: "The authors of many
present-day plays raster (we call attention--not already"mastered", but for the
time being"master "--K. S.) "the undercurrent" of Chekhov, the social quality of
Gorki's characters, and the publicity of Hayakovakiy's satire." '

It would seem that the only thing remaining is to rejoice over this restrained,but
good assessment.

However, no! Suren Agabsbyan hurried to appear in the pages of the journal DRUZHBA
NARODOV and refute this--for the Armenian drama-favorable opinion. He says. allow-
ances are being made with respect to Armenian Soviet literature. A relapse of this
phenomenon are "the articles on the plays of contemporary Armenian dramatists,"
Suren Agababyan sounds the alarm and with unconcealed irony adds that in these
articles "it is literally said that the Armenian playwrights, neither more nor less,
inherited "the art of the Chekhovian undercurrent." Yes and Gorhi's depth in addi-
tion. . . The second example, continues the critic, is the article by T. Chebota-
revskaya. . . where the author demands immediately "the all-Union stage" for all
Armenian plays mentioned by her. So that there are relapses, as we see."

Here we became convinced that any favorable opinion expressed in the union press
about our literature not correspoading to the narrow limits of the conceptions of
Suren Agababyan is nothing else but a relapse.

Here 1 would like to turn your attention to the astonishing carelessness of the
critic, which is manifested in his "distinctive" principle to quote. Having given
advance notice that he is quoting "literally", Suren Agababyan distorts the ideas
of authors in such a way that after this it is already an easy thing to smile
ironically at the "naivete" of T. Chebotarevskaya and V. Frolov.

By the way, similar illicit "methods" are sufficiently characteristic for some of
our specialists on Armenian Soviet literature.

In order to mask the militant nihilism with respect to our contemporary literature,
these critics ”regard favorably" the writers of the past, who, however, have no
need whatsoever for such “advocates", who "defend" the classics in order to pro-
nounce "the death sentence" for contemporary writers. . . But there are excep-
tions. . . In his monograph "Aramashot Papayan", Suren Agababyan examines the

bk
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
creative work of one of the leading dramatists of Armenia. The critic not only
subjected the dramatic compositions of Papayan to analysis, but also gave a certain
resume. Papayan, he writes, is “one of the well-known and strong dramatists of
Armenia, recognized not only by the national, but also by the all-Union spectator. .
Aramashot Papayan became one of the discoverers of the national quality of laughter
in Armenian dramatic compositions of our time.“ How is one to explain this excep-
tion7This question is kindly answered by the critic himself, who writes: "In order
to interpret this book I began to meet more frequently [with my old friend/ (Empha-
sis supplied by S. Agababyan). A strange acknowledgment, is it not?

However, we shall return to our "specialists“ on Armenian Soviet literature. Is it
possible that this persistent nihilism and subjectivism with respect to our national
literature is the consequence of malicious intent? Hardly so. Some of our critics
for some reason simply have not grown up. they were unable to rise above the level
of criticism of the Forties and Fifties, and indeed in the future I do not see any
comforting perspectives for them.

And it is not a coincidence that they almost do not appear in the pages of the
union press, and if there are such attempta,then another organ of the union periodi-
cal press never is slow in expressing its attitude towards their insignificant and
superficial articles.

Thus, for example, not long ago the journal LITERATURNOYE OBOZRENIYE wrote on the
occasion of one of these articles: "Absolute unintelligibility, inspiredconection
of uncombed ideas: "His path as a writer had almost no zigzags, and in this case
splashes and disruptions, ascents and falls, signify only two stories that are fol-
lowing one another. let us say. ." “A familiar reality and familiar people dictate
the subjects, the subjects, in their turn, dictate the corresponding prototypes, in
other words, the material itself dictates the movement and development of the sub-
ject." "Since the event presents to us and gives us a child, its childlike "1" some-
how softens the real, wiry body of the work, gives the narration a sweet taste. . ."
Thus writes . . . Felika Heloyan."

And everything without any conmwntaries, simply: "Thus writes Foliks Heloyan."

Such a nihilist attitude towards one's own literature worries not only us, but Rus-
sian critics as well. Lev Zolotarevskiy, for example, wrote with pain that he had
"to read and listen already that in a discussion of contemporary Armenian prose the
literary process in the republic is frequently reduced to a restriction. . . The
opinion even appeared in the press alleging that it is impossible to make judgments
about "Armenian life" on the basis of the Armenian press.Having studied contemporary
Armenian prose, the Russian critic states decisively: "The contemporary prose of
Armenian writers gives much rich food for seeing the life of the Armenians and for
judging it . "

This is precisely how, in fact, things are. Through its genre and thematic diversi-
ty, through the presence of true creative individualities and ideological-aesthetic
glow, contemporary Armenian literature takes directly part in the all-Union lite-

rary process, and confirmation of this is faund in the numerOus translations of
of the best works of Armenian literature in our country and abroad.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 would like for LITERATURNOYE GAZETA and DRUZHBA NARODOV to pay special attention
to this circumstance. And the illumination and assessment of the process of devel-
opment of Armenian Soviet literature in these press organs is, above all, the busi-
ness of our critics, critics with a wide horizon, a professional ethic and a set of
principles. This is also the honorable and noble obligation of our representatives
in these organs, our writers' organization, and, without a doubt, the literary press
of the republic.

Participation in the union-wide literary process and the repudiation of reticence
are dictated. first of all, by the interests of the mutual enrichment of the multi-
national Soviet litersture, by the interests of maintaining our spiritual values.

And is it worthwhile, after all of this, to say that I agree with Suren Agabebyan's
view that, yes, "the interests of the development of our literature require that
people go into criticism who are completely dedicated to this cause, who have a
feeling for art, and who are ready to respond to the vital needs of literature."

However, it is appropriate here to remember the wise words: Re,uho is able, does;
but he, who is unable, teaches.

This is how things are.
Translation from the Armenian
COPYRIGHT: "Literaturnaya Armeniya", 1981

8970
C80: 1800/59

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY