FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10672
20 July 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 25/82)

CURRENT POLITICAL ISSUES '

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information priurily froa foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
trenezisaions and broadcasts. Materials froe foreign-language
sources are translated; those froe English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and eaterial enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as {Text}
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. llhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation as summarized or extracted.

Unfa-iliar nataes rendered phonetica’Jy or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or naees preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Goverment.

COPYRIGH' MRS AND REGUIATIONB GWERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MTERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN Z£QUIRE THAT DISSEHLNATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

Pouncu. AND Soctometcu AFFAIRS
(moo 25/32)

CURRENT POLITICAL ISSUES

Comsu‘rs

INTENAIIONLL

mladtn on wiry. 1.19 of World (b-nut lbw-n:
(SLOW mm“. J‘n &)oooovooo ooooooooo coo ...........

NATIQIAL

Podouyev "Efcu M01 bacon for [881 Jubtlu
(P. a. hdouycv: SIDVO IRMA. Jun 82) .......... ....
mmussmv

INTERNATIONAL

ZAGLADIN on UNITY. TASKS 0! mm MIST 1mm
Hoecoe 8W0 mom in Russian lie 6, Jm 82 pp 3‘42

[Abridged version of Prof V.V. Zagladin lecture: "In the Vanguard of the
Struggle for Peace and Social Progrese")

[Text] The CPSU coneietantly supports the strengthening of
the socialist co-Inity'e solidarity with all detachunte
of the international cmist, worker and national libera-
tion love-ante.

Pro. the CPS!) Central Co-ittee decree "60th
Anniverear'y of the Poi-nation of the USSR".

Our journal'e readers, prieerily international affairs lec-
turers. are vitally interested in various aspects of the
world comist noveeent. Nuerous requests are expreeeed
for SLOW mm to carry analytical, u-ary material on
this topical ewject.

Taking this into conaideration, we are punishing an abridged
version of a lecture by Prof Vadin Velentinovich Zagledin.
neﬁer of the 0980 Central Co-ittee and firet deputy chief
of the party Central Conittee'e International Departnent.
The author analyzes the state of affairs in the fraternal
parties ae a whole and in respect of individual regions in
the light of the decision of the 26th CPSU Congress and with
regard for recent events of international life. The approxi-
Iete plan of the lecture ie:

1. Growth of the role and strengthening of the
positions of the Met ”resent.

2. Great force in the struggle for peace.

3. tor the mity of the Met ranks.

“WI-MONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1

Unprecedentedly broad social forces have now bacon a part of the struggle
for the solution of the truly far-reaching problems which currently confront
the pawl-win”; planet. The degree of practical participation in politics
of representatives of various social groups and strata has reached in the
man'- the highest level in Ian's history.

And there is no doubt that the most influential and energetic political force.
which dodiee this increased eesertivenesa of the leases and at the same tine
serves as a factor of its further increase. is the international co-uniat
love-cut.

The opponents of the mist amount, primarily the ideologiats of imperial-
isn, claim that it is experiencing a time of crisis and collapse. it is true.
v.5. Preeident l. Reagan inceaaently repeats over and again that the communist
novement has entered the stage of decline.

The same idea. althoud'u expressed aomhet differently, is also being put
forward by the representatives of opportmist ad reformist currents in the
workers' novement. They believe that the mist movement, which ”perhaps
did play a definite part in the past." has now exhausted itself. In their
opinion, the need for consist party activity ha "peaaed".

Of course. the explanations as to why precisely the «waist movement is
either experiencing a "crisis" or has "exhausted” its potential are various.
Bourgeois ideologista say one thing. the opportmists another, but there is
little change in the essence here. It is in both cases a question of an at-
tempt to discredit the great revolutionary novenant in the present day.

It cannot. of course, be claimed that the cot-mists are not encountering
msolved probleea and difficulties. Certain problems and difficulties there
undoubtedly are (they will be addressed further on). But there are positively
no grounds for portraying the present state of affairs as our enenies depict
it. In real life the role and significance of the conunist nova-ant in our
day not only have not dininiehed but. on the contrary, are growing and con-
tinuing to grow. ﬂhy is this the case?

To answer this question the lecturer could recall the following basic points.

First, in our time a considerable proportion of mankind is already living under
socialist conditions. Many revolutionary-demcratic countries have embaer

on the path of socialist developnsnt and are implementing concrete measures
ained at the creation of the fomdationa of a new society. All this ie also
stimulating the process of the maturation of the objective prerequisites of

the transition to socialian on a world scale.

Naturally. there is a considerable increase under these conditions of the
sdajective factor in history. including the role of the "nonunist nova-ant,
which is called on to head the masses in the struggle for socialist and impart
to their independent creativity the necessary revolutionary sweep and due
purposefulnesa .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Second. nan's biggest problen now is that of war and peace. The imrialist
forces are not abandoning stteqts to resolve the contradictions between the
two social systeu by way of the me of force. But such a policy course is
creating a real threat to the future of all mankind. In our nuclear-nissile
age progress in any sphere of activity and, of course. social progress pre-
supposes primarily the prevention and exclusion of world war.

In this situation there is an inevitable increase in the significance of the
activity of the social forces which are capable of consistently and enphatical-
1y struggling for the prevention of a world thermonuclear catastrophe.

It is well bane-end this is acknowledged by our class eneny even--that among
the current political currents it is the conunists who were the first to
declare the need for the prevention of nuclear war and who have struggled in
a broad front to achieve this great goal. The humanist essence of the ideas
of commisn and proletarien internationaliss has been manifested anew with
great force in the sharp, clear formulation of this question by the fraternal
parties.

Third, unkind is now also confronted with such very appreciable problens sf-
fecting the future of all countries and peoples as the surnounting of under-
development and the energy, food, raw naterial and other problem which it is
customary to tern global.* It has now already been proven not only in theory
but in practice also that such problems can be radically solved only on the
paths of a consistent class-proletarian approach and the surmunting of the
social linitedness characteristic of monopoly capital and its policy

It is precisely the commnist novenent which is the fighter for just such a
class solution of man‘s problem. And it is only in the comtries where the
columnists. at the head of the masses. have accosplished a socialist revolu-
tion that practical approaches for a solution of the said problem have now
been found and real steps in their implementation are being taken.

Fourth, in the nonsociallst world a situation is currently taking shape wherein
monopoly capital. incapable of surnounting the socioeconomic difficulties. is
endeavoring to find a way out of then by shifting the entire burden onto the
working people. It is a question both of economic burdens and of increased
political reaction and capital's all-aromd offensive against the working peo-
ple's vital riﬁxts and interests.

Under these conditions there is undorbtedly an increase in the significance
and role of the social forces which are capable of putting forward a realistic
program of struggle for the masses' vital interests and striving for its
implementation without vacillstion and deviation. It is the commist move-
ment which acts as such a force.

.________________“__
*Por more detail see LT. Frolov. Urgent Concerns of All Mankind," SLOVO
LEKTORA No 10. 1981.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus all mkind is today really vitally interested in the existence and
activity of the con-mist mvenent. It needs it not less but are then in any
other previous period of history.

It was from precisely this that our party proceeded. confirning anew at the
26th CPSU Congress the policy of the utnoat develop-ant of relations with the
fraternal parties of other comtriss. the strengthening of the international
unity of the co-mist ranks and a further increase in the role of the con-
munist novenent in world development.

It is important to emphasise that the objectively conditioned growth of the
co-unist novenent'a role is expressed in its continuing development, which
was dealt with convincingly in the CPSU Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th
party congress. The congress stated that the international working class
and its political vanguard—the co-unist and workers' parties--had arrived
at the boundary of the 1933's in confident stride.

In this connection the lecturer should nention the outstanding role which

the columnist parties have perforned in the process of the strengthening of
the positions of the forces of social progress. This has brought about their
further quantitative and qualitative growth and increased political influence.
The number of columnist parties in the world in the 1970's gra fron 88 to 95
and the total nuﬂaer of communists increased in this period from 50 nillion
to snare than 77 million.

Developing this point. the lecturer could remind his audience that the follow-
ing have energed recently: the Commiet Party of Malta (whose creation was
announced in February 1970); the Commist Party of Saudi Arabia (whose first
congress was in August 1975); the Janaican Workers' Party (whose constituent
congress was in Deceaber 1978); the Commie: Party of Pakistan (whose con-
stituent congress. illegal. was in 1976); the Egyptian Commist Party (whose
first congress was in Septeliaer 1980); and the Palestine Comist Party
(1982).

The African Party of Independence and Labor of Senegal (whose constituent con-
gress was in 1981), which was hitherto viewed as a revolutionsry-denocratic
party. has becou a part of the comaunist movement.

Together with commist parties which have been in existence for many years

there have energed in Australia and Sweden (respectively) the Australian So-
cialist Party and the Swedish workers' Party-Communists. which have adopted

clear-cut revolutionary, class positions.

As a whole, the number of columnists outside of the socialist world increased
by more than 1.5 million in the 1970's. The ranks of the fraternal parties
were reinforced in practically all countries. In the developed capitalist
states (West Europe. North America. Japan. Amtralia) the increase in this
period was over 1 million persons. Comiets in the Latin Anerican countries
grew by almost 90,000. Not that many. seemingly. But the lecturer must point
out that the 1970's were years of difficult trials for Latin Anerica: the
Guilean revolution suffered a teaporary defeat. counterrevolution strengthened
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Uruguay and rightwing forces in a number of other countries of the conti-
nent seized power or consolidated their positions. In my cases the nuber
of con-mist parties in Latin American states declined in the mid-1970's.
but then began to grow again. And this grovth is continuing. There are
more than 110,000 more contains as a whole in the Asian (excluding Japan)
and African countries.

It is inortsnt to note that in their social cosposition the communist parties
are primarily codat parties of the working class which are strongly forged
organizationally and ideologically. And although it is perfectly natural that
they by no means close the door to persons from other social strata and groups
but. on the contrary, endeavor to enlist them in their ranks. they pay the
main attention to replenishing their organizations from the ranks of workers.

As a whole, according to available estimates, workers constitute over 1.0 per-
cent of the fraternal partias' total strength. Together with ewloyees their
proportion of the overall co-unist mvement is over "0 percent. Peasants,
representatives of thsdntelligentsia and middle urban and rural strata and so
forth account for the remainder. In other words. the present-day co-nist
movement more or less reflects the social structure of the present-dey world.
This could also be put in a different way: practically all the main social
groups of contemporary society. excluding. of course, the hsute and nonopoly
bourgeoisie. are currently represented in the col-unist movement.

Peasants and representatives of the middle strata constitute the majority in
the cousunist party ranks in Asian and African countries and in certain Latin
Anerican states also. This is an entirely logical reflection of the social
composition of the population of the corresponding regions. Many represent-
atives of the student youth and the intelligentsia have joined the ranks of
the Afro-Asian and Latin Aurican comist parties in recent decades.

The continuing "implantation" of the co-Iunist parties in the muses can also
be easily traced in the following data. whereas 15-20 years ago in the non-
socialist countries where the con-mists participate legally in election can-
paigns 25-30 million people voted for then. the figure now is 35-40 million.
Even the communist parties which do not obtain seats in the representative
institutions as a result of elections are melting increasingly skillful use of
the election caspaigns to spread their ideas and consolidate their political
positions and relations with the broad masses.

The experience of the Communist Party of the United States is interesting fron
this viewpoint. In the 1980 election it nominated its presidential (Gus Ball)
and vice presidential (Angela Davis) candidates. Not counting on their elec-
tion, the party concentrated its forces on strengthening its position during
the election campaign a the party of the working class defending the interests
of all the oppressed and exploited. The party also made the maxi." me of
its opportunities for addressing Americans via the mass information media.

6. Hall alone took part in 61 radio programs in 23 states. Candidates of the
Cot-mist Party of the United States gave mare than 70 press interviews and
organized 13 mass meetings. Over 3 million copies of printed latter were
distributed.

POI OFFICIAL WE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Su-Iing up the developnent of the con-mist novenent in the 1970's, L.1.
Brezhnev said at the 26th CPS” Congress: "The col-mist noveunt has continmd
to extend its ranks and strengthen its inﬂuence in the masses. Co-mist
parties are currently operating actively in 9‘ countries. In West Burope
shone approximately $0,000 nu fiwters have joined their ranks in the past

:0 years. Is this not teatiaony to the invincible mastic force of commist
dose!

2

The 1980's will mdotbtedly occupy a special place in the history of nodern
civilization. It is in this decade that a question of extraordinary urgency
and iaportance has to be csrdinally solved. It is a question of the prevention
of ~a world thermonuclear catastrophe. unkind mt at all costs to everything
necessary to prevent its eruption.

The front of the struggle for peace is new broader than ever. And, further-
lore. a particular, vanguard role in this greatest political current of the
presazt day is being perforned, as before. by the co-unists. As observed

at the 26th CPSU Congress, the counmist and workers' parties had arrived at
the boundary of the 19m's "as active fighters for the working people's rights
and peace and the security of the peoples."

It is well known that in a nder of cases there are disagree-ants and dif-
ferent viewpoints in the ranks of the con-mist mveasnt. They concern the
problem of war and peace also to sons extent (we will sped: about this further
on). however. as a whole, it is on precisely these questions that the cor.
nunist move-ant acts far are oohesively and as a united front than with re-
spect to nany other problem.

what is the concrete nanifestationof the commist movement's practical con-
tribution to the defense of universal peace?

The first thing that should be enphasired in this connection is the fact that

the commist parties provide a correct Handst-Leninist analysis of the cur-

rent situation. which enables then to fornulats a realistic. effective program
of the struggle for peace.

To speak of recent tines, particular significance fron this viewpoint was In-
doubtedly attached to co-uniat party congresses. There were 6 congresses
of cmist parties of the socialist countries and 17 congresses of commist
parties of countries of the nonsocialist world in 1981 altogether, for ex-
asple.‘ Problems of the international situation were broached at all the

______..'____.__————-—
*Por the lecturer s information: in the period January 1971 through Decebsr

1981 all the fraternal parties of the socialist countries held congresses
(many of than twice) and there were 181 congresses of 69 parties of the
nonsocialist world altogether.

L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uornmlst congresses without exception. And regardless 01 this dillcteucc m-
the other in their positions. they all reached the conclmion of the particular
significance of the problem of war and peace and the need to do the maximal
possible to prevent a thermonuclear catastrophe.

As has already been said, there were certain differences of evaluation. Parti-
cular attention should be dram here to the position of the leadership of the
Italian and also Spanish commist parties, which, contrary to the generally
known facts, are attenting to "share," as it were, responsibility for the
present increase in tension between socialism and imperialism. According to
the opinion expressed, for example, at the PCI Central Committee January (1982)
Plenum, in a ouster of instances the policies of the USSR and the United
States have little to distinguish them. Their actions, this party's leader-
ship believes, have contributed "equally" to the deterioration of the world
situation.

It is com-on knowledge, however, that the fraternal parties of the socialist
countries, primarily the CPSU, have done and are doing everything possible

and necessary to contribute to the strengthening of peace and to prevent man's
further slide toward nuclear war. The great services of the CPS!) md other
fraternal parties of the socialist com-laxity in the struggle for peace have
been acknowledged by all mankind. which, inter alia, was emphasized again and
again at the time of the enumeration of Comrade L.l. Breshnev's 75th birthday.

0n the other hand, it is well known that imperialist propaganda has been as-
serting for many years now that the threat to peace is created by the Soviet
Union. Stories about the "Soviet military threat" literally fill bourgeois
newspapers and journals. Under these conditions the objective result is that
the statements of the PCI leadership only help the propaganda of the imperial-
ist states. This fact, inter alia, has alsobam Isntioesd‘b'ymsny co-Inist
press organs like, for example, muss DMSCHLAND, in the article "The
Stronger Socialism. the Pirmer Peace," and also the creek comists' paper
RIZOSPASTIS and many others.*

On the basis of the analysis made by the congresses of the fraternal parties
the consulate have put forward wide-ranging, detailed and practical proposals
concerning the struggle for peace. Particular sipifioance from this view-
point wss attached to the Peace Program for the 1930'. proclaimed by the 26th
CPSU Congress. As is known, this program touches on the most basic questions
of the international situation and, primarily, those which concern the am
race, which is being jacked up by the inerialists. The Soviet Peace Program
provides for the concrete asasures necessary to put a stop to this process,
which is dangerous for all mankind.

It is ieportant to emphasize that my interesting considerations have also
been put forward by other fraternal parties. Thus, for mle, the SED, CPCz

 

*In discussing these problems the lecturer could use the PRAVDA article
"Contrary to the Interest of Peace and Socialists" (24 January 1982) and the
KOHMUNISI' article "On a Slippery Path" (No 2, 1982).

son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Greek Co-mist Party congresses held in 1981 proposed a number of iqort-
ant and well-considered measures aimed at the consolidation of peace in Central
Europe and the prevention of a new twist to the ar- race spiral in this part
of the world. The Bulgarian Cmist Party congress paid special attention

to the problem of the creation of a nuclear-free zone in the Balkans. The
congress of the )bngolian communists advanced a set of proposals concerning

the consolidation of peace in Asia. The congress of the lsraeli Commist
Party paid great attention to a peace settlement in the Near East and formulated
realistic proposals aimed at its achievement. The congresses of the llexican
Columnist Party.‘ the Panama People's Party and the Coal-mist Party of Ecuador
concentrated their attention on the problems of Central and South America.
euphatically opposed the expansion of iaperialiem and supported the coupletion
of the liberation struggle of the peoples of El Salvador, Guatenla, Honduras
and other comtries.

Big significance in this plane was attached to the collective meetings of the
comnist parties also. The lecturer could recall that there were seven such
large-scale matings in 1981, for example. The representatives of all conun-
ist parties of Arab countries discussed in April-May 1981 a wide-ranging set
of questions concerning the Arab people's struggle against Israeli aggression
and the actions of American imperialism in the Near and Middle East. A wet-
ing of the comaunist parties of North America (the United States. Canada and
Mexico) held in June 1981 examined problem of the struggle against the arms
race and the spurring of international tension. The meeting of con-unist
parties of the lbditerranean, the Near East and the Red Sea region held in
Septedaer 1981 discussed a broad range of problem, from the Near East through
the Cyprus question, from the viewpoint of stimulation of the struggle against
ilperialism's acts of aggression. Fundamental questions of the struggle
against the aggressive policy of imperialism were extensively discussed at a
meeting of secretaries for international and ideological questions of the
central committees of the socialist comtries' fraternal parties in Novelber
1981.

True. thoughts have been put forward repeatedly recently on the proposition
that joint actions of the coal-mist movement and coordination of the actions
of the fraternal parties. in the form of their joint meetings included. have,
as it were, become pointless. Various arguments are adduced in support of
this position. But the main thing which columnists should consider is this:
the danger of nuclear war exists regardless of the diversity of the national
conditions and geographical location of this state or the other and its socio-
political orientation. The prevention of such a war corresponds to the vital
interests of every people, not to mention the global, Long-term needs of all
mankind. The continuation of detente and the implementation of effective

and concrete measures to put an end to the arms race are essential couponenta
of the national policy of any coanunist party.

*It is now a part of the Mexican United Socialist Party, which was created

on the basis of the country's five leading parties and organizations of
the left at the end of 1981.
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is reconsnded that the lecturer focus the audience's attention on the

fact that the overwhelling .jority of national detachnents of the colamist

movement is now waging a purposeful and selfless struggle for the prevention

a; war and the revvel of the mrtal threat which has arisen to unkind and
future.

Tremendous, multifaceted and highly effective work in the struggle for peace
is being perforsed by the cal-mists of the socialist countries and. of course,
our Lenin Party—the CPSU. Since the 26th party congress even Comrade I..I.
Brezhnev personally has presented a number of new ideas, initiatives and pro-
posals which have attracted truly universal attention. As graphic eta-plea of
the good will and the unswerving. sincere endeavor of the Columnist Party and
the Soviet state to curb the ar. race. avert the nuclear threat and again
direct world development into the channel of detente md equal and mutually
profitable cooperation it is reconnded that the lecturer dwell on the new
peace-loving proposals and ideas put forward by L.I. brezhnev in speeches at
the 17th 0881! Trade Union Congress and the festivities in Tashkent and in
response to a question of a PRAVDA correspondent and on other Soviet initia-
tives.

In continuation of the these that has been broached there are several further
enemies of the position of certain fraternal parties on cardinal probleu of
international politics. The 0.8. col-mists are participating actively in the.
struggle against the threat of war. In the no co-aunists are among the
stanchest fighters against the deployment of new American nuclear aissilea on
their country's territory ad insist on inediate negotiations to spare Europe
and all aankind a dangerous nee twist co the ar- race spiral.

A great deal of ldwrnus practical work in their countries ained at their
salvation free the herican missile threat is being performed by the cos-anists
of Belgium and Holland. They are iwlementing a multitude of initiatives and
striving for the maul expansion of the under of participants in sntiaissile
deannstrations.

This applies equally to the consulate of North Europe also, who vigorously
advocate its conversion into a nuclear-free zone. The ideas advanced by L.I.
Brezhnev in an interview with the Finnish newspaper sum SUTSIALIMATI
have encountered their were support.

The columnists of Greece and Cyprus are striving for the peaceful solution of
all problems of the Best Mediterranean, including the Cyprus problem. and
struggling against the deployunt of Anerican uilitary bases on these coun-
tries' territory.

The cousunists of South and Central America unanimously demand an end to 0.8.
interference in the internal affairs of El Salvador, Nicaragua and other
countries of the Western Bedsphere and saphstically protest the dangerous
policy of blackmail and military threats directed at revolutionary Cuba.

The Asian col-mist parties are conducting an extensive campaign of solidarity
with the peoples of Kaspuchea, Vietnam and other Indochina comtries struggling
against the military and political provocatione of Anrican iQerialisn and

Chinese hegemoniss.

mmuszomv
l-‘OI OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

In a word, the co-nnist parties-and the lecturer should tdte this into con-
sideration in his speeches constantly—ere operating tirelessly as unbending,
consistent fighters for a lasting peace guaranteed for all peoples. The CPS!)
Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th congress observed: ”The co-sunists' con-
sistent struggle for peace end against the aggressive policy of inperialise
and the era race, which entails for the peoples the threat of nuclear cate-
strophe. serves as s great unifying principle and powerful factor of the fur-
ther cohesion and increased authority of the world cmist mvenent."

3

The co-unist anvenent's mdisputed successes, particularly in the struggle
for peace, by no means signify, of course, that it does not have its msolved
problees and difficulties. It does, of course, and at tines very serious, wre-
over. what is the source of then? The answer to this question is by no leans
sinple and straightforward. Reduced to a concise for-ula, it appears para-
doxical even at first sight.

The min source of the problens and difficulties being encomtersd by the
cont-mists currently is their own successes and progress. In fact, it is
these successes and the rapid dyneaics of growth which have opened to the con-
nunist noveesnt new prospects, but which at the sans tine hsve also posed new
and, to be blunt. difficult tasks. The nain thing here, of course, is the
fact that the achievements of the conunists end all forces of social progress
have given rise to sharp opposition on the part of their aein class eneny-the
haute bourgeoisie, iaperialist monopolies and the unitary-industrial cmlu.

The 1970's were Iarked by e deepening of the general crisis of capitalise, and
this, in turn. was also reflected in its policy—foreign end doustic. In
what and how were inperialise's difficulties reflected in its political beha-
vior? The answer to this question was provided by the 26th CPSU Congress.
"Adventurisn and a readiness to geiale with man's vital interests in the neat
of their narrow selfish goals," the CPSU Central Collittee Report says. "are
what is being unifested particularly clearly in the policy of inerialise's
most aggressive circles.... They have truly set the-elves the goal of
attaining the unattainable-«rating a barrier in the way of progressive changes
in the. world and restoring to themelves the role of arbiters of the people's
fete.

Erecting a barrier in the way of revolutionary social changes—such is the
present goal of iwerialise's aggressive, reactionary circles, for whose
achievenent they are truly prepared to spare neither forces nor resources. It
is essentially a question of the fact that inperialise has begun a kind of
crusade against the forces of peace and progress as a whole and against the
socialist comtries and the commist novenent primarily. And this cenpaign
is being developed, moreover. in literally all the eain areas at once.

ldeologically, the manifestations of this crusade are on the one hand a sharp
intensification of anticonunise and enti-Sovietian in all Western countries.
beginning. of course, with the United States. The nain accent here is being
put on an attempt to discredit and coepronise the socialist con-mity and real
MWLUSEONLY

socialise. Together with this there is an extension of the attacks on Harrisn-
heninisn—the ideological foundation of the activity of the co-Inist and
workers' parties.

Politically, the caspaigu against the forces of the revolutionary process is
developing prinarily into attewts to destabilize the situation in the coun-
tries of the socialist world and also in the revolutionarys-demeratic states.
As far as the socialist world is concerned. inperialisn's nain efforts in
this direction are now concentrated. together with continuing attacks on
Vietnan, Laos and free Kawuchea (with the conplicity of Beijing and surviving
Pol Pot people) and with provocations against revolutionary Cuba, on the stin-
ulation of subversive, diversionary actions and econonic sanctions against
people's Poland and, equally. our country.

Suuuing up in the Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th CPSU Congress the es-
sence of iaperialisn's antisocialist policy, L.I. Brezhnev observed: 'ﬂ‘he
iaperielists and their accowlices are systenatically conducting hostile
cawaigns against the socialist countries. They are discrediting and distort-
ing everything that is occurring in these countries. The min thing for
then is to turn people away free sooialisn.

"Recent events confirn tins and again that our class enenies are learning fron
their defeats. They are operating against the socialist countries increasingly
subtly and insidiously."

There is also increased political pressure by the nonopolies' state and prop-
aganda nachinery on tbs-co-alnist and leftwing forces of the Best and the trade
unions. We have recently witnessed a nunher of open atteqts to legalize this
pressure by way of the adoption of the corresponding legislation (in the United
States. Britain and e nunber of other countries).

The repressive measures are asking the cannists' struggle nore difficult.
Currently 21 co-unist parties of the capitalist vorld are working under
underground conditions or sesrllegally. In a number of Latin American, Asian
and African countries the communists are constantly subjected to police su1~
veillmce, persecution and terror. "Through terror and persecution and through
prison and the barbed wire of concentration m0 and in selfless and frequently
very difficult daily work for the good of the peoples," I..I. Brezhnev said at
the 26th congress, "the co-unists of the capitalist countries are carrying
their fidelity to the ideals of Herdsn-leninisn and proletarian internation-
alien."

Socially it is a question of the nonopoliee' nassed offensive against the
working people's vital rights. Let us tales. for era-pie, the developed capit-
alist countries. Althougu the intensiveness of the class struggle has not
abated here but, on the contrary, has increased rather, state-nonopoly capital-
isn, having nobiliasd all its forces and resources, has nonetheless been able
to achieve certain changes to its advantage. For the first tine in a long

period in the last 2-3 years a palpable decline in the real living standard of
the working people he been observed in the United States, the no. France

and a number of other countries. All this is markedly cowlicating the poli-
tical situation which exists in these countries and neking the condition of
the class struggle nore difficult.

11

FOIOFFICIMJJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

80, the nain difficulties for the cause of the columnists and all revolution-
aries are being created by inperialisn and its political sdvanturisn and
ideological and nilitary diversions and sellies. And if we are to sun up the
reel result of the path trodden by the co-nists in recent years, we should
be surprised not that in a ember of instances they have suffered defeats end
failures but by how far they have advanced. By how successfully they are
repelling the attacks of the class many. And by how strong their gains are
proving.

Such is the general conclusion which nay be drawn by analysing the statemts
of the 26th CPSU Congrsss' foreign guests. "The speeches of our conrades in
struggle here, at the congress, and at meetings in Moscow and other cities."
I..I. Brezhnev eqhasired in his speech at the conclusion of the congress. "have
strengthened even note our belief in the invincibility of social pgoress and
the irreversibility of the revolutionary transformation -of the world."

‘ At the sane tine the com-11st novanent is encountering difficulties of a

different nature, particularly those arising within its on nilieu. Is speak-
of such difficulties. the lecturer could point out that their cause are
various. They are frequently of an objective, but soutines of a subjective
nature.

Thus it is natural that the tasks confronting the conunist parties will be-
come increasingly couples: and diverse as their influence grows. This, in
turn, perfectly logically sonetines engenders differing evaluations end dif-
ferences in the approach to the solution of concrete questions of the class
struggle and gives rise to debate between parties.

Life itself proves convincingly that even given such differences it is pos-
sible and necessary to develop political cooperationin the struggle against
the canon class eneny. v.1. Lenin was profoundly correct when he pointed out
that nany disagree-ants "nay disappear and unfailingly will disappear: this
being the result of the logic of joint struggle agath a really formidable
eneny. the bourgeoisie..." (v.1. Lenin. "Poln. sobr. soch." [Conlete Works],
vol 39. p 225).

But now about another apsect of the natter. In the course of the search
which is currently under way everywhere for new ferns and methods of struggle
and answers to unsolved theoretical and practical questions there also arise
in a mdaer of instances inprecise or incoqalete solutions which are subse-
quently not corroborated by practice. The class struggle has always been a
cowlsx science and difficult art. It is all the sore conplicatad in our
tine—a tins of rapid social chanp.

In analyzing the course of the theoretical search engaged ' in by the con-m-
ists it is possible to highlight several central problem with respect to
which isprscise or erroneous positions are being expressed, we believe,
currently.

One such problen is the attitude toward harriss—Laninisn as the cmists'
single international teaching. The opinion is expressed in a nder of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instances currently that Marxism-beninism is “outdated". The first to begin
this ”operation" in our time was the Chinese leadership. which smsequently
directly substituted for Harrism-laninism the fundamentally anti-Leninist.
essentially counterrevolutiaaary "teaching" of Haoism. The consequences of
this substitution are well known. But there are .other instances of a "ream-
ciation" of Leninism also. Attempts are frequently wade to separate Leninism
(as an allegedly "specifically Russian” phenomenon) from Marxism.

In speaking of these instances it is evidently necessary to first of all re-
call that the "advice" to rid yourselves of leninisn has been thrown at the
com-mists :extrsordinarily persistently, not to say inortnnately. for liter-
ally years by bourgeois ideology. The West's philosophers and sociologists
endeavor to portray matters such that all the difficulties currently being
encountered by the columnist movement have their roots in the "domination of
dognatism" in its ranks. And this "dognstism" is, of course, a consequence
of the communist parties' fidelity to the ideas of Hararism-Leninism. It
transpires. accordingly, that the sole path toward a way out of the difficul-
ties is the "de-Leninization" of the communist movansnt and, of course. liqui-
dation of the close relations of the fraternal parties of the nonsocialist
world with the communist parties of the socialist countries, primarily with
the CPSU, which was created and raised by v.1. Lenin.

No objective observer can fail to dry attention to the most profound baseless-
naes of this approach. In fact, in 1980-1981 many communist parties cele-
brated their "full" jubilees. Among these were a number of big parties. which
have won recognition and enjoy great influence in their countries, which cele-
brated their 60th anniversary. What do the lessons of the history of these
parties indicate? Primarily that they have reached such considerable heidnts
precisely on the basis of the revolutionary principles formulated by Mara.
Engels and Lenin.

In attempting to substantiate their remarks against leninisn certain comrades
say, for example, that they would not wish to use the term "Leniniem" out of
tactical considerations. Reference is sometimes made to the fact that nsny
currents have arisen in recent decades which have "abused" the term "Marxism-
Leninism" and that for this reason this term is no longer acceptable. Others
attempt in all seriousness to persuade m that beninism has "exceeded" its
tins and is no longer a dependable support for revolutionaries.... However.
it has to be said that objectively none of these approaches can in any way
serve the overall, international cause of the worldng class and socialism.

Another big theoretical problem also coming nuch debate currently is that of
socialism. The present debate about real socialism is brought about primarily
by the fact that. as already mentioned. there has been a sharp exacerbation in
our time of the need for a fmdamental transformation of capitalist society.
the deepening of the general crisis of capitalism which has been mentioned
also testifies to this. his is indicated by the all-around exacerbation of
the contradictions currently being encountered by the bourgeois world. Very
mterial, finally. is the fact that inerialist "from-a-position-of-strength""
policy. in the spirit of the cold war. and imperialism’s attewts, in spite
of the objective laws of social development. to halt the course of social
progress are capable under present-day conditions'otjeopardising man's very

13

FOIOFHCIALIISBONLV
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

existence. This is why the lecturer should in this connection eaphesire '
particularly that in our space. electronic and nuclear-missile age socialism
has become an urgent requirement of social development and the sole and de-
pendable alternative to world chaos and nilitary Apocalypse.

It is understandable that under these conditions there is an animated and.

at times, very tewersmsntal debate about socialism, the ways of advance-ant
toward it. the methods of its creation and its characteristic features. The
participants in the debate are also endeavoring to find solutions to the prob-
lems of the struggle for socialism which correspond most fully to their
countries' national. specific conditions.

"Not so long ago," L.I. Brezhnev observed at the 26th CPSU Congress. "the
leadership of certain col-mist parties presented a vigorous defense of the
right to national specific features of the ways and forms of struggle for
socialism and socialist building. However, if an unprejudiced approach to the
question is adopted. it has to be acknowledged that no one is imposing on
anyone any stereotypes and outlines which inore the singularities of this
country or the other.

"v.1. Lenin's position on this question 11 well known. 'All nations will ar-
rive at socialise, this is inevitable.“ he wrote, 'but not all will arrive
entirely identically; each will inpart distinctiveness to this form of demo-
cracy or the other, to this variety of dictatorship of the proletariat or the
other and to this rate or the other of socialist transformations of various
aspects of social life' (v.1. Lenin, "Complete Works." vol 1), p 123).

"Our party adheres unswervingly to this directive of Lenin's, which has today
been corroborated as convincingly as could be by historical practice. Just
think, comrades. After all, in none of today's socialist countries were the
forms, methods and paths of socialist revolution a mechancial repetition

of another's experience....

"There has been armed struggle and there have been peaceful form of transition
to the new soc La]. system; and the rapid accession to power of the working peo-
ple's classes and processes which have been prolonged. In sane countries

the revolution had to be defended against foreim intervention, others get

by without foreign invasion.

"The creation and strengthening of the foundations of socialism and the build-
ing of the socialist society," L.I. Brezhnev emphasized, "also had and continue
to have their particular features in different comtries.

"Thus it is only possible to speak of son 'standardization' and to contrast
the communist parties according to recognition or nonrecognition of their
chosen paths of the reorganization of society...by ignoring the actual facts."
The experience of all revolutions, past and present, and the experience of real

socialism, as also the experience and practice of the present class struggle in
the capitalist countries. unequivocally confirm the obvious fact that socialism

14

USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

may he established only as a result of the liquidation of capital ism as a
system, but by no means by way of a conromise of the old and the new and a
"gentleman's agreement" between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.

The following thought may sometimes be heard. Turture socialism in the de-
veloped capitalist countries could, it is said. assume various forms. but,
what is most important, it mat in no event "repeat" real socialism and must
not be similar to it. The authors of such concepts usually accompany their
considerations with a sharp and. it met be said, an unobjective critique of
socialism. primarily the socialism which exists in our country. And such an
approach is called "critical solidarity" with socialism.

"Certain co-unist parties." l..I. Brezhnev said in this connection at the 26th
CPSU Congress. "sometimes express critical judgments with respect to this
concrete aspect or the other of our country's development. He by no means
believe that everything has been ideal here. Socialism in the USSR was built
under unbelievably difficult conditions. The party was blazing a trail in
virgin territory. And no one knows better than us what difficulties and short-
comings were encountered on this path and which have still to be surmounted.

"He listen attentively to comradely. constructive criticism. But we are
emphatically opposed to 'criticism,’ which distorts socialist reality and
thereby wittingly or unwittingly does imperialist propaganda and the class
enemy a service."

A further consideration should be added to what has been said. The supporters
of the building of socialism by any method, "just as long as it differs from
others." frequently say that their position is connected with a need to take
account of "national specifics". But is this so? Taking account of national
specifics means first of all studying them in depth and drawing precisely
from their own. national situation fundamental, scientifically swstantiated
conclusions for the future of socialism in their country. These conclusions
could concur with somone else's experimce and could differ from it. But
they cut by no means be dram by way of a categorical disregard for this
experdsnce.

A quest for new ways to move foward is entirely explicable, more, it is
essential. But, of course, only if it is a question of a movement forward.
toward socialism and not back from it, toward an unnatural (and. we would note.
impossible) hybrid of capitalism and socialism.

The world commist movement knows both the quest of the first kind and "quest"
of the second. Experience. including that of the past decade. has shown per-
fectly convincingly that "quest" of the second kind leads directly...mrsy

from socialism; leads directly into the ed>race of antico-mism, "to a class
world". It is such a path. for eruple, which has been trodden by a group

of new opportunists from the ranks of former members of a nuiler of Best
European co-unist parties.

The question may. of course, be put: whence the appearance of such views in

the cosmnmist movement? [along the various factors responsible for their
appearance. we may cite the following:

MWLUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the influence of petit bourgeois views on the workers' nova-ant as a result
of the growth of its ranks thanks to nonproletarian elenents;

the strong pressure of imperialist ideology. propaganda and the "lie concerns."
thich is becoming particularly dangerous precisely by virtue of the change

in the social concaition of the working class and presence within it of per-
sons susceptible to argtnents in favor of class collimation; and

a certain weakness of the theoretical-political training of co-unists who
have joined the party comparatively recently and their lack of due i-mity
to ideological principles hostile to the came of co-unian.

At the end of the speech the lecturer should emphasise that the CPS!) has done
and continues to do everything to contribute to the consolidation of the unity
of the com-mist movement, the cohesion of the fraternal parties and the de-
velopnent of their cooperation. For this purpose our party is stepping up
contacts with the conuniat parties of other countries and strengthening
interaction with then in the solution of the main present-day problems.

In the past 5 years alone Politburo nenbers and candidates and Central (to-it-
tee secretaries have received several hundred party delegations representing
comunist, worker and revolutionary-democratic parties of all continents.

The CPSU regularly and confidentially notifies the fraternal parties about
events of our donestic life and the foreign policy acts of the 60-min Party
and the Soviet state. Foreign conrades also have a broad opportunity to ac-
quaint themselves with the CPSU's practical activity locally—in the republics,
krays and ohlasts, at enterprises and construction.» projects and in rural
areas. All this. as the representatives of foreign coll-unist parties themselves
observe. helps than in practical work. Permanent contacts with foreign con-
munists also enable our party also to get a better grasp of the situation in
individual comtries and regions.

Smarizing what has been said. the lecturer could refer in conclusion to the
finding of the 26th party congress that consistent struggle for peace and
against the aggressive policy of inperislisn and the ares race being imposed
on the peoples. which entails for than the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
serves under current conditions as a powerful factor of the cohesion and in-
creased authority of the world commist nave-ant.

As the CPSU Central Couittee document on the 60th anniversary of the USSR's
fornstion observes, cor-unists. arned with the teaching of Harrisnruninisn,
are struggling constantly for the interests of the working class. the working
people of their countries md demoracy. peace and socialism.

LITERATURE
1. "Material of the 26th CPSU Congress." Hoscow, Politisdat. 1981. pp 3-31.

2. "60th Anniversary of the Pormstion of the USSR". CPSU Central Coulittee
decree, Moscow, Politisdat. 1982.

16

u. USE ONLY
3.

e.

50

6.
7.

13.

1‘0.

16.

17.

18.

M OFFICIAL I.“ ONLY

in». Brezhnev. "Speech at CPSU Central Co-ittee 16 Blonder 1981 PROD,"
Hoaeov. Politirdat. 1981.

1.1. Brezhnev, "Speech at the 17th 0881! trade Uniona Congreee," PIAVDA
17 lurch 1982.

1.1. Dreshnev. "Speech at the Ceremonial Seeeion in Tashkent.” mm
25 lurch 1982.

L.I. Brezhnev. "Speed: at the 19th Ron-owl Congreae." PRAVDA 19 thy 1982.

NJ]. Andropov. ”buinien—Inuhauetible Source of the Revolutionary Energy
and Creativity of the Hum". Report at cerenonial eeaeion in hoecow
devoted to the 112th anniversary of v.1. unin'e birth. mm 23 April
1982.

8.11. Ponouarev, "In the Struggle Against the Threat of Her". Speech in
Prague at a neetin; of representatives of the fraternal parties to diecuee
the work of the journal mum HIM 1 msnnm, mm 25 “meter
1981.

"Velikiy Oktyahr' i nezhdmarodnoye ko-mieticheakoye dviaheniye" [The
Great October and the International (Io-min Hove-ant}. Collection of
Articlee, Hoecow. Politizdat, 1981.

"In the Struggle for Han'e Future." KW“? 80 14. 1981.

Gt‘eetinp to the 26th CPSU Congreae tron Co—Iniat, Worker, National-
Demcratic and Socialiat Portia." Noam. Politizdet, 1981.

"The 26th CPSU Congreae: Dialogue in the Preee Center." hoacov. ltd-v0
APR. 1981. .

"Political Partiee". Handbook. macaw. Politiadat. 1981.

V.V. Zagladin, "Huzheatvennyye-thortey re narodnoya delo" [Courageom
Halters for the People'e Cauee] ("Decision of the 26th CPSU Congreee
in Practical" Library), Hoecov, Znaniye. 1981.

V.V. Zagladin, "Ietoricheekaye niaeiya eoteialiaticheekoxo obahcheetve"
[me Socialiet Society'a Hiatoric Minion]. Noacov, Politiedat. 1981.

”Real Socialien and the world'e Co-uniete." PIAWA 10 March 1982.
"Comiet and Horkera' Partiea on the l‘oeitione of the PCI Leaderehip.
0n the Queation of the Poeitione of the PCI Leaderehip." NWO?! WA
No 3. 10, 1982.

"Once Again Concerning the Poeitione of the PCI Leederahip,‘" MST
No 6, 1982.

comm: Izdatel'atvo "Zmiye". 1982
8850

C80:

1&0/ 737
17

POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NATIONAL

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

moszm onus 1002!. 1.3ch m USSR MILE!

Hoecov SLOW neuron in husien lo 6. Jul 82 pp 26-!)

[Synopsis of lecture by Audenicien 9.x. redoeeyev. nedaer of the €280 Centre].
Co-ittee end vice president-o! the 038! Acsdeny of Sciences: "The USSR:
New Sociel end Internstionel Oo-nity"]

[onerpts] History does not know of e stete which in the
shortest possible tine could heve done so Inch for the ell-
eround developmt of the nstions end netionelitiee es the
USSh—the socieliet fetherlend of s11 our peoples.
Pro. the 6280 Centre]. (Jo-ittee decreen “60th
Anniversery of the rorution of the 088!"

In consideration of reedere' wishes we continue the publicetion
of e series of lectures tined for the 60th enniversery of the
fornstion of the 0883. Our per-meat heeding is inmmeted
todsy by the synopsis of e lecture by Acsdenicien Petr
llikoleyevich hdoeeyev. ester of the CPS“ Centrel Oo-ittee
end vice president of the USSR Acede-y of Sciences. The euthor
enelyres oertein cherscteristic trends in the eocisl develop-Int
of the world's first unified union eultinstionsl stste end
shows the dinlecticel interconnection end sociel unity of
the internetionel end the netionel et the steae of neture
socislisn.

A rouﬂ: plen of e lecture or speech on this abject niat he:

1. triumph of the 080's leniniet nstionslity policy. hes
histories]. co-mity of people-the Soviet people.

2. Socieliet internstionslisn in ection. Growth of the
socisl honogeneity of the society of developed socielien.

3. he Soviet vey of life—nu historicsl tors of .II'.
existence. Dielectics of the internstionel end the netionel.

The crestive potentiel of the energy of the people's enses end their sociel
end civic seeertiveness ere reveeled even sore fully end nstiolsride socieliet

18
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
coepetition for the efficient end highdperfornnce fulfillnent of the 5-yeer
plen quota ie developing extensively et the current etege of developed eo-
cielien. Feetureeof the neturity of the Soviet people an e co-unity ere
reveeled increeeingly fully with the building end refinemt of developed
eocielien in the USSR. L.I. Brezhnev observed at the 26th CPS!) Gangrene in this
connection thet the felily of Soviet peoplee hee hecone even note coheeive ad
in living even note'edcély.

However. it would be wrong to believe thet the Soviet people. ee e nu hie-
toricel co-nity, heve ecquired eone perticuler epecific ethnic treito which
thereby certe with the ethnic cherecterietice dietinguiehing e pereon ee e
representetive of thin netion or the other end replece then. Such en mder-
etending of the queetion inevitebly engendere the fundenentelly incorrect
notion thet eny etep elong the peth of the further develop-ent of the Soviet
people's coneolidetion leede to e nechenicel eupereeding of netionel co-Ini-
tiee. The Soviet people ie not e phenomon of the eene order no ethnic fore-
etione end netione end netionelitiee. It ie, end the lecturer ehould theeize
thie. characterized by different perentere. different neeeurenente end dif-
ferent levele of ite mifeetetion. Our perty hee given e preciee ecientific
interpretetion of thie queetion, deternining thet the Soviet people a e new
hietoricel col-unity ere not en ethnic end e perticulerly netionel but e eo-
ciel end internetionel con-unity of people.

In the report on the dreft USSR Conetitution I..I. Brezhnev criticized ettenpte
to introduce the "eingle Soviet netion" concept. ”The Soviet people'e eocio-
politicel mity," he ewheeized. "by no eeene eignifiee the dieeppeerence of
netionel differencee" (for none deteil nee L.I. Brezhnev. "leninehin kureon"
[lenin'e Hey]. vol 6, Hoecow, 1978, p 525). ‘lhe new hietorlcel co-Inity not
only doee not ebolieh the existing netione end erect none kind of empre-
netionel euperetructuree over then but, on the contrery. ie e nodel of the
arsenic unity of people of different utionelitiee et the eene tine ee the
netione end netionelitiee themelvee end their dietinctiveneee. lencuege end
culture ere preeerved. Further-ore, che loviet people no e not hietcricel
col-mity ere en orgenic end effective fore of the development end burgeoning
of the neteriel end epirituel forcee of eech netion end netionelity.

In thie connection it ie reco-ended thet the lecturer recell v.1. Lenin‘e
instruction to the effect thet the internetionel ie not the nonnetionel. It
etende to reeeon thet en internetionel con-unity ie inconceiveble without
specific netionel conponente end without the preeence end eelf-developnent
of netione end netionelitiee.

And one further reconendetion for the lecturer end repporteur. The pletforn
epeeker nuet unfeilingly drew the eudience'e ettention to the feet thet the
developnent end repprochenent of the netione ere not ieoleted proceeeee pro-
ceeding in perellel but cloeely interconnected proceeeee expreeeing the single
internetimeliot eeeence of the eocieliet eociety. The optinun conditione

end neene both of netionel develop-Int end the repprochenent of the netione

ere creeted einulteneouely. in orgenic interectinn. Thie dielecticel inter-
connection ie werrented in reepect of the neteriel, eociel end epirituel con-
ditione end the prerequieitee of the fornetion. functioning end ongoing develop-
Ient of the new eociel end internetionel thy.

19
1'01! OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such priurily are the processes of the building of co-nisn's materiel-
technicsl facilities and the strengthening of the single all-stats national
economic cleex representing the eateriel basis of the fraternal friendship
of the USSR peoples. The task of equalization of the levels of the Soviet
republics' econonic developeent has been accowlished, in the Iain, at the
stage of nature socielisn. ‘lhe econony of each republic occupies an inortant
place in the all-union division of labor and nakes m increasingly invasive
contribution to the comtry's national wealth (it is recs-ended that the loc-
turer use local illustrative nateriel in this pert of the speech).

The need for an increase in the role of all the national republics in the
accowliahnent of all-union tasks and the optimum codination of the interests
of each nation with the interests of the Soviet people as a whole new becoees
pare-cunt. The general upsurge of the 0883's national econoly end the reali-
sation of such nejestic national econonic projects as the develop-eat of the
fuel-energy and rat nateriel resources of Siberia end the Far East, the build-
ing of the Baykal-Anur Trunk Line, the develop-ent of the nonchernosen and

the creation of the Anger-Yenisey cowlex are inconceivable without the uni-
ficetion of the efforts of the working people of all republics end the nobili-
zstion of the nateriel and labor resources of the entire country.

Thus-essentially ell the union repxblics are participating in iqleaentation

of the vest cowrehensive prograa of transformation of the BSPSR's nonchernom
tone which has been developed by the party. In consideration of the consider-
able shortage of labor resources in this region of the RSPSR the other union
republics are sending specialised construction and installation convoys,

uobile mechanized coin-1s and equip-cut and. in su-erti-e, student construc-
tion detach-ants. ‘lhe party's socioeconomic strategy in the llth Five-Year Plan
and the period through 1990 envisages an increase in the naterial potential of
each republic and at the ease tin its sari-u use for the her-nonious de-
velopnent of the entire country. This. as eqhesised at the 26th CPSU Congress,
is an essential and sdutantial condition of Soviet society's further progress.
the strengthening of the USSR's econolic and defense night and the growth

of the working people's well-being.

The developnent of the scientific-technical revolution is also proceeding in
the direction of a continued intensification of the process of the socialist
internationalization of production in the country. Modern conditions objectively
require a further increase in the efficiency and an extension of the coopera-
tion of the nations and nationalities in the production sphere and in the
sphere of scientific research and the speediest introduction of the achieve-
nents of the scientific-technical revolution in practice. Under its influence
the econolic basis md operational life of the nations are becoering increas-
ingly interconnected. New sectors of industry are growing rapidly in the
national republics. and at the sens tine the working people's scientific-
technical level is rising.

however, the effect of this factor, which is contributing to the repprocheuent
of the nations under the conditions of developed socialise, is realized far
fro- autontically. Like any other cowlex and mlti-espectuel process of
socialist building. it requires a constant inproveeent in the scientific
control of social developnent. primarily centralized planning in codaination

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’03 OFFICIAL 083 am!

with the broad initative of the mien and autonoeous repualics. an increase
in the creative assertiveness of the .sses and a rise in their consciousness
and cultural level and sn eqhatic struggle against all eanifestations of
localise and departesntel preference (it is reco-nded that this point of
the lecture also be illustrated as far as possible with figures. facts and
concrete exalplee on the basis of local uterial).

Analyzing 'the prere-tuisites and regulerities of the fomtion of a historically
new social end international thy. the lecturer should also eqhasire that
Soviet people, irrespective of their national origins, are mired by the unity
of their spiritual life and comity of world-outlook orientetions.

A single Soviet culture which is commend international for all the social-
ist notions and which iﬁihes the best. progressive achievements end values of
each national culture has ntured and strengthened. ‘l'he profound dislectics
of the cannon and the particular and the national and international exist

in its developesnt. as in other spheres of social life. Its essence is that
the flowering of the national cultures is possible only on the basis of

their rapprocheeent and interpenetration. The contribution of each netion
and nationslity to all-Soviet culture increases newervingly as their social-
ist national culture develops.

It is taco-ended that the lecturer dwell in this part of the speech on the
role of Eunian, which mder our comtry's conditions has becoee the scans of
inter-nation conmication. Mention should be eade here of the erroneouaness
of the opinion which is sonnetiets eepressed to the effect that Russian is an
ethnic chsrecteristic of a single Soviet nation which is allegedly taking
shape. In reality. Russian, as the language of the lost populous nation.
served even in prerevolutionary tines to a certain extent as a eeana of peo-
ple's operational and cultural co-nication in our eultinational country.

Internationalization of people's social sphere and atmdards of behavior and
the way of life a a whole is under wsy in the developed socialist society.
Despite the preservation of national. local and group si Igularities, tradi-
tions. for- of co-unity living and so forth. a single socialist way of
life has been established mder current conditions which is cousin for the
entire Soviet people. detereines the eost essential and nest ieportant alani-
festations of people's vital activity and ceeenta thee in a single, organic
commity.

The socialist way of life as a new historical fore of esn's existence is
established in the process of society's transforestion on commist principles.
The main ideal is of an international nature. For this reeson the new
type of people's vital activity and their collective cooperation and cousuni-
cation engendered by socielise is also of a genuinely internstionalist na-
ture in its content and spirit. The process of the internationalisation of
the Soviet way of life. which integrates the east valuable features. tradi-
tions and eingularities of the culture and social existence of each USSR
people, reflects the objective requireeents of the socialist society's
econoeic. sociopolitical and cultural-historical develop-ent under the con-
ditions of the scientific-technical revolution and the building of cmise's
esterial-technicel facilities.

21

FOR OFFICIAL 088 MY
303 omcm US! MY

All this preeuppoeee a concentration and degree;- of actual eocialization of
the neane of production and a mivereelization of all apheree of Soviet peo-
ple'e vital activity which are incoqatible with the relaanta of national
excluaiveneee which etill exiat. In this eenae the proceae of internationali-
zation of the way of life ia an objective regularity of the ongoing nova-eat
of developed eocialian and a aenifeetation of the proceee of the eocialiat
natione' continued rapprochement.

In thia connection it ie imrtmt that the lecturer euphuize that interna-
tionaliet trende and featuree of the Soviet aociety'e way of life, trenefore-
ing the nterial foudationa of people'e vital activity, are contributing

to the education of the new nan. a nan of hid! conniet ideala with the all-
Soviet traditione end traita of aocial life and aentality inherent in hie,

and increaeing the eignificance oi the canon, related elenenta of the national
culturea. Internationalien ie enerciaed here in daily life and in Soviet
people'e creative labor and everyday life.

Time the proceae oi internationalization perneatee all aapecte of the eocial-
iat way of lifenproduction. eociopoliticel, epiritual, aociel and family-
being realized in a epecific way in each of then. However. deepite all the
inteneiveneee of the internatimalization of Soviet people'e way of life. it
doee not abolieh the existing natione and doea not erect any euperetructurea
over then. International conecioueneee and behavior are not nonnational.

The international doea not exist other than in the national and via the na-
tionel.

The Soviet people'a way of life repreeente a mity of the international essence
of the eocieliet way of life and nationel-epecific features. It takee ehape
tron co-Jn, international featurea engendered by the col-mity oi hietorical
fate, living conditione and world outlook and iron the epecific einguleritiea
and fora. of the ebodinent of thie that ia town in the life of different
natione and nationalitiee.

The internetioneliea of all eepecte of the Soviet eociety and the diveree
proceae of the rapprocheaent of the 0881! natione and nationalitiea are a neat
iaportnt condition of the accolpliahaent of the taeke of col-uni“ building.
however. the international, being the leading. Iain aapect of the aocialiet
way of life under the conditions of developed' aocialien. ie inaeparably con-
nected with and realized via the all-around burgeoning of the national.

The epecifice oi the dielectice of the international and the national at the
stage of developed eocialian are that the rapprochement and all-around cooper-
ation of all our country'a natione and nationalitiee and their all-around
prosperity are not ieoleted but interconnected proceaeee expreeeing the single
eeeence of the eocialiet way of life. It ie therefore nethodologically

wrong to reduce the national aerely to the national-«pacific and national-
particular. In reality. in the proceea of dialectical interaction the inter-
national end the national are continuouely enriched with con-mitt content,
the eeeential prerequieitea thereby being created for the achievenent of the
cowlete international unity of the Soviet people in the future.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
The lecturer ohould oloo take account of the fact that mdor current condi-
tione the very content of the "nov" and "old" concopto with reference to the
sphere of national rolationo is becooing note varied. ror ample, the "new"
concept now expreooee the progreoaive thrust of the changes in tho technical
booie of eociety, public well-being. city planning. education. health care,
culture, art and so forth. the aphore of the struggle between old and no: is

turn, conditioning the pointednaoo and inlacahility with which tho Co-miot
Party oppooee petit bonrseoia, anorehip veatiuea in poople'o Iinde and beha-
vior and deviations (non the atandarda of oocieliat ethics and nrala.‘

In concluoion the lecturer ohonld enphaoiao that the forward line of the urn;-
3lo between new and old today liea not only in the aphero of ideology and in-

inteneive, highly efficient and econo-ical econoay in being tackled currently.
Addroeeing the centennial meeting in Tashkent. LI. Brezhnev pointed out

that under the conditiono of our nnltinational otate intornationaliao in
practice is prinarily the honoot, coneciontiono and full-fledged labor of all
peoples of the country for the canon good.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatol'otvo "Znaniye", 1982

8850
C503 1800/ 735 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL US! 031.!