FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10615
25 JUNE 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUD 21/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITXCAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(rouo 21/82)

CONTENTS
INTERNATIONAL

Role of Revolutionary Parties in Third World Discussed
(Xu. V. Irkhin; VOPROS! ISTORII, Apr 82) 1

Issues in Soviet International Law _
(SOVETSKIY YEZIIEGODRIK MBZHDUIIAROIIIOGO PRAVA 1979. 1950). 17

International Ties of Soviet Institute of History
(Editorial newn)sssoseosooseooassoossaooososssoooonoso ..... 32

NATIONAL

New Bromley Article on Contemporary Ethnic Procesaes
(Yu. V. Bromley; SOVM'BKAYA MORAN“, HapApr 82)... 33

Guidance for Lecturers on 60th Anniversary of 188R
(Editonal mwn)IOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOIUOOIOCO.IOIIOOOOOCOCO0.0... 51

1136103.“. L

Influence of Russian language on Uzbek
(I. In. Astandiyarov; VOPROSY YAZYKOZIIMIYA, Mar-Apr 82)...... 52

- a - [III - ussa - 3s rouol

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

ROLE OF REVOLUTIONARY PARTIES IN THIRD WORLD DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian N0 4. Apr 82 pp 55-67

[Article by Yu. v. Irkhin: "Revolutionary Vanguard Parties of Horkins People in

Liberated Countries" under the rubric ”Pollaw~Up on the Decisions of the 26th
CPSU Congress") e

[Text] There has been an increase in the number of countries
with socialist orientation, countries that chose the path of
socialist development.... In these countries. revolutionary parties

reflecting the interests of the broad masses of workers have been
gaining in strength.

L. I. Brezhnev

A characteristic feature of the current stage of the world revolutionary process is
the expansion and deepening of the struggle of the nations of Asia, Africa. and
Latin America against imperialism and domestic reaction and for democratic trans-
formations and socialism. The ranks of the countries with socialist orientation
that had arisen during the 1960s in Asia and Africa (the Algerian People's Demo-
cratic Republic, the Guinean People's Revolutionary Republic, the People's Deno-
cratic Republic of Yemen, the People's Republic of Congo, the United Republic of
Tanzania. and others) were complemented in the 1970s by the People's Republic of
Angola, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. the People's Republic of Benin, the
Republic of Guinea-Bisau. the People's Republic of Mozambique, Socialist Ethiopia.
etc. The rise of these states in Asia and Africa has been accompanied by the forma-
tion of an extensive zone of countries with socialist orientation, having an aggre-
gate population of some 150 million persons and an aggregate area of more than 12
million sq m.1 In Latin America the path of social progress was taken in the

19703 by Nicaragua and Granada and the revolutionary struggle of El Salvador and
various other countries on the: continent is being expanded.

In the development of the revolutionary process in Asia, Africa. and certain coun-
tries of Latin America, an important role is played by revolutionary delocracy. Re-
volutionary-democratic forces. groups. and parties. rule virtually all the coun-
tries with socialist orientation and are an izportant factor expressing public
anti-imperialist and anti—capitalist tendencies in many liberated countries. More-
over, they take an active part in modern national-liberation movements and often
even head then. A characteristic feature of the development of revolutionary-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

democratic forces in Asia. Africa. and Latin America during the 1970s and early
19803 has been their greater consistency in occupying anti-imperialist and anti-
capitalist positions. In some of these countries, revolutionary parties are

beginning to be established according to the principles of scientific socialism

movements increasingly often declare themselves to be friends and comrades-in-
arms of the CPSU. the communist movement. Indicative is the following fact:
while the 25th CPSU Congress was attended by representatives of 19 such parties.
the 26th Congress was attended by 36. The ranks of revolutionary democracy ex-
perience a leaning toward scientific socialism, toward arming themselves with
Marxist-Leninist teachings and with thg organisational and poltical principles of
building vanguard parties of workers."

first declared and substantiated by V. I. Lenin. In a report to the commmission
on nationality and colonial questions at he 2nd Komintern Congress. and in his
report theses, V. I. Lenin pointed to the possibility of the emergence, in back-
ward countries, of "elements of future proletarian parties."3 called upon to
unify and embody the elemental leaning of the working masses toward socialism
based on a scientific theory. He repeatedly pointed out that the revolutionary
parties in backward countries have to accomplish a great deal of work on the
path of their transformation into communist parties, and he warned them against
a bias toward [ultra-]leftism. Thus, in reply to the question by delegates from
the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party [MPRP] whether "Should not a national-
revolutionary party turn into the communist party?" Lenin answered that he did
recommend it. because a party "cannotbs 'transformed' into another party.” Lenin
stressed that "much has yet to be accomplished by revolutionaries in promoting
their state, economic, and cultural construction before the proletarian mass

can be created from pastoral elements and subsequently assist in 'transforming'

a national-revolutionary party into a conunist party. 1"»: were replacing of

the name-plate is harmful and dangerous."‘ The transformation of the MPRP

into the party of the working class took place only as late as in the 19408

after the necessary conditions for it became ripe.

The problem of the formation of revolutionary parties in the liberated countries
and their evolution into parties of the Harxist-Leninist type at the present
stage is considered in va ious studies of modern national-liberation revolutions
and developing countries. There exist no special overall monograph surveys pub-
lished on the history of the formation of revolutionary vanguard parties in the
liberated countries during the 19705 and early 1980s, as yet. Works by Soviet
historians deal with, as a rule, aspects of the formation of individual vanguard
parties. The first attempt at an analysis of the formative history of several
vanguard parties at a time, and at their comparative analysis (as exemplified by
Angola, Mozambique. and Guinea-Bisau). was made in the book by 0. V. Hartyshin.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The need to consider this kind of questions is due to the fact-that they are being
distorted by bourgeois historians. . Parsons, . Austin. S. Huntington. I.
Nelson. P. B'yarne [name transliterated], and others actively comment against the
formation of vanguard parties in the liberated countries. regarding this process
as a real threat to the neocolonial interests of the imperialist powers. They put
a false construction on the activities of such parties, attempting to prove that
the peoples of the liberated countries supposedly are not "ripe” for socialism
and should necessarily pass through a lengthy stage of bourgeois development, or
the stage of "modernization."8 The bourgeois ideologists consider the idea of a

In this connection. it is becoming particularly topical to analyze the question of
the patterns and special features of the transition of revolutionary-democratic
forces to the positions of scientific socialism. and of the paths whereby these
forces form revolutionary vanguard parties on the basis of the principles of
Harxism-Leninism. Below an attempt is made to examine the basic historical forms,
patterns, and features of the formation and development of revolutionary vanguard
parties in the liberated countries of Asia and Africa on the basis of materials
pertaining to the 19703 and early 19808. The principal source for analyzing the
activities of these parties is their program documents, the speeches and articles
of their leaders, and the revolutionary-democratic party press.1°

revolutionary-democratic to Marxist-Leninist parties. The vanguard parties display
a number of class features and characteristics common to those of the parties of
the Marxist-Leninist type. They acknowledge Harxism-Leninism to be their ideologi-
cal basis. substruct their activities on the principles of democratic centralism.
and complement their ranks through individual selection of the best representatives
of the working class, peasantry, and other laboring strata of the population. It

is these features that account for the vanguard nature of these parties. which
represent a distinctive proto-image of parties of the Marxist-Leninist type. As

for the difference between the revolutionary-democratic vanguard parties of workers
and parties of the Harxist-Leninist type, it consists in that their members do not
as yet fully assimilate and apply in practice scientific communism, the share of
the working (especially cadre) class in their membership is small,‘and their
primary organizations are insufficiently strong and active in industry and army and

of maturity of [Marxist-Leninist] theory among their cadres. the degree of their
revolutionary influence on workers, and their ideological-political and organiza-
tional.0!pcrience. Their social basis consists of non-proletarian strata of
workers, the working class in its formative stage, and the intelligentsia.

tions and names of vanguard parties in countries with socialist orientation.

These names and definitions reflect the vanguard nature of the parties, their social
basis, and their class orientation. They are such names and definitions as
"revolutionary-denocratic vanguard parties." "vanguard parties of workers," "par-
ties of the worker-peasant vanguard."11 It appears that the social composition

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nition "revolutionary vanguard parties of workers." or. more briefly. "vanguard

formations in the countries that chose the path of socialist development. "Namely.
the gradual liquidation of the positions of imperialist monopolies, indigenous

scientific communism and the development of democratic activity of workers and
armed with Merxism-Leninism and called upon to become the directing motive power
and guaranc of socialist orientation. The experience of Ghana. Mali, Egypt.

regimes cannot be assured.

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

detachments of revolutionary democracy is the problem of creating and consolidating
vanguard parties as embryos of parties of the Harxist-Leninist type. The docu-
ment of the Conference of Communist and Workers Parties of Tropical and Southern
Africa declares: "Revolutionary experience demonstrates that only the establish-
ment of an anti-imperialist, anti-capitalist revolutionary organization basing it-
self on the support of workers and other patriotic strata of the population

can serve to consistently accomplish and defend radical socio-economic reforms.
Already many organizations which originated as broad revolutionary-democratic
movements have commenced the process of their transformation. we welcome this
trend and consider such organizations to be part of the newﬁy forming and growing
group of Marxist revolutionary vanguards on our continent." 5

A major effect on the formation of the world outlook of present-day revolutionary
democracy is produced by the example of real socialism, by the active support
provided by countries of the socialist community to all anti-imperialist revolu-
tionary-democratic movements in Africa. Asia, and Latin America.

A differentiation is taking place within the ranks of the revolutionary-democratic
forces, along with a strengthening of the positions of the left wing of revolu-
tionary democracy, and the coming to power, in a number of countries in Africa,
Asia, and Central America. of the "second generation" of revolutionary democrats
who have extensive experience in class struggle, are familiar with the experience
of real socialism and the basic premises of Harxism-Leninism. have actively
collaborated with communists in the course of anti-imperialist struggle, and do
not reject joint activity under the new conditions. The aforementioned document
of the Conference of Communist and workers Parties of Tropical and Southern Africa
states that: "in the last few years an increasing number of revolutionary demo-
crats has adopted a positive point of view toward Marxism-Leninism."1

The formation of the vanguard parties results from the conceptual impact of

the CPSU's experience on the revolutionary democracy as well as from understand-
ing the Leninist tenet of the need to create a vanguard organization of the working
class in the struggle to build a new society. Thus, the chairman of the Central
Committee of the Congolese Labor Party (CLP) , Denis Sassou-Nguesso,

characterizes as follows the political platform of CLP: "[It is] a vanguard party
whose organizational structure, orientation, and end-goal are defined on the basis
of the revolutionary experience of parties of a new type among which the brightest
example is the party of Lenin."17

The creation of the revolutionary vanguard parties signifies a qualitatively new
stage in the evolution of revolutionary democracy andthedevelopmentofcountricswith

socialist orientation. 8. N. Ponomarev points out: “In certain countries
progressing along the path of socialist development, the ruling revolutionary- _
democratic parties (for example. in the People's Republxc of Angola, the People's
Republic of Mozambique, Socialist Ethiopia. the People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen, the People's Republic of the Congo, and others) proclaim Marxism-Leninism to
be the ideological and political basis of their activity. The leaning toward
scientific socialism among the vanguard detachments of the national-liberation
movement is becoming increasingly more explicit."18 The experience of the deve-
lopment of revolutionary-democratic forces in the liberated countries is a shining

5
FOR OFIWCJAL USE3CM‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

affirmation of Lenin's conclusion that "in the 20th century... one cannot be

a revolutionary democrat [if one fears] [printed in italics] advancing toward
socialism.”19

In the 19703 the process of the formation and strengthening of the vanguard parties
has been taking place in the group of countries with socialist orientation as
well as in certain other liberated countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
The Congolese Labor Party. established in 1969, has been gaining in strength. In
1977 the following turned into vanguard parties: the Mozambique National Libera-
tion Front (FRELIMO)--the party retained its original name. and the National
Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA), which was renamed MPLA-Labor Party.
In 1975 there arose the Party of People's Revolution of Benin (PPRB). and in 1978.
the Yemenite Socialist Party (YSP). Toward the end of 1979 the crisis within the
National-Democratic Party of Afghanistan (established in 1975. became the ruling
party in April 1978) was overcome. In 1980 in Nicaragua work was begun to trans-
form the Sandinist Front of National Liberation (SPNL) into a vanguard organiza-
tion, the Sandinist revolutionary party (as yet. a conditional name). In 1979

in Ethiopia there was created the Commission for the Organization of a Workers '
Party (COUPE). The process of formation of vanguard parties can be observed in

the Republic of Guinea-Bisau, the Republic of Case Verde Island, the Democratic
Republic of Sao Tome and Principe. and Bahr in.2

Historical experience demonstrates that the formative process of parties of the
vanguard type in countries with socialist orientation may assume various forms
and proceed along different paths. One direction taken by this process is the
formation of vanguard parties in the countries with socialist orientation where
revolutionary-democratic parties or groups already exist. In this case, the left
wing of revolutionary democracy can utilize the experience and part of cadres

of the revolutionary-democratic party when establishing the vanguard party. The
CLP. for example. was founded in 1969 by M. Nguabi [name transliterated]. the
leader of the left wing of the mass party National Revolutionary Movement which
had existed in the Congo from 1964 until 1968. In Angola and Mozambique in 1977
parties-movements became transformed into vanguard parties.

Another direction is that of the formation of vanguard parties in the countries
in which revolutionary-democratic parties previously were absent. In this case,
revolutionary or military-revolutionary democrats begin to form vanguard parties
chiefly with their own forces. This precisely has happened in Benin, where the
military-revolutionary government headed by M. Kerekou. which came to rule in 1972.
established in 1975 the Party of People's Revolution of Benin. The First Extra-
ordinary Congress of the PPRB in 1976 adopted the party program and consolidated
the course of development of the country on the basis of the principles of scien-
tific socialism. In Ethiopia the progressive wing of the ruling military-
revolutionary democracy. while heading the process of the formation of a vanguard
party, at the same time strives to cooperate with those political organizations
or their representatives which or who support the government's policies. The
third form of establishing a vanguard party is a rapprochement of positions.
followed by the unification of Marxist and revolutionary-democratic organizations
on a common platform of scientific socialism. In the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen in 1975 the political organization of the National.Front. the

6
ma OFFICIAL USE. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

People's Democratic Union, and the Party of the People's Vanguard merged into a
united political organization called the National Front on the basis of which
the Yemenite Socialist Party was created in 1978. In principle, other paths of
the formation of vanguard parties also are possible.

clearly, the creation of a vanguard party is an objective necessity and law

of the onward progress of the liberated countries in the direction of socialism.
R. A. Ul'yanovskiy states: "The socialist orientation presupposes first of all

an effective political leadership by vanguard parties or by an alliance of parties
forming the front of progressive forces. The idea of creating vanguard parties
which are close in their nature to parties of scientific socialism, as put

forward by many revolutionary democrats. is a constructive idea."21

Bourgeois historians and political pundits claim that the liberated countriessuppo-
sedly lack the necessary social basis. and primarily the proletariat, for establish-
ing vanguard and communist parties.22 But an analysis of the numbers of the
working class and its share in the social structure of the countries with a socia-
list orientation. as well as of its role in the vanguard parties. produces an
opposite conclusion. Although the share of the working class in the social
structure of these countries is smaller than in the developed countries. in Asia
and Africa the proletariat--including factory and plant workers--had emerged on
the political arena as early as in the 1950s and 1960s and it continues to

grow rapidly in numbers. Between 1960 and 1973 alone the working class in Africa
increased by 5 million people or 35.2 percent, and at present it consists of more
than 19 million people. 3 In the countries with socialist orientation the
overall growth in the numbers of workers is accompanied by a rapid increase in the
numbers of skilled workers due to the growth of the state sector, the stabiliza-
tion of the labor force, and improvements in the system of the occupational
training and education of workers. In Congo, for example. the size of the working
class between 1963 and the present increased from 40,000 to 70,000 persons, and
its propggtion in the gainfully employed population rose from 7 percent to 12
percent. In Ethiopia there are about 100,000 factory and plant workers and

the agricultural proletariat consists of some 310,000 persons. In Al eria there
are 370,000 industrial workers. and in Mozambique. more than 100,000. 5 The
materials of the First Congress of the Yemenite Socialist Party point out that

one of the principal changes that took place in the country's social structure

and in the party's social composition since the mid-19703 has been "the rapid
growth of the numbers of hired workers. Within this huge army of workers there
begins to arise a stratum of skilled workers and technicians associated with

the new system of production, who represent the hard core of the Yemenite working
class.“26 The General Secretary of the Universal Confederation of Trade Union
Workers of the PDRY. Sultan ad-Dash [name transliterated] announced: "Today
three-fourths of the 100.000 trade-union members are workers."27

Consequently. the working class in the countries with socialist orientation
indisputably can and indeed does provide the principal social basis for the for-
mation of vanguard parties. Their program documents and charters contain provi-
sions that exclude from membership any reactionary and non-working elements and
stipulate the primary role of representatives of the working class and working
people in the party and in the socio-political life of the countries with socia-
list orientation. For example. the charter of the YSR states that "admission to
membership in the party granted through an individualized procedure to candidates

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who complete the stage of candidateship. Membership in the party is granted to
the most conscious and active representatives of workers. peasants, soldiers,
and other strata of working people and revolutionary intelligentsia. For
workers, members of peasant and fishery cooperatives and soldiers (of worker

and peasant origin) the stage of candidateship lasts one year and for all others.
two years.”28

The purposeful drive of the vanguard parties to recruit to their ranks the best
representatives of the working class is producing fruit. For example, the pro-
portion of workers in the CL? climbed to 31.5 percent of its total membership of
some 7,000.29 In the PDRY during the three years of preparations to establish

the YSP [Yemenite Socialist Party] (from 1975 until 1978) the proportion of

workers in the vanguard political organization climbed to 55.7 percent. At present
the YSP has a membership of 26,000 of whom 13.2 percent are workers and 12.8 percent
peasants.30 The MPH-Labor Party is actively working to recruit workers for its
membership. Thus, in recent years its membership in the Northern Luanda mining
region increased from 276 to 1,137, and the number of party cells rose to 112.
Vorkers account for 51 percent of the party's total membership. of the 31,000
mebers and candidate menbers of the HPLA-Labor Party, industrial workers account
for 25.9 percent; agricultural workers. more than 23 percent; peasants. 1.9 percent;
the intelligentsia and technician personnel, 6 percent; and white-collar workers
and manageramore than 39 percent.3|

Vanguard parties in the countries with socialist orientation organize cells at
larger enterprises. For example, four party cells consisting of 80 members and
candidate members of the TSP operate among the 1,350 blue- and white-collar workers
of the Port of Aden.32 Luanda's largest industrial enterprise. the Textang
Textile Factory, is the site of HPLA-Labor Party cells numbering 60 members. esta-
blished in 1978.33 A chapter of PRELIMO has been organized at the Habor plant,

a large industrial enterprise in Haputu, the nation's capital.“ As pointed out

at the Fifth Plenum of the PDPA Central Comittee (1981), 25 percent of the

new members and candidate members of the party are cadre workers and working
peasants.

In Mozambique, in accordance with the decisions of the Third Plenum of the
FRELIHO Central Committee. the year 1978 was declared to be "the year of party
construction." The plenum put forward the slogan. "We shall build the party in
order to better organize our life." Under this program, a national seminar on
party construction was held on 17 February 1978 with participation by the leader-
ship of PRELIHO. In May 1978 a seminar of party organization secretaries on
organizational work was held in Haputu. These seminars activated the drive for
party construction. Thousands of Mozambican working people applied for admission
to the party. They mostly consisted of workers, peasants. and members of the
armed forces and security troops. The main aspect of that drive was that. "paral-
lel to the growth in the number of candidates augmenting the party's ranks,"

as pointed out in the Mozambique press, "the class awareness of the working
people is also increasing."36 The measures taken caused the membership of
PRELIHO to increase to 35,000 persons associated in more than 1.000 party
organizations.37

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The vigorous work to create and strengthen party cells resulted in an increase

in the number of primary organizations in all vanguard parties. In the PDRY

the number of primary organizations of the Yemenite Socialist Party has increased
by 10 percent between 1975 and 1978 and amounts to some 1,500. In Angola about
3,000 primary party organizations are active.381b£:primary organizations of the van-
guard parties are created chiefly according to the territorial-production prin-
ciple. In some cases there arises a number of difficulties associated with the
formation of party cells in enterprises and establishments where class conscious-
ness is insufficiently developed among workers. especially whcre the number of
illiterates is large. In view of this, the vanguard parties devote more attention
to ideological-political and educational work w.th broad masses of working people.

An organic part of the process of increase in the share of the working class in

the membership of the vanguard parties is the elimination of bourgeois elements
from these parties. Parties of the vanguard type differ from revolutionary-
democratic organizations chiefly in their more explicit class composition and

more resolute ideological-political platform. The rightist groups and elements in
the ruling circles and the machinery of state of the countries with socialist
orientation, which realize that the formation of the vanguard parties objectively
presupposes their elimination from membership and the strengthening of the course
toward socialism, resist thisprocess and attempt to impede the creation of van-
guard organizations and. in the final analysis. turn the young countries away from
the progressive parth of development. Thus. in the PDRY the opportunist grouping
headed by 8. Ali acted to oppose the decision to organize the vanguard party of
working people. The group made demagogic declarations stating that a vanguard
party had supposedly been formed long ago in the PDRY, and it agitated for reduc—
ing relations with the socialist countries and developing contacts with reactionary
Arab regimes. When. however, the grouping realized that the process of the forma-
tion of a vanguard party of working people in the PDRY cannot be halted, it at-
tempted on 26 June 1978 a coup d'etat which was foiled by revolutionary forces.

The heads of the YSP pointed out that the clique of "opportunists opposed the crea-
tion of the YSP, claiming that the Yemenite working class is still small in numbers
and has a low level of awareness. But we believe that, despite the small size of
the working class in Yemen (in our country there are about 80.000 blue- and white-
collar workers out of a total population of 1.75 million), the leading role can be
assured by a revolutionary vanguard with a clear-cut ideological platform."39

The optimal approach to the formation and strengthening of vanguard parties of work-
ing people is one when the process of the consolidation of positions of the left
wing of the ruling revolutionary democracy and its transition to the positions of
scientific socialism occurs in an inseparable connection with the process of enhan-
cement of the role of the working class and working people in the party, state. and
public life of the countries with socialist orientation. These processes objecti-
vely occur as interwoven tendencies. Consistent proponents of the course toward
socialism among the ruling revolutionary democracy are objectively interested in
support by the laboring masses while the working class and other laboring strata

of the population, in measure with the growth of their awareness, provide increas—
ing support to the progressive policy of the revolutionary-democratic forces.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIA'. USE ONLY

The share of workers belonging to the vanguard parties of working people in the
deliberations of party congresses is increasing. This contributes to the adoption
of decisions promoting the interests of broad masses of working people, and to

the activization of the party's work to implement these decisions. 0f the 459
delegates taking part in the deliberations of the First Extraordinary Congress of
the Yemenite Socialist Party on 12-14 October 1980, workers accounted for 21.9
percent; peasants, 6 percent; the intelligentsia, 40 percent; administrative em-
ployees, 19.5 percent; and soldiers, 10.6 percent."'0 The congress approved the
basic directions and indicators of the second Five-Year Plan for the Development
of the PDRY for 1981-1985. Major attention at the congress was devoted to aspects
of improving organizational-party work and the social-class structure of the party.
as well as the qualtiative composition of the party's leadership, and increasing
its share of workers and other working people. Recently the YSP replaced par
cards, which was of major organizational and political-educational importance. 1
In January 1982 an important political measure commenced in Afghanistan--the
issuance of party documents to members and candidate members of the PDPA. In

the last one and one-half years its membership has doubled. The party's ranks

are being augmented with pace-setting workers, peasants, soldiers, and the intel-
ligentsia. The striving of working people to link their fate to the party is an
eloquent proof of its growing authority and the trust placed in it by the popular
masses. The PDPA has 62,000 members and candidate members associated in 1,656

party cells. or the 18,000 members and candidate members joining the PDPA in 1982
40 percent were workers and peasants/02

A major place in the activities of the vanguard parties is occupied by problems of
the management of mass organizations of working people. of restructuring them on

a revolutionary basis, enhancing their role in the country socio-economic life.
increasing their membership, and refining their structure. Special attention is
being devoted by the vanguard parties of working people to improving the activities
of the trade unions, which even now represent a real political force in the coun-
tries with socialist orientation. In Ethiopia, for example. during the years of the
revolution, the membership of the All-Ethiopian Trade Union increasd from 100,000
to 350,000.43 The membership of the Congolese Trade Unions Federation has more than
doubled during the years of the revolution and now amounts to 85,000.44 The Univer-
sal Confederation of Trade Union Workers of the PDRY has doubled in membership
within 4 years and now has 100,000 members."5 Trade unions in the countries with
socialist orientationweregranted the right of supervising working conditions at
enterprises and participating in the preparation of plans for the country's politi-
cal, economic, and social development.

An important school of class awareness for the working class of the countries with
socialist orientation is the participation of that class in elections to the

organs of people’s authorities and its subsequent participation in these authori-
ties. The vanguard parties. as a rule, promote this process. In Angola. for ex-
ample, the "Law of Elections" (1980) granted to the population of that country
broad electoral powers. At the same time. this law provides for certain restric-
tions on persons who had collaborated with the colonial regime or take part in
actions against state security, in acts of sabogate, or who are involved in corrup-
tion, smuggling, speculation, etc. Candidates for province deputies were nomina-
ted from among activists of the HPLAeLabor Party, trade unions, youth organiza-

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tions, and women's organizations. This accounted for the high proportion of the
working class and other working people elected to the provincial people's assemb-3
lies, whose deputies consist 50 percent of workers, 30 percent of peasants, 10 per-
cent of representatives of the intelligentsia, 10 perzgnt of employees of the
state administration, and 10 percent of the military. The elected deputies of
the people's assemblies-the central ruling bodies in Angola and Mozambique--
consist correspondingly Of 28.5 and 31.4 percent of workers, respectively, and 22.6
and 28.7 percent of peasants, respectively."7 0f the 111 deputies to the Supreme
People's Council of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. about 50 percent

are workers and peasants (1978 e1ections).43

A.primary role in the strengthening of the vanguard parties is played by elevation
of the level of ideological and political-educational work both among party mem-
bers and among the broad masses of working people. The vanguard parties consider
it an important task for their members to master the basic tenets of Marxism-
Leninism. At the same time, they promote the propaganda of the ideas of scientific
socialism among the popular masses. The documents of the Third Congress of
FRELIHO state: "Marxism-Leninism is the ideological and theoretical basis of our
party. 50 that it may become a genuine vanguard of the laboring classes. the
party should be armed with a revolutionary theory which would enable party members
to correctly understand the laws of social development and revolution. Without
such an ideological and theoretical basis the party cannot lead the struggle of
the working masses and have them follow it. This basis is Marxism-Leninism. The
party will always guide itself by the universal principles of Marxism-Leninism

on allowing for the specific conditions of development of the class struggle in
our country.”9

To train qualified party and administrative cadres, workers of public organizations
of working people, and propagandists and agitators. special party and state educa-
tional institutions have been established in the countries with socialist orienta-
tion. They are: the Higher School of Scientific Socialism in Aden (1971). the
Central Party School in Mozambique (1975), the Political School named after

the February Revolution in Addis-Abeba (1976). the Party school in Brazzaville
(1973), the Party school in Guinea-Bisau (1978). Scientific socialism is being
studied at the Aden, Addis-Abeba, and other universities of the countries with
socialist orientation. In the PDRY, for example, some 105000 persons have been
graduated from the Higher School of Scientific Socialism. 0 The number of acti-
vists who completed the Political School in Ethiopia exceeds 8,000, and the gra-
duates of Afghanistan's Institute of Social Sciences under the PDPA Central
Committee number 1,600.51 During 1977-1979 the party schools in Angola trained
more than 2,200 persons of whom 40 percent were representatives of the country's
working class. The country's first "rabfak" [workers' faculty] has been estab-
lished at Kabul University in 1981 (with an enrollment of about 500).52

Recently a number of new party or political journals dealing with actual problems of
Marxist-Leninist theory has been founded in the countries with socialist orientation.
These journals also concern themselves with party construction and problems of
Marxist-Leninist education. In the PDRY, for example, the first issue of the monthly
KADAYA AL-ASR [Problems of the Present Day] has been published. In Ethiopia. the
quarterly "Harxist-Leninist ideological journal" HBSKBREH {September}. has been
published since January 1980.53

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ideological activities of the vanguard parties serve the cause of imbuing

the working class and all working people in the countries with socialist orienta-
tion, with a sense of responsibility for the fate of the revolution, awakening
and developing their class consciousness, and familiarizing them with the prin-
ciples of the scientific world outlook. The further strengthening of the van-
guard parties on principles of Marxism-Leninism and enhancement of the role of the
working class in all domains of public life in the countries with socialist orien-
tation are prerequisites for their transition to socialism. Thus, in his speech
at the 26th CPSU Congress, the Chairman of the HPLA-Labor Party Jose Eduardo dos
Santos declared that "under the specific conditions of Angola our party gradually
affirms its Harxist-Leninist nature."54

of invaluable importance to the strengthening of the vanguard parties is the deve-
lopment of their relations with the communist parties. During the 19708 there took
place a number of joint international conferences and symposiums dealing with
questions of theory, at which the communist and the revolutionary-democratic par-
ties exchanged experience and opinions. A tendency toward the strengthening of
ties between the CPSU and the vanguard parties of the liberated countries is ob-
served. Rcentlv. the USSR has been visited by party delegations from the YSP.
HPLA-Labor Party, FRELIHO, PDPA, CLP, SFNL, and COUPE. In its turn. upon invita-
tion by the vanguard parties. the CC CPSU has dispatched party delegations to the
concerned countries. In the course of these visits. plans for cooperation between
the CPSU and a majority of the vanguard parties, exchange of parliamnetary delega-
tions. and interaction in economics. science, and culture, were formalized.

The leaders of the vanguard parties prize highly the ties between the CPSU and the
revolutionary-democratic forces of the liberated countries. The member of the

cc CLP P. Nze commented in that context that "between the Congolese Labor Party and
the CPSU excellent relations of friendship and cooperation have been established.
The views of our parties on the basic international problems and questions of
building socialism coincide. We are convinced that the succcessful implementation of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress will contribute to further strengthening

the militant solidarity of our nations and parties."55 The General Secretary of

the YSP A. N. Muhammad streses that the relations between the YSP and the CPSU

"are of a militant, strategic nature. Our alliance with the CPSU has always been
the solid basis for the development of Yemen's revolution. It contributes to
defending national sovereignty and solving the social problems of Democratic Yemen.
Our revolution has directly witnessed the unshakable adherence of the CPSU to the
cause of internationalism."S6

As stressed at the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, "The
CPSU shall consistently adhere to the course of developing cooperation between the
USSR and the liberated countries, strengthening the alliance of world socialism

and national-liberation movement."57 Support by the countries of the socialist com-
munity provides favorable external conditions for the formation and strengthening of
the positions of the vanguard parties. The strengthening of the existing vanguard
parties and provision of the necessary premises for their formationin a number of
other countries objectively exist as a most important task for the revolutionary-
democratic forces.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

S.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

An. A. Gromyko. "Afrika: progress, trudnosti, perspektivy" [Africa: Progress.
Difficulties, Perspectives], Moscow. 1981, p 72.

B. N. Ponomarev. "0n the International Significance of the 26th CPSU Congress."
mums-r, No 5. 1981. p 16.

V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete Works], Vol 41. p 167.

Ibid.. Vol 104, p 233.

See Yu. Tsedenbal. "Izbrannyye stat'i i rechi" [Selected Articles and Speeches].
Vol 1. Moscow. 1962. p 280; L. M. Cataullina, "Problemy nekapitalistischego
razvitiya. Mongol'skaya Narodnaya Respublika" [Problems of Non—Capitalist
Development. The Mongolian People's Republic]. Moscow. 1978, pp 65-157.

"Razvivayushchiyesya strany: zakonomernosti. tendentsii, perspektivy" [The
Developing Countries: Patterns. Trends. Perspectives]. Moscow. 1974; Zarubezhnyy
Vostok i sovremennost' [Non-USSR Orient Today]. Vols 1-3. Moscow. 1981;

K. N. Brutents. "Sovremennyye natsional'no-osvoboditel'nyye revolyutsii"
[Present-Day National-Liberation Revolutions], Moscow, 197A; by the same author.
"Osvobodivshiyesya strany v 70-e gody" [The Liberated Countries in the 19703].
Moscow. 1979; An. A. Gromyko, op. cit.; R.A. Ul‘yanovskiy. "Sovremennyye problemy
A211 1 Afriki" [Present-Day Problems of Asia and Africa]. Moscow. 1978; A. V.
Kiva, "Strany sotsialisticheskoy orientatsii" [Countries With a Socialist
Orientation], Moscow, 1978; P.I. Manchkha. "Aktual'nyye problemy sovremennoy
Afriki" [Current Problems of Modern Africa]. Moscow, 1979; N. D. Kosukhin.
"Formirovaniye ideyno-politicheskoy strategii v afrikanskikh stranakb sotsiali-
sticheskoy orientatsii" [Formation of Ideological-Political Strategy in the
African Countries With Socialist Orientation]. Moscow. 1980.

See V. Ya. Stekol'shchikov. "Narodnaya Respublika Kongo v bor'be 2a sotsialisti-
cheskuyu orientatsiyu. Moscow. 1976; A. S. Gus'kov. "Natsional'nyy Front Deno-
kratischego Yemenal [The National Front of Democratic Yemen]. Moscow. 1979;

0. V. Martyshin, "Afrikanskaya revolyutsionnaya demokratiya. Ideyno-politicheskaya
platforma MPLA-PT. FRELIMO. and PAI " [The African Revolutionary Democracy.
Ideological-Political Platform of the MPH-Labor Party. PRELIMO, and PAIGK [7]].
Moscow. 1981.

For more detail see V. Ye. Chirkin. [Burzhuaznaya politologiya i deyatvennost'
razvivayushchikhsya stran" [Bourgeois Political Science and the Reality of the
Developing Countries]. Moscow, 1980.

See "Africa and International Communism." London. 1980; J. Sartori. "Parties and
Party System." Vol 1. Cambridge. 1976; 5. Huntington. 1. Nelson, "No Easy
Political Choice: Political Participation in the Development Societies." M. 1.,
1976.

13
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10. See "Programnnyye dokumenty Beninskoy revolyutsii. Rabochiy klass i sovre-
mennyy mir" [Program Documents of the Benin Revolution. The Horking Class and
the Present-Day world], No 6. 1977; "I s"yezd Narodnogo dvizheniya za osvobo~
zhdeniye Angeli (MPLA)" [First Congress 05 the National Movement for the Libera-
tion of Angola (MPLA)], Moscow, 1978; "Materialy I s"ye2da Yenenskoy sotsidli—
sticheskoy partii" [Materials of the First Congress of the Yemenite Socialist

1980; "Extraordinary Congress of the Yemenite Socialist Party. Aden, October
1980. Beirut, 1980 (in Arabic); "Vizit Babrska Karmslya v Sovetskiy Soyuz.
Dokumenty i materialy" [The Visit of Babrak Karma! to the Soviet Union. Docu-
ments and Materials], Moscow, 1980; "Vizit Ali Nasera Mukhammeda v Sovetskiy
Soyuz. Dokumenty i materialy" [The Visit of Ali Nasser Muhammad to the Soviet
Union. Documents and Materials], Moscow, 1980; "Vizit Samory Moyzesa Mashela
v Sovetskiy Soyuz" [The Visit of Samara Moises Machel to the Soviet Union].
Moscow. 1980; "Basic Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan." in
the book "Demokraticheskaya Respublika Afganistan" [The Democratic Republic of
Afghanistan], Moscow, 1981; "Visit Deni Sassu-Ngesso v Sovetskiy Soyuz" [The
Visit of Denis Sassou-Nguesso to the Soviet Union], Moscow, 1981: "Programme
du Parti Congolais du Travail, Brazzaville, 1972; "Basic Documents of the
Ethiopian Revolution," Addis Ababa. 1977; "Relatorio de Comite Central so I
Congresso Extraordinario do MPLA--Partido trabalho," Luanda, 1980, et a1.

11. P. I. Manchkha, "Aktual'nyye problemy sovremennoy Afriki" [Current Problems of
Africa], Moscow, 1979. p 130; An. A. Gromyko, op. cit., p 75; "Dokumenty
partii FRELIMO Narodnoy Respubliki Mozambik." op. cit. 206; Ye. M. Primakov,
"Countries With Socialist Orientation: The Difficult but Real Transition to

Socialism," HIROVAYA EKONOHIKA I HEZHDUNARODNYYE OTNOSRENIYA, N070 1981, p 81;
C. P. Kim. "The Insurmountable Process," PRAVDA, 20 June 1981.

12. "Materinly XXVIs"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress]. Moscow,
1981, p 12.

13. B. Karmal. "The Forum of Soviet Communists and Our Primary Tasks," KOMMUNIST,
No 6,1981, p 81.

14. The "revolutionary democracy" in the liberated countries is construed. in the
social meaning of the term, as politically active strata of petty urban
bourgeoisie. peasantry, and radical intelligentsia which take the positions of
an anti-imperialist. anti-feudal. and. to some extent.anti-capitalist struggle;
in the political sense of the term, it is construed as the parties, organiza-
tions, and groups expressing the interests of these strata (see “Nauchnyy
kommunizm. Slovar'" [A Dictionary of Scientific Communism]. Moscow. 1981, p 227).
The "left revolutionary-democratic wing" is construed to mean those revolutio-
nary—democratic or national-democratic circles which change over to the posi-
tions of scientific socialism (see Ul'yanovskiy, op. cit.. pp 58. S9).

15. "For the Freedom, Independence, National Rebirth, and Social Progress of the
Nations of Tropical and Southern Africa." RABOCHIY KLASS I SOVREMENNYY MIR,
No 4. 1979, p 160.

16. Ibid.

1h
FOILOFFNJA1.USEIDNLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

D. Sassou-Nguesso, "Ten Years of _the Congolese Labor Party," MIST, No 3,
1980, p 88.

B. N. Pononarev, "Zhivoye i deystvennoye ucheniye marksizma-leninim" [The
Living and Effective Teaching of Marxian—Minion]. Moscow, 1981, p 99.

Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 34, p 190.

See "Politicheskiye partii. Spravochnik" [A Guide to Political Parties],
Moscow, 1981, pp 118, 206, 236, 305.

R. A. Ul'yanovskiy. "On the Countries With Socialist Orientation," KWIST,
No 11. 1979, p 120.

P. Lloyd, "Classes, Crises. and Coupe." London, 1977. p 128.

An. A. Cromyko. "Development Tendencies of the working Class in the Countries
of Africa." MBOCHIY KLASS I 50mm am. No 5, 1978, p 11; "Rabochiy klass
i rabocheye dvizheniye v Afrike" [The Working Class and Worker Movement in
Africa], Moscow. 1979, p 13.

Grouyko, "Rabochiy klass i rabocheye dvizheniye v Afrike,"op. cit.. pp 197-198.

“Hezhdunarodnoye rabocheye dvizheniye. Spravochnik" [A Guide to the Internatio-
nal Worker Movement], Moscow. 1980, p 356.

"Heterialy I 3"yezda Yemenskoy sotsialisticheskoy partii." op. cit., p 67.
PRAVDA. 20 May 1980.

"Haterialy I 3"yezda Yemenskoy sotsialisticheakoy partii." op. cit., pp 239-240.
Sassou-Nguesso. op. cit., p 94.

"Materialy I 3"yezda Yenenskoy sotsialiaticheskoy partii." op. cit.. p 127.

"Relatorio do Comite Central no ICongreaao Baxtraordinario do HPLA-Partido
trabalho," p 16.

PRAVDA, 20 Hay 1978.

V. Volkov, "Angola: The Third Spring of Liberation," ZA RUBEZHQ‘I, No 66, 1978.
p [2.

. PRAVDA, 21 September 1981.

KABUL NEH TIMES, Kabul, 29 March 1981.

See A. H. Khazanov, 'Mozanbik: vrellya percmen” [Hozaﬂiqum A Tine of Change],
Hoscou. 1979. p 610.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

37. PRAVDA, 4 February 1979.

38. "Materialy I s"yezds Yemenskoy aotsialisticheakoy partii," op. cit., p 127;
"Relatorio," op. cit., p 18.

39. A. F. Ismail, "The Birth of a New Type of Vanguard Party." PROBLEM! MIRA I
SOTSIALIZMA, No 1, 1979. p 13.

40. "Extraordinary Congress of the Yemenite Socialist Party" [in Arabic],
op. cit., pp 434-435.

41. A. N. Muhammad, "Devotion to the Revolution,“ PROBLEMY MIRA I SOTSIALIZMA,
No 3, 1981. pp 29-30.

42. PRAVDA, 6 January and 15 March 1982.

43. A. Keshokov, "The Country of the Young Revolution," KWIST. No 6, 1978,
p 109.

44. ”Rabochiy klass i rabocheye dvizheniye v Afrike," op. cit., p 208.
as. PRAVDA, 20 May 1980.
46. "Relatorio." p 42.

47. V. S. Yakovlev. "Mozambik" [Mozalbique]. Moscow. 1980, p 29; ZA RUBBZHOM,
No 50. 1980. p 9.

48. "Strany nira. Sprsvochnik" [The World's Countries. A Guide], Moscow, 1981,
p 206.

49.“Documents of the Party PRELIMO of the People's Republic of Mozambique." op.
cit., p 71.

50. "Materialy I s"yezda Yemenskoy sotsialisticheskoy partii," op. cit., p 107.
51. PROBLEMY MIRA I SOTSIALIZMA, No 11, 1981, p 65.
52. PRAVDA. 16 June 1979; 15 March 1981.

53. Yu. v. Irkhin, "A New Marxist Journal in Ethiopia," AZIYA 1 AFRIKA SBGODNYA,
No 2, 1982. p 55.

54. “Privecstviya XXVI s"yezdu KPSS ot koanunisticheskikh, rabochikh, natsional'no-
deuokraticheskikh i sotsialisticheskikh partii“ [Greetings to the 26th CPSU
Congress Prom Communist, workers, National-Democratic. and Socialist Parties],
Moscow, 1981, p 301.

55. Ibid.. p 356.
56. Ibid., p 345.
57. "Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress." op. cit.. p 15.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy iatorii”, 1982

1386

080: 1800/589 16
FOR 0FF“JAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

ISSUES IN sovm INTERNATIONAL MW

Moscow SOVETSKIY mm W “AVA 1979 in 339118!) and Russian
1980 pp 7-8, 96-97, 105-107, 120.121, 131-132. 145-146, 160-161, 170, 199,
211-212. 232-233, 249-250

(Table of contents and selected articles from savm mascot: CC moron»
LAW 1979 pimuahed by Soviet: Association of Incarnational Law]

[Text]

c 0 N T e N 1’ S

E. 1'. Usenho. cm as Subject ol international Lav . I
S. V. Chorale-limb. International Lav Rules. Their Formation and Snedlies 0!

Their Structure . .
S. N. Laban. 0n the Nature oI Private international Law . . . . . 61
V. F. cabin. In.1'he New USSR Constitution and Aliens in the USSR . . . . . so
0. I. Team Number: Princl tea and Modern International Law . . . . 91
0. AI. Mallow. alContento the «Zone at Pesto Notion . . . . . . 101
O. V. 8.03% the Right oI Disarmament Fonnann . . . . :— :“‘."—IZI
S. A. 7mm On Banning Chemical Weapons . . . . 133
I. P. BMW, M. V. Zlidonoo. Mancunian: an International crime . I“
V. I. Eainloo. Peculiarities oI Drawing up Tests oi Contemporary International

treaties tn Dilierent Languages IGI
M. I. Enun Conception oi lntar- state Dispute in International Court Practice and

in the Bourgeois Doctrine oI International Law . 17!
G. A. Salmon. Historical and Legal Analysis ol Disarmament Problem (1946.. '83

W55) . . ..
D. I. Fold-ton, S. N Chabysliru. Nihtiiant in International Law (its Genesis and

Content raneity) . zoo
@ 0n «Qualiﬁcations n; Private International Law . . m
A L. mug. Uniﬁcation of Maritime Lav and the Notion ol Private Interna

tional Maritime Law . 220
G. 0. (mo United Nations Convention on the Carriage ol Goods by Sea. ms 236

Surveys and Reports

.tl. A.Sormnooyeu Constitutional Fundamentals ol international Personality ol

Soviet Union Republics . 2.“
L. A Ital/llama“. Legal Regulation oi Temporary international Researeh 8110- 35

ties
V ..V Drawn. Frorn the History at Russias Science at International Law (the

First Russia's Journal Devoted to International Lav Questions) . . 261
L. V. Karon! l'.u Yo. Bosnia. International Rivers: History and the Present 2“

In the Association

The 2lst Annual Meeting ol the Soviet International Law Association . . . 27‘

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcuu. use ONLY

Cironlcle -
Treaties and Agreements oi the Soviet Union with Forei n States in I918 . 375
Legislative Acts Pertainin to Foreign Relations oi the U SR, Adopted in i918 . 279
Major Normative Acts 0 Socialist Countries Pertaining to Foreign Relations.
PublishediniSTS.................36
Major Normative Acts oi Capitalist Countries Pertaining to Foreign Relation.
PublishodinISTS.................W
The First Seminar oi inrists oi Socialist Countries on the Questions of Connie
Law Related to the Interltostnos Programme Implantation . . . . . 288
Consideration oi Certain International Law Questions In the Sixth Committee oi
the 33rd Session oi the UN General Assembly . . . . . . . . . 19‘
The 34th Session oi the UN Commission on Human Rights . . . . . . 2“
~ itsvlewa
D. I. human at at. International Law . . . . . . . . . . . . 298
L. N. Shesinboo. G. I. Tunitin. International Law in the International System ”4
G. A. 5mm. D. i. Barstashvili. The Principie oi Sovereign Equality oi
StaissinlnternationaiLovI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I)?
. M. V. Yonoosku. D. B. Levin. The Principle oi Peaeeiui Settlement oi Interna-
tionaIDlsputes..................310
A. L Kolodtin. Modern International Maritime Law: Research. Marine Environ-
ment Protection. Merchant and Military Navigation . . . . . . . . St:
L A. loonosluhenbo. G. G. Shinlraretsltaya. Archipelago States: Interns-
tionalLawTreatment................3“
6. Qt. Mellon. T. i. Spi valtova. The Last and Natural Resources oi Coastal 316
L. A. Ionnaslicllanlto. V. G. Sidorehenlto. Legal Stains oi Ship and Cargo Ssi- 3"
R. M. Voteyeo. I... N. Galenslta s. L at Problems oi Coo ation oi States in
CornbatUngCrimequm
D. I. Fad-ton. Bnmltgaedia oi international Law and international Relations 321
L. N. Sheridan. K Yearbook oi international Lav. l97-l—75 . 32'!
R. A. Mullerson. The French Yearbook oi International Lav I978 38
Personaiia
V. M. Koreislty (On the Occasion oi Ute Ninetietii Birthday) . . . . . . 339
Bibliography
Soviet Works on international Lav: (I978) . . . . . . . 333
International Lav: Literature oi Socialist Countries (I918) . . . 53

Doeansenu........ti7ti

TN! NEW USSR CONSTITUTION AND ALIENS IN THE USSR
V..F. Cabin. Candidate of La-

Summary

Aa deﬁned by Leonid I. Brezhnev the
Wu?“ C???“ toms;
you son o
viet oi‘t e U SR. the Ninth Convocatio":

Y
Soviet State developmen
iuntiamenial law oi Iiie [or the developed
and mature socialist society In our country.
Its adoption heralds a Iurther development
oi the Soviet socialist democracy and an
unprecedented In history broadening and
depening oI ri ts oI Soviet ettiaens. and
it deeialvei in iuences the position oi ali-
ens In the SSR.
We treat aliens as
the territory oi a given state.

resent In
are not

its citizens and subjected to its jurisdiction. '

18

This article does not deal with the status
oi aliens enjoying any immunities. It deals

with aliens as rsona present in the ter-
ritory oi the let Union who are not
its citizens proper and who are iuiiy

subjected to its jurisdiction (political emi-

es. ioreign dents. tourists. stu-
enis. representatives oi Ioreign science.
culture. social organizations. and business
communities. em members oi. ioreign
means oi tra tion. relatives and
guests oi Soviet citizens irom abroad. etc).

The status oi citizens oi other countries
in list: USSR is characterized by their dual

' subjection both to the law order oi the

country oi residence and to that ol the
state oi their nationality. Their rights and
duties in the territo
are deiined by So
as (by translorma
oi internatiimal a

la months

given count

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ry oi the Soviet Union
viet legislation as well
tion) by the provisions
ts to which the

USSR is a party. in accordance with these

legal acts aliens in the USSR are. in

nciple. accorded national treatment.
2-. on the whole they are equated as

[It

to their rights and duties to the citizens

goper oi the Soviet' Union. Art. 37 oi the
nstltution states as ioilowa: «Citizens oi
other countries and stateless persons in the
USS are guaranteed the ri his and tree.
rovl ed by law ..s. number oi
nonnative acts oi the USSR and the
ubtics further concretlae this pro-
provide tor some exceptions cau.

R
dome

3:“;

vision 3::

sed by the tact that citizens oi other coun-
tries are in legal bond with the state oi
their nationality and

the state security oi the USSR and Its
ecnnornicintercsts.

by considerations oi

The legal status oi aliens in the USSR

depends to a certain extent upon such cir-
cumstances as the term.
at their stay. etc.
their residence in the USSR aliens are divi-

conditions
Depen ing on the term oi

2;: by)Soviet legislatig‘rli into twot eategur.»e
: (a those crupora ' presen in
USSR and (b) those rest ent in .
The latter comprises aliens who reside in
the Soviet territory tor not less than
runnin‘ Fandcn ageinanyac~
tivtty allowed by av. The ternational to»
set science also divides attests i

ependlng on their term oi in e
ry. it is consi as generally
590cm Wilkes?” carotene“:

nto groups

NUREMIERG PRINCIPLES AND

G. I. Tmtiu. Correspond
- n} Sciences.

(rig Member

ties oi resident an
ens in a coun
The USSR nstitution
rally acknowledged
else by citizens oi their ri
is inseparable train the
obligations. This el
Flies to aliens present in
tire their ri h
the whole. i entical to those ol So
rens. However.

lain rights and
Soviet citizens (

[lenient oi
SSR and

d temporaril t .u.
is dillerent y m

ements

l lamily. etc).

derneanours and other 0
led to criminal.
responsibilities under So
on the same looting

. However. d rtat
on as a pun
vent oiience is apt
than to Soviet cit sens.

Soviet people and the Soviet State
treat citizens oi other

mum's": :2:. n...
cor y an oapi i t . oiten vest
them with such rights azd l
extend to them such beneﬁts

' traces can be loud in their native countri .
- ereiore. the Soviet peop es
Mill eW

' expect that to their on
I rel cats will reply by dul
aws. customs and tradi

viet law principally

t for

sot-1t ””9"

ns.

RODERN INTERNATIONAL LAW
of the USSR Academy

Mottled Scientist o] the RSFSR

Summary

The Charter oi the International Military .|

chief German war criminals

‘l' 'bunal to t

an'd the indktztent oi the Tribunallheinbody-

' in the so called Nuremberg prlnc es. were
"it important contribution to the deveiop-
mcnt ol internationallaw.

ProvisionsoltheChartergavertaetoa
irantic discussion which to a certain extent
continues up to now. This discussion locu-
sas on twokbssie rations: to what eaten:
the Nurens r r p a corresponded
international lgwpat the time oi their lormu-
lation. and what place they assume in nio-
dern intemationat law.

Opponents ot the Nuremberg principles
subject to especially severe critisiein the

visions oi the international Military Tri~
nal Charter and oi the indictment ol this
Tribunal which relate to crimes against
Arguments which have been and are
mist up against the Nuremberg prlndp-
tea are based on a static view oi internatio-
nal law. they are permeated with extreme

19

lormaltsns. and the do not talre into acco-
lunt the entire continually at its rule-ma-
id s.
gram?” anee in international law oi
the principle oi ban on an aggressive war
and its characterisation as an international
I crime was a condition toe thehin-
- ternational criminal responsibility oi indivi-
duals lor crimes agalnsrteguce. As is known.
such a principle appea in the period bet-
; waenWorid War land World War lhThe ins.
'petua lnthisdlrectionwasgivenby the Dec-
ree on Peace oi November i9l1—theiirst
legislative act oi the iirst socialist State in
the world. The Decree solemnly declared an
anuesationist and aggressive war as «the
greatest crime against humanit . ‘
The Paris Pact oi I923 tor Renuncta-
tion oi War as an instrument oi National
. Policy. also containing obligations to settle
I international disputes by peeceiul means
”2:: “2.- .gmumw c
. sire war is
: were parties topthis Beet. including Germa-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reﬂects a gene
provision that the exert

is and ireedonu
ullilment of their
ry rule also an

the USSR. Just
ts. their obligations are. on

aliens are relieved iron-t cer-
duties addressed solely to
participation in the mana-
state aliaira. duties to deicnd the
the Armed Forces.
and citizens without

have committed crimes. mts~
llences are subjec-
adrnintstrative and other

as Soviet citizens.
ion iron: the Soviet Unl-
eontmitting a rele
icd more alien to them

states and stateless
country with all

reedorns and
at which no

le IS entitled i0
in lo-
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R00050007006‘l -2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:ty. Italy. and Japan. The aggreseiVe war at the aggressive war he
ban principle soon became a_generally re- oi the examples.
cognized principle oi international law. . Alter being proclaimet

t means that the question oi :nternatto- Millta Tribunal Chart
nal responsibility oi state for the violation princip ea were recognia
oi the aggressive war ban ole. or.tn international law rules.
other words. the question o responsibility prooi to such recognitli
oi aggressor-state was already delintteiy each oi thern letter: sent
resolved in international law beiore World cient. tatten all together
War it. All measures tattoo by the allied suiiicient amount at pr
powers alter the war with regard to Ger- recognition oi these prim
many. itaiy. Japan and their a Iiea were le- One cannot but time
gally based right on the prmdple oi inter- Fried oi New York Univ
national responsibility oi aggressor-state vacate lor the general
[or an aggressive war. Nurern principles. l

The second question is the question oi wing in s presentation
whether there existed international ertrninel sage oi Nuremberg lor I
responsibili oi indlvtduals in international the World Congress 0
law related the responsibility oi a Political Science Associ
sor-state who achtally eonrntitted ac to. cow in Au t I919: all
violation ol the aggressive wer ban prlno paper that n the \ic' oi

p war technology since i

it would he. oi course. an overeseggwa- remberg principles are 1
tion to assert that the rinciple oi interna- essential than they are:
tional criminal responsl lily oi individuals generation agoa.
tor a greesive war was at the time as lirntly The Number prim
esteb ished in intcnatlonal law as the pnn- become a part 0 Intern
ciple oi responsibility at state [or such a have inﬂuenced end cl
war. However. the principle was already in considerabl its iurther
the process at lormulailon during a certain It wasu the inllue:
period at time bciore “urid War it under principles that the Sovi
jhkh aggressive war was a criminal act national law put inrwnl
and. thereiore. its launching and waging ill” Mmlion tinder '1'
had to entail not only a heavy responsibility international law are d
at a gressor-atate but also thelnternational flu: international i
«initial responsibility oi individuals who I nil Mich. The ﬁrst
actually committed such acts. in other the most dangerous v
words. the rocess oi coordinating the wills tionel I"! 57 ““9. if
at states th regard to the reco tion oi all other International:
international criminal responsibil ty oi in- 0' course. the Mill
dividuals ior ag ve war started soon in I dillml an” ill
alter World War . and there is enou rea- rneetlc lav. .ll 40¢!th
son to assert that this view was ent led tion oi the internatton
in the Paris Pact oi was The International bulllr at state but ll I:
Military Tribunal bad enou ground to sta- I out the most daneuou
te in its indictment that a . solunn renun- malloml In}! its slate--
ciation oi war as an instrument ol national Cf '9 ”will“! 0‘ ”it,
policy necessarily involves the preposition as In «national crunu
that such a war is illegal in international relevant individuals.
law: and that those who plan and we This view was suppr
such a war with its inevitable and terri e lloml 1-“ “WWW
consequencu are committing a crime in so on State Responslbtltt
doing..a. ' - and by the Comings:

. . C . . .

The international Military Tribunal Char- tlcles ”tauﬁm,
let molded the pm 0‘ “villi-ﬂirts ioliowin way: rlnierl
the wills oi states with regard to the reoog- interns amt Delictsa.
nition oi the principle, oi international cri- gactgiggj internationa
minal responsibility 0‘ individuals '0' an 0‘ an mtunationgl obli
aggressive war. which lasted ior rather a i. so essential tor the
telngltlirne prior to the outbreak oi World lm(.| interests oi n,

8' ~ munit that its breac

The Charters oi the Nuremberg and Tokyo mm '5, m, mu:
Military Tribunals and their indictments m, ven in this articlt
were not the end oi the Nuremberg princip- leg 0 international air
Ies Being an international agreement con- oi an international ol
eluded among the Soviet Union. the United impugn” ior m. ma
States. the United Kingdom and France. the tional pug. and m
Nuremberg Milltarv Tribunal Charter was prohibiting aggression
binding only over these stats. an “my”... 05““,

However. rules made by two or more sta- portance ior ”It!!!“
les very oiian gradually obtain general re~ determination oi ”op
cognition in international law. The principle oi an “amulet!“ pl

20

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROP82-00850R000500070061-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

im rtance tor saieguarding human envi-
ron’r:ent. such as that oi prohibiting mes-
sive pollution oi the atmosphere or oi the

seas.

The iniluence oi the Nurembcg principles
isieitin iheConveotionon thePreveotion
and Punishment ol the Crime oi Genocide
oi I948. the Convention on the So presaion
and Punishment oi the Crime oi pariheid
oi 1973. and in many other International do~
etmsents.

While talking about the signiii
the N principles one cannot tell to
mention that he UN General Assembly at
his 32nd Sesion resumed the discussion oi
a drait Code oi Olienaes a ainst the Peace

canoe oi

and“$eeur"i oi Mankind
n .

umThe 'consoiidation oi the Nurunberg
.cinlu u ﬁrm-simmer“-

ter it was adjo-
prin-

...._-._ --._

tionai law was ao‘important event in
regressive development oi internatie
fast. it slgnilled the appearance o_l a n
institute oi international law—internal
nai criminal responsibility oi individuals
international cranes which is oi a mate:

- signiiicance lor increasing the role oi int

5 national law in seeming peace.

9 The Nuremberg principles are a mo
to the great struggle oi poop
a inst the Nazi barbarity. a monument
those who gave it their lives in this a
red struggle. and w leii victim to. 1
Natl obscurantisrn. The Nuremberg prune
lea are a constant reminder oi the access
to be vigilant and not to give u tor a n
- meat the struggle for peace ag nst the ii
'cearisltingenewoorid warwhlchwor
be thousand times more terrible than I

.Wum_..-.....,_

LEGAL CON‘I’EN'I' 0? rue «ZONE Of Peace» nation
0. M. Maison. Candidate of Lon

Summary

in connection with the
conlcrence on the indisn to declare
it a zone oi peace the lollowing oesiions
are dealt with in the article: What a a pos-
iibie leg'al content oi the «cone oi peace:
notion? a there anyreiationoithisnotionto
the political and military detente and to the
legal content oi edemiiitarisaliona. eneutra~
lleationa and ennciaar-iree eonea notions ar~
ready known to international law? Is the
establistunent oi ozoneol-peace in anarc-
gion relevant to the solution oi the pro em
oi general and complete disarmament?

Baaedoo theanaysisoioriglnal propo-
.sals on a tone obgeece by the Republic oi
Sri Lanka. 26th General Assembly ite-
solution No. 2832 oi December I6. i91i
(Declaration on the Proclamation oi the in-
dian Ocean as a Zone oi Peace). materials
and doatmenta oi the Conierence oi the
Communist and Workers' Partia oi Europe.
3rd UN Conicrence on the Law oi the Sea.
Stir Conlerence oi Heads ol States and Go-
vernments oi Non-Aligned Countries. in-
ternational Conlerence ior Peace. Security
and Coo ation in the Mediterranean. the
Special on oi the UN General As
.sembty on Disarmament. the international
Conierence tor the Establishment oi Zone
oi Peace in the lodian and the Pacific
Owens. the Final Act oi the Conicmsce on
Security and Cooperation in Europe. as well
as oi the legal content ol «militarization».
«neutralization and «nuclearoiree zones
notions. the author came to the lollowing
conclusions:

i. The stone oi peace» notion comprises
two important interrelated component parts:
provisions relating to interstate rela-
tions. securing peace and international se-
curity. peaceiul coexistence and non-align-
ment: and provisions relating to the reduc-
tion and diminution oi the (nuclear and
conventional) arms race and disarmament.

tionola

21

2. A zone oi peace in a geographical sen-
se consists oi two mutual inseparable
component parts: land and we or territories
of coastal and mainland states and air spa-
ce over them: and the water space beyond
the limits oi territorial waters oi coastal
states and the air space over it.

3: As to its content the «zone at peacu
notion is a unity oi measures at nal'
political and military detente. as wet as it
a an important step in the direction oi ll-
mitin the arms race and oi disarmament

6. «zone at aces notion is related
not only to cderoli tsrizationa, eneuh'sllza-
tions and «nucleardree zones notions but
includes some oi the component parts oi
these notions.

5. The «cone oi peace: notion is not and
cannot be a total combination oi these three-
notions or be identiiied with any oi them
as in its scope it is much broader than any
oi meals Wiley notiolns Ibecaus: it inrzi'uudes
genera po ega rues an rues a-
ting basic lteedoms oi the high seas.

6. The «zone oi peace» notion includes as.
a component part the irredorn oi the high
seas and the possibility oi doing other scri-
vitiee tor peecelut purposes as recognized
in international law.

7. Observance oi a luture international
law reglrne oi a tone oi peace must be gua-
ranteed by all nuclear powers (including all
Great Powers).

The author suggests the ioliowlng legal
content tor the «zone oi peace notion:

A zone oi peace is a preeisel deilned
geographical region including ian and wa-
ter territories oi coastal and mainland ste-
tea and the air space over them. as well as
the see and air space beyond the limits of
territorial waters ol coastal states. with a
special conventionally established and (us-
rantecd legal regime which. in particular.
provides inr:

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mn-interlerenca oi states located wian
- the cone oi peace and also oi slates activel
using its waters. into internal aiiairs oi
other: respect oi territorial integrity and
sovereignl . mutual renunciation oi use or
threat oi orce. and settlement oi dis tee
exclusively by peaceful means throug ne~
goliations in accordance with the UN Cher-
ter: complete elimination oi colonial regime
within the cone oi peace and granting oi
inde nee to all peoples under ioreign
dom nation;
rohibltion within the zone oi peace oi
mi ilery political alliances directed a ' t
any state or group ot states. oi eats lish-
ment oi ioreign military bases. oi installa-
tion. production. testing and storage ol nuc-
lcar weapons and other types oi mass dest-
ructlon weapons and oi their delivery vehl~
clea; ban on the deployment oi land-ba-
sed and aeavbased strategic nuclear wea~
pons and their components. land. air and
see means oi support and control thereoi as
well as oi delivery vehicles thereoi in land.
sea and air space oi the zone oi peace and
at the sea bed:
withdrawal oi states within the zone oi
peace irom military political alliances and
their accession to international treaties in
lorce pertaining to nuclear weapons and
other typa oi mass destruction weapons. to

 

the limitation ol the arms race and disarma.
merit; elimination within the zone oi
oi existing ioreign military bases an ban
on the construction oi new ones: complete
dermlilerlulion oi the zone oi peace sea
bed beyond the 12~mile cone ol coastal sta-
res:

ban on the use oi the acne oi as a
theatre oi milita operations t ior ca~
ses oi eacra'se o the right to ind vldual or

collective seiivdeienae in accordance with
the UN Charter.

ireedom at sea and air nevi ation. of
layin underwater caqu and pi ines bey-
ond limits oi territorial waters oi coas-
tal states. as well as exercise in the sea and
arr space oi the zone oi peace oi other iree-
diom: oi the i‘li h seas and oi 015:1 actitzi
tee orpeaceu posearemgn in e
UN Charter and n international law;

ban on entry-into the zone oi peace oi
warships and military aircrait with nuclear
weapons aboard:

limitation oi conventional armaments ol
states within the zone oi peace by the re-
quirements oi national deiense: '

iirrn international guarantees ot nuclear
powers. including all Great Powers. to the
eilect that the international law re oi
the cone oi peace will be strictly rved
by all states.

 

0N Til! RIGIIT 0P DISAIMAMtNT FORMATION
O. V. Boadonoo. Dodor oi Low. Prolessor

The problem oi disarmament has talren
the most important place in modern inter-
national lile. its solution is rightlully consi-
dered as oi a trey importance tor a radical
improvement in international relations.
A certain progress has already bear achie-
ved: lirst practical steps have been made on
the road to disarmament. As applied to in-
ternational law the carried out work has re-
sulted in a set oi rules on the matters at
disarmament. A whole system oi treaties and
a reements on such matters has come to
lie. ltlaanew phenomenon nottobeiound
in the history oi international relations.

Such process is rellected tn the interna-
tional law science. Over the recent years the
number oi works on legal aspects oi disar-
marnent has sharply grown. The socialist
international law science has leit behind the
bourgwia one in the study oi legal qmii'
ons oi disarmament. Over the recent years
quite a law wortrs on this subject. including
a number oi major monogre ic studies.
have been published. it is in icalive that
in our country these mattm are considered
not only in specialized monographs but they
have an important place in serious collecti-
ve studies. such as. e. a. a air-volume trea-
tise oi international law and various test-
boolts on international law.

The Western international law science is
characterised by a diiierent approach to the
matters oi disarmament. For a long time
many bourgeois jurists tried to entirely ig-
mm. the matters of disarmament. Later on
such an approach was mainly overcome. The

22

studies oi various aspects oi disarmament
have been noticeably inlensiiled in a number
oi Western countries (it is especially true oi
the USA). The matters oi disamament are
olten discussed at various international con-
ierences oi jurists. The International Law
Association which addressed itseli several
times to these matters over the recent years
may serve as an example Nevertheless. the
views oi a number oi Western jurists are
still characterized by a tendency either to
ignore as beiore or to minimize the impor-
tance oi developing international law in
this iield.

The socialist International law science is
dominated by the thesis that the principle
oi disarmament is being iormed now in in»
ternational law. The problem oi the spedllc
content oi this principle and oi the ways oi
its evolution is now drawing, ever growl?
attention. The solution oi th matter rec .
res analysis oi a number oi international
treaties.

First oi all. it Is necessary to anal the
relevant provisions oi the UN herler
which have pla a noticeable role in as-
serting the pro lem oi disarmament In in-
ternatioosl law. ‘l'hev are somewhat concise
but. nevertheless. important ior the theory
oi international law. They are contained in
Articles ll. 26 and 47 oi the UN Charter.
it should be kept in mind that they had been
worked out when World War It was stillon
and. thereiore. they could not vide ior
peculiarities oi the way the lens oi di-
sarmament was put in the post-war period.

[-08 OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it goes without saying that answers to ma-
ny aspects oi disarmament topical now can-
not be lound in the UN Charter.

The distinctive lesture at UN Charter pro-
visions lie in the iact that disarmament is
mentioned as one at the major tsslrs set to
the UN principal bodies irt the iield oi main-
raining pence in the world. The authority to
solve the matters oi disarmament has been
clearly distributed between tlte General
Assenbly and the Security Council. There
is a considerable interest in the terminology
used in the Charter on the matters oi disar-
mament. 0n the whole. the Charter provides
the necessary legal base lor the implemen-
tation oi disarmament measures

in its ractical activities UN has given
consider le attention to various aspects oi
the disarmament problem. it is especiali
true oi General Assembly resolutions w
have become important tools lor iormtng the
principles related to disarmament. The pre-
sent time is characterized by the transiorma-
tion oi such principles Into conventional
ones. Treaties have dellnltely taken the
main place in this iield: they do regulate the
mos:l important aspects oi the disarmament
pro on.

Thepresenceolawholesystanoisuchltind
oi international law instruments transiorms
a set ol principles and rules on disanna-
ment into a certain branch oi international
law. One cannot fail to see that this branch
assumes ever more distinctive lorms. There
is already in existence a number oi major
international treaties on the matters oi di-
sarmament Further development must bring
in new instruments at such itind. All this
witnesses to the ellect that disarmament is
a branch in the development oi international
law. it is probably early to talir about this
branch as luliy termed. it would be more
correct to sa that it is in the stage oi its
active iorma on. with this process going at
a more rapid pace.

The content at the disarmament principle
at this sta comes to the curtailment latter:
by man tea to iscilitate the implementa-
tion 0 already concluded agreements on
disarrnarnent and to elaborate as soon as
possible new measures in this direction both
oi rtlal and more radical nature.

och notions as the principle oi disarma.
ment. on the one hand. and the right at di-
sarmament. on the other. should not be mi-
ned up. The said inclple lorms in al
the obligations 0 states in the list ol di-

sarmament and resents the totality oi
treaties and rules in ioroe in this lield. The
right oi disarmament is. at course. much
broader and more specillc in its content then
the ncipie oi disarmament

right oi disarmament is constantly
developin . Hence. the princi ie oi disarrna-
ment is a so developin . As or the general
direction at such de opment it should be
said that it [allows the line at an ever broa-
der coverage oi various types oi annaments

_and ol the ban (sometimes. complete. i. e..

includin destruction) ol the most dange-
rous v ties oi wea ns. Such a direction
must eventually lead a general and comp-
lete disarmament. and than the principle oi
disarmament will be tilled with a more radi-
cal and tar-reaching content. But this sta
is still ahead. So lar the next turn is tor
application ol the system ior limiting and

bannin individual types at modern wes-
pon7. abolition oi armaments (I. c. it:
nera and complete disarmament) is

most important task oi the luture. the ulti-
mo]? aim oi the entire development in this

Sometimes there is a certain ambi
the assertion that the principle oi
ment has been lormed. it is correct in the
sense that such principle already exists. But
it should not be interpreted in the sense of
givin such evolution a tinge ol ﬁnality as
such ormation is iar lrom being compieo
ted—it is developln! and intensliylng. it
is important to svoi a sim lilled interpreo
tation oi the interactions law evolution
course in the ﬁeld oi disarmament.

One oi peculiarities oi legal regulation in
the lield oi disarmament ea in the tact
that its ractlcal implementation iresan
appropriate international treaty. ssrma~
menl measures are simply impossible with
out such a treaty to regulate the procedure
and specilically denote the obiects sub ect
to destruction. it applies both to the i d
oi partial disarmament and to the program-
me oi complete disarmament.

These are some oi the questions on disar-
mament which arise in the theory oi inter-
national law. There may be no doubt that
the number oi such questions will grow
with the development oi practical activities
in Usgelgoﬂoi‘ disarmament. {it is another;
man a o a progressive evelopmen
in international law and oi melting it an
increasingly more eiiective tool oi peace.

iy in

ON OANNINO CHEMICAL WEAPONS
S. A. Tormnko

Summary

The struggle in the field of bannin and
abolishing weapons ol mass destrucl n is
one oi the moat lm rtant directions in the
struggle oi the U SR ior dissrrnament.

The problem oi international legal ban
on chemical means ol mass extermination
has an Important place in the complex oi

23

problems connected with the ban on all ty-
pes oi mass destruction weapons.

Chemical weapons are certainly inhuman
as their enormous killing power is directed
primarily and mainly against human beings
asne’t'cil as against every living creature on
ca .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Attempts at using chemicals in combat
operations have their roots in ancient ti-
mes. However. chemicals are considered to
become real weapons at mass extermination
at the beginning oi the 20th century when
they were actively used during World
War .l. The experiences oi that war rather
convtncingly proved to the whole world a
barbaric nature oi such weapons what. un-
doubtedly. played a certain role in the pro-
cess oi melting a rule putting a ban on the-
se means oi conduct oi war.

_ raetice oi usin poisoned weapons
in war as long been alien to the legal con-
science oi mankind. There is a well-known
provision made baclt by Roman lawyers
and later more clearly regulated to the el-
lect that wars are iought with weapons and

not with alson. -.

However. while being important inter-
national document the ueneva Protocol has
only solved in part the problem oi chemi-
cal and bacteriological weawns. it does
not prohibit the development. improvement
and stockpiling at such weapons what is
quite dangerous.

Today the bacteriological weapons are
the only kind oi mass deatntction weapons
competely banned by international law.
The question of a complete ban by inter-
nationa law on chemical means of mass
extermination is now in the order of the
dav.

The Soviet Union advocates a radical so-
lution to this question. i. e.. the necessity
oi a com rehensive ban on chemicals oi the
types an in the quantities not justliled by
peaeeiul purposes. This conception is rei-
!ected in the drait convention prohibiting
the development. manuiacture and stockpi-
lin oi chemical weapons and their destruc-
tion—pt” o a by socialist countries and
submitte to the Disarmament Committee
in March l972.

However. not all capitalist countries exp~
:cssed their readiness tor a comprehensive
ban by making proposals on a partial or
gradual ban based on the criterion oi toxi-
city. it allows to l lize such chemcals
as deloliants. herbici es or irritating gases
which were widely “04th the US milita-
ry in Vietnam and Cam is.

At the present time there are discussions
under way both within the Disarmament
Committee and on a bilateral basis between
the USSR and the USA with the aim to
elaborate a mutually acceptable agrament._

—--——-—.——_—..

There are considerable diifieultles in cousin
to an agreement on the lorms and methot
ol control. Thus. the USA and some otht
capitalist countries continue to strive ata
unjustiliably broad set oi measures oi it
ternatlonal character. including on-sii
inspections. it naturally slows down th
ace oi ne tiations and does not contn
ute to lher successiul conclusion.
However. as it was noted in the state
ment on the results oi the ninth round c
negotiations which took place in Febn:
a —March I979. meetings between th
U SR and the US delegations were helpitai
Besides. the majority oi representatives 0
states in the Disarmament Committee sup
ports a comprehensive aooanech when sol
ving the pro lam oi the ban. All this give
hope that the elaboration oi an agreement
prohibiting chemical means oi mass ester
mlnation would be crowned with a m
and. thus. the mankind would be tree lore
ver irom catastrophic consequences ol l
chemical war. .

-~—---—— «rm—rug“. a '1"

The second hall oi the l9th century saw
the beginning ol the process to l lly re-
gulate permissible means oi con uet oi
war.

One of the first international law rules
directly mentioning chemical weapons is
contained in the provision oi the Hague
Convention W on the laws and customs
oi war on land oi i901. it deals with the
prohibition to use poison or poisoned wen-
ponss. Later on such prohibitions began to
appear in some other international treaties
and agreements However. the Geneva Pro-
tocol oi I925 prohibiting the Use in War oi
Asphyxallng. Poisonous or other Gases
and oi Bacteriological Methods ol Warfare
is the basic document containing rules oi
mandatory nature with regard to prohibi-
ting the use ol chemicals in military opera-
tions.

The Geneva Protocol is a vivid etample
oi codiiication and progressive development
at international law in the iield oi the laws
and customs oi war. At the same time it
has remained up to now as the most autho-
ritative document containing the interna-
tional law rule prohibiting the use oi cho-
mical means oi mass extermination. The
great importance oi the Protocol lies also
in the tact that it contains a lilac-wise
prohibition with regard to bacteriological

weapons.

 

MERCBNARISM: AN iNTERNATiONAL CRIME

I. P. Btisltclteneo. Doctor of Lot, Prolessor
.V. V. Zhdonou, Candidate 0! Lou:

Mereenartsm — a shamelul maniiesta- "
Ir analy-

tion oi imperialism-is thorough
sed in the article on the basis oi a
lactual material.

Summary

rteh

21s

oi

The authors review national legislations
mercenary supplying countries—the

USA. the United Kingdom. France. Bel-

gium. the FRO and Sweden.

unmask the

‘TlClAL USE ONLY
who is neither a national oi a conilietin
art nor a resident in the territory contro -
ed y a conflicting party. A mercenary
does not belong to the military personnel
at a ooniiicting party nor be is sent by a
state not bein the party to a conilict to
perform oiiicla duties as an individual be-
longing to its military personnel.

This delinition gives the possibility to
draw rather a clear line between a meresc
nnry and a volunteer. In other wrds. it is
the matter at individuals committing crimi-
nal oiiences and being subject to persecu-
tion and punishment.

Articles and studies by British. Belgian.
Airican and American authors are analysed
and criticized in this work.

The arcticle analyses international law
instruments in ioree related to mercena-
rism and mercenaries. shows its illegalit
and raises the point oi the mereensries‘ -
minai responsibility.

The authors give a thorough analysis of
drait Conventions on mercenaries prepared

_ by OAU and the international Commission
. based on the iirst trial of mercenaries in
Angola and analyse the trial itsell oi mer-
cenaries in Luanda in I916. States make
eiiorts at the international level at estab-
lishing broad international law guarantees
ior combatting mercenarism and mercena-
ries. OAU has been very active in this mat-
er.

During events in the Congo and the ag-
gression against the Republic oi Guinea in
I970. where mercenaries were used. the
IOAU Council oi Ministers passed resolu-
i tions which qualiﬁed mercenaries as crimi~
.nai oiienders. 8y i979 OAU adopted the
{Convention containing the deﬁnition oi
. memnariee and meroenariam. Mercenarism

_- is considered to be a crime against peace
. andhsecurity in Airiea and is punishable as
- sue

Under this Convention a mercenary is
any individual who. while not being's na-
tional oi the state against which is ac-
tions are directed. is hired. recruited or vo-
luntarily allied himseli with an individual.

- a group or an association whose aims are:
to overthrow by armed violence or other
means the government oi an OAU mam-
ber-state. to undermine the independence
territorial integrity or normal operation of
institutions oi that state: or to block by
any means the activities oi any liberation
movement recognised b OAU.

The Government oi t e People's Repub-
lic oi Angola took and initiative to try mer-
cenaries in Angola and the international

. Commission at Enquiry on Mae;.aries

was set up on a broad international basis.

This Commission analysed the internatio-

. not practice ol combstting mereenarism. oi

_ LIN and OAU resolutions on this matter.

' and also worked out its own drait Conven-
tton.

While positively evaluating the approach
oi the drailsmen towards the deﬁnition of
the mercenarism_eerpas deiieti covered by
the Convention and its more proiound le-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gal elaboration as compared to the OAL’
drait. it should be recognised that the dralt

has certain shortcomings. However. its
main merit is in stimulattn the l al ela-
boration oi this matter an in liiaing

ellorts to combat mercenarism.
Mercenaries should not only bewoutla;

wed in words but in reality. The road to
this objective is the road oi struggle aga-
inst imperialism. the road oi cooperation
oi|peace-lovi'r|tg states in tire internalin.
na arena w en solving eve aspect ol
the problem. and the road oIIYilghtlng all
kinds .ol_l,n_ternational crimes. . _

“militias 0F DRAWING UP 1875

OF CONTIMPORARY INTERNATIONAL

‘I’REATIES IN DIFFERENT LANGUAGES

V. l. Eaintoo

Summary

A contemporary international treaty has
as a rule two or more equally authentic
texts in dillerent languages. The procedure
lor working out and concluding treaties
should provide tor conditions to draw it
adequate and equally authentic texts in di ~
ierent langua

As a rule. ilateral treaties are worked
out simultaneously in the languages oi the
parties and recognized by them as equally
authentic. Even il lor an
tacit ol time) tests in the an ages ol the
parties are not p ared at some time
the recognition oi t e two tests by the par-
ties as authentic makes them equally reli-
able 'sources lor determining the intentions
and wills oi the parties when interpreting
them. '

The most serious problems arise in the
elaborations oi general multilateral treati-
es on the matters of interest to the entire
conununity ol states. Therelore. their uni-
versality—the possibility and necessity ol
wcipation by the largest possible num-

ol states—is at a special importance.
The attainment oi universality is iacillta-
ted by their elaboration in diplomatic lan~
was accepted in the practice at the UN

erai Assembly and used by the majori-
ty ol world population in countries belon-
8'08
and having dillerent law systems.

The experience oi workina out texts Ill
dillerent angua set the N Charter and
the Final Act 0 the Conference in Helsino
iii in l915. has shown that the elimination
oi possible discrepancies in the texts oi a
muttitanguage treaty depends to a conside-
rable extent on the way how these texts
are prepared: simultaneously or lirst in one
language with a subsequent translation in-
to the others A conclusion is made in the
arcticle to the ellect that the greatest sde~
quacy oi texts may be reached il every pro-
vision under question is put into an appro-
priate langua term at the very conside-
ration oi legs notions. opinions and situ-
ations with a subsequent comparison at the
tests. The authenticity oi teats presupposes
that each oi them is an independent rcilcc-
tion hi all provisions iii a treaty
same time it is lully equivalent
uthers as in its legal eilect.

Having audit-d the procedure M An»

In "It:

reason (e. g.

to dillerent socioeconomic systems

and at the

wing up and concluding international ire.
sites with tests in two or more hostages
a conclusion may be drawn that th ro-
ccdure has its own uliarities relat to
the existence oi diierentlangua tests
in a treaty. The practice oi eia rating
tests ol these treaties and oi concluding
them has developed in the direction oi ta.
king more into account specific ieahares oi
such kind ol treaties. As a rule tests oi
treaties in dillerent languages are a-
red without a time gap and without giv
an advantage to any one sbaaica text. In
the course oi drawing up texts in diﬂcant
ianguages more attention is given to com-
pare in parallel the texts ol treaties (as a
rule muttitanguage ones) especially oi a
general nature. States realize well enough
that they are bound by the texts oi a tree-
ty in other languages as wall. it should be
noted that as there are no international law
mics regulating the choice at languages
lor the preparation oi treaty texts. the ra-
ctice lotlows the Rules oi rocedure o the
UN General Assembly — a universal orga-
nisation which elaborated and developed
basic procedural lortns ior drawin up
texts oi muttitanguage treaties. aving
been developed in a dilllcult diplomatic
and political struggle these lorms are at a
general democratic nature and they pres»-
pose equat treatment ol texts in major
world diplomatic langua . It is rellected
in the requirement lor al texts in dillerent
languages to pass the same rocedural sta-
ges ol their preparation an simultaneous
conclusion.

international law has also accumulated
certain experience. unique ol its ltind. oi
concluding equity authentic texts oi an
international treaty in dillerent languages
with a big time gap. The experience oi two
diplomatic Conlerencea tor adopting new
equally authentic texts at the Chicago Con-
vention oi I9“ allows to state that the I.
tablishment at such procedural norms which
would it: identical wills ol the parties with
rcgard to all tests oi a treaty is one oi the
main conditions lor adopting lull~bodicd
and equally authentic texts. Being an as.
ccption lrom the rule. the lCAO experience
is at a great importance as it brings to
light certain s ilic ways oi preparing and
adopting mull language treaties.

26

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lllﬂORlCAl. AND LEGAL ANALYSIS
OF DISARNAMEN‘I‘ PROBLEM (lNO—iD“)

0. A. Smirnou

Summary

The ilrst ten years alter World War ll
(iM-l955) is the most fruitless period
oi tiations on disarmament which re-
veal: two diametrically opposed policies:
the policy oi the USSR and at peace-
loving iorces towards a genuine disarma-
ment. banning oi atomic wee ns. and re
duction oi armed ioreee. on a one hand.
and the policy oi the USA and other Wes-
tern powers which sabotaged any concre-
te approach to solving the problem 0! di-
sarmament. l. e. the policy aimed at whip-
ping up the arms race. on the other.

A special study oi this period oi negoti-
ations on disarmament is topical now as
it is not by chance that the history oi nee
gouations aiter World War ll. especially
its early ' is so much distorted and
conlued the Western prone da and
diplomacy. The role oi the U arter in
the iield oi disarmament is eyed down
and the presence of the pri pie oi disar-
mament in the Charter as one oi main
princi lea oi modern international law is
deni it is being done in the interests oi
those who hear the blame ior unleashing a
wild arms race and tor maltin the discus
sion of the disarmament p lent during
many years to tool: like a iencin match
rather than a business-trite consi cratlon.
Many versions by the Western historians
and international jurists oi this problertt
have nothln to do with reality. and they
are aimed a oonlusin all those who want
to understand why atomic age has
brought with it a traged and threat to
all mankind and why the oi plea
[or cooperation among antrHitlertte co-
alition powers embodied in the UN Cher-
ter. and tor a better and saler world have
not come true. While not being able to de
ny the historical responsibility evident to

bod which is carried in its entirety
USA lor «letting the atomic jinn out

n the jars, some US propagandtsta want
to shilt the attention to later events and to
cast a shadow over the USSR policy. But
the [acts are against those who started and
whipped up the arms race They are a ainst
the latter-day «theorists» lrom citing
who are also iussing about the concept oi
equal erasponsibili by the USSR and
iglﬁrtallst wars or the arms race. it in
l the SA and other Western powers
had accepted the Soviet proposal to ban
atomic weapons the world would not have
lived now under the terrible threat oi nu-
clear wsr. it they had agreed to embark on
the road oi reducing the armed iorcea and
armaments ioilowlng appeals by the USSR

27

the world would not have been in a tree.
zy oi uncontrollable competition in weav

PONY-

‘lhe origin of the atomic bomb and the
circumstances at its llrst use serve as a
clear evidence oi the tact that the US
ruling circles pinned rather tar-reaching
expectations on atomic weapons. The critic
re US iorei pollc was subjected to the
objective o mainta ing the strategic mi-

litary edge in the town of atomic wea a.
their delivery vehicles and military as":

spread throughout the world. it was
very reason or a negative attitude by the
USA to the USSR proposals on the ban on
atomic weapons and on the general reduc-
tion at armaments. it was the reason why
theUSAclun sohardtotheBaruchPlan
which con ted the UN Charm. kno-
tvtng in advance that there were no pro
speets to torce it upon the USSR. and put
a decision through the United Nations. use-
tng the voting machine it had then at its
gamut. declaring this Plan as the UN
an.

A number oi UN General Assembl ra-
solutions unanimously adopted in lg“—
55 (taking iculsr account oi their nu-
merous real irmations) reﬂected the prac-
tice ol recognising the principle oi disarma-
ment which was'llnd in the UNC‘harteJ
as a universal y recognized nctpa
modern international aw. Argough the
presence at the at principle oi disar-
mament in the Charter does not imply
abanonhaving this orthattyg‘e o
wea nry.onthawhole. the whlpp g u
oi e arms race nuts counter to this prin-
ciple oi modern international law.

The USSR Meals tabled at that time
were lutiy consistent with such main prin-

ciples oi oonternporaéhy‘ international law
set iortlt In the UN rter as the p-
lea oi sovereign tlcal

ejuallty oi states.
independence an territorial invi t1.
and non-interlerence into internal allairs
oi states (Art. 2. UN Charter).

The Soviet diplomscy never gave up try-
ing to get moving the negotiations on nu.
clear disarmament. on the reduction oi con-
ventional arms and the armed iorces even
at the times when it seemed there was not
the slightest dunes oi success. Such con.
sistent. tenacious and rincipled policy oi
the USSR has success ully ted lrom con-
irontation to business-trite discussions
starting item the 60's and to reachin
agreements in a number ol iields reia
to reducing the nuclear war threat. limiting
the arms race. and to disarmament.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIIIILISI iN lN‘I'ERNATIONAL LAW
(ITS GENESIS AND CONTEMNMNBITY)

D. I. Fetdmen. Matted Scientist oi the USSR, Doctor of Ln.
5. N. Chebysllec

Summary

Nihilism in international law continua to! [snail iii} which 'th its essence g his}.

lay an important role in content ary
ideological stru while some engines
on the origin a development oi interna-
tional law nihilism have not been suliici-
6|in studied so lar. The problem oi origin
at international law nihilsm is the subject
ol this article.

Hobbes and Spinoza are usually conside-
red to be the isthers oi international law
nihilism. it is true that at the ing nl-
htlism was expresed in the crest complete
lorm in their views on international law
which have their own earlier roots as they
originated back in the midst oi leudel socio-
economic lormation.

The roots oi nihlllatic doctrine in the sphe-
re oi international law and its science stem
irom the idealistic platlorm oi Thomas
Aquinas. on the one hand. and Madriaveili-
anism. on the other. The essential tenets oi
the latter are the basic core oi all nihilistic
political and legal doctrines. Thus. in dille-
renee to the established point oi view. Tho-
mas Aquinas and Machiavelli should be re-
cognized es proclaimers oi nihilism in in-
ternational law. Although due to immaturity
ol international law and at its science the
views oi thee authors related only to some
individual matters and their doctrines were
not. rather clearly deiined and well-balan-
oed. they. nevertheless. laid the theoretical
inundation to nihilistlc attacks on interna-
tional law.

Ol course. the views oi T. Hobbes and
B. Spinoza. two greatat thinkers at the
time at break-up oi the ieudal system. who
had a nihttlstic attitude towards legal de-
terminations in the sphereoi international re-
lations. are oi a special signilicance in the
history oi nihilism in international law.

in tact. Hobbes gave start to the nega-

tion oi stgoilicanea oi regulating interna- :

tionat relations by treaties and dlsclsimed in

general the validity oi hiternationai treaties. '

Nlhlllsllc views were treated in a greater
detail in the political and legal teachings
oi Spinoza. Dubiety as to the possibility oi
ensuring the iuliilment oi international ob-
li otions in good ialth is the basic thesis
\v ich is literally a trey-note in Spinoza's
teachings. s iooza stated the right oi every
state to wit raw irom honouring obll
lions under treaties by saying that the wt h-
drawal should not be blamed on the state

Thus. the oihllistic conception found its
reﬂection in the conceptions ol Hobbes and
Spinoza. it was also characteristic lor the
views oi S. Puiendori. C. Woli and others.
to the then speciiic historical environment
the international law nihilism oi these au-
thors had known objective premises. The
appearing bourgeois class throu its ideo-
logists repudiated the then exist g positive

law. what lound its expression in the attitu-

' de towards international law then in totes

which held down business activities oi bour-
gfo‘ies‘ie beyond the boundaries at national
s a .

With the consolidation ol its positions the
bourgeoisie iorgot about earlier proclaimed
by it «natural rights oi peoples and em-
barked on the road oi their gross violation
by giving a dlllerent iorm to nihilism in in-
ternational law. The revival oi internatio-
nal lew nihilism on a new soil and its lull
blossom tails on the ism. l. e. on the age
oi imperialism. Reactionary interpreters oi
Hegel s teachings on domestic law. lirat oi
all. A. Lesson and then the Zorn brothers
created beiore World War l a well-balamd
structure oi international law nihilism
which had its lollowers in a whole number

. oi imperialist countries. Every time. regard-

iless oi crushing blows which tell on the

. ideologists oi international law nihilism.
these theories seemed to receive a new im-
petus when some ruling circles oi imperia-
list countries made preparations lor an ag-
gression. That is why the international law
nihilism iound such a iertile soil in Nazi
Germany. that is why it is being cultivated
in every way where acts ol aggression are
in preparation or taltc place-be it Israel
or the SAR.

Even west-European and US universi-
tics are not short oi sympathizers oi inter-

' national law nihilists.

Under the present-day conditions connec-
ted wtth the shill in the locus ol the strug-
gle between the two systems to non-milita-
ry means there is no end to clletnpls at
distorting the regulatory essuicc oi inter-
national law and at interpreting it. while
ignoring speciiic leslures oi a given law
system. as a purely instrumental suhlect
conducive to the realization oi basic
class objectives ol the bourgeois reactionary
circles.

At the same time it is necessary to draw
a clear line between the so-catted eradicate
nihilists (the most reactions wing oi in-
ternational law no tors) an the socalled
«moderates ltihera and pacilist) theoreti-
ctans who in oonstructln their conceptions
aimed at solving key or terns oi humanity
prepare a iertile soil [or the negation oi
international law due to their class narrow-
mindednees and narrowness oi their metho-
dological base

The power at international law nihilism
to survive is the reason tor the topicality
and significance ol criticizing nihillstit'. doc-
trioes and tor the necessity oi their more
prolound and thorough analysis in the light
at the roblems oi contemporary ideological
slrug e.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UNIFICAI‘ION OP MARITIME LAW AND Till NO‘I’ION
0P PRIVAIB lN‘I’ﬁRNATIONAL MARITIMI LAW

A. L. Mahoosky, Candidate of Lots

Summary

Private international maritime law is a
subdepartmcnt at private international law
which represents a civil law department ol
domestic law regulating property relation~
shi with a lorelgn element and combinin

domestic law conlllct mics and dlrcc
and cobalt? rules unilied“? mbdepar‘t“ in-.
ternat agreements. ' su ment-
diliers irom the other subd artments oi |
private international law in a number
oi rules resulting lrom international until--
cation

The basic content oi obli lions assumed
by states under internationa treaties on law
unilicatlon consists oi the duty oi each ol
them to ensure legal regulation oi relations
specilicd in such a treaty in a manner estab- '
lished therein Dis duty has a diilerent' “2‘."
tent dependent on the methods oi unilica?l
tlon used in the truly. I

Under eindlrccts uniiication the particiu'
patin states in a treaty are committed to!
estabiah a legal rule in their legislationsi
whose content is deiined to this or that
extent in that treaty. The revision ol the
treaty to establish such ru es la the inter»
national law rule whence these rules
established in implementation at an inter-
:iational treaty are the rules oi domestic
aw.

The «directs uniilcation method is the

most characteristic one lor the unillcatlon "

oi maritime law whereby linalised legal
rules (direct and. less ireouentty. eonillct
rulesi are delincn in an interactionai tica-
ty rradv lnr application in domestic law
systems at participating states in a trea-
ty. and these states commit themselves to
ensure their a pllcatlon. Such unilied ru-
les are at dua nature On the one hand.
they are already established and included
in an international treaty as rules Inten.
ded tor application with the use oi dome.
stic mechanism in combination with other
rules oi municipal law. They are mainly
civil law rules as to their nature. On the
other hand. unilied rules delinc the content
at commitment made by the participants
to an international treaty and may be
considered as one oi the elements oi this
treattl. This quality oi unilied rules es la-
the «conciliatory» nature as as
the a plication thereto at a number oi

treaty aw provisions. :
One may tallr oi the «nixeda unillcati. :

on method “a unilied rules are delincd ! are noobiective obstacles to that.

in an international treaty but at the same
than the participants to a treaty are given .
the right to deviate therelrom in their le-
gislations.

Putting an international treaty on the
unillcation ol maritime law in eilect and
the iullllment oi obligations assumed by
its participants ilnd their expression. ilrst

29

' special

oi all. in the lormation ol domestic law
of states corr ndin to such treaty. in-
cidentally. all a ma ters ol putting the
said treaties into ellect by participants the.
reto belong to the domain oi legal corre»
lation oi international law and domestic
law. Such correlation is determined by the
lact that the state acting within the tra-
meworir ol one legal system must observe
its binding requirements oi another I at
system and by that indication oi the s -
te'a legal bond it is dilierent lrom actual
interaction (interinlluence) oi internatio-
nal law and domestic law.

The translormation ol treaty provisions
on law- untiication into municipal law ru-
les oi the contracting state Is an act oi
law-matting which can be perlorntcd in
only one oi the two ways—either thnoogh
creation by the state of rules ol its law or
through sanctioning by the state (i. e.. by
giving legal lorcc to the already lormed
rules ol conduct). The llrst way is requi-
red at indirect unillcation ol law, and the
second one—at direct unilication. At mi-
xed uniiication the one or the other met-
hod is used to put a treaty into ellcct de-
pending on whether the state intends to
use the right to deviate lrom unilied ru-
les. The act at assuming obligations under
a relevant treaty iratilication, accession.
etc.) is the basic lorm oi sanctioning uni-
lied rules by the state.

international treaties on the uniﬁcation
at law oi states with dillcrcnt socio~peli
tical systems aim primarily at uniiorni re-

' gulatlon oI relations with the foreign ele-

ment and to the extent possible they do
not bind. the contracting state in the mat-
ters relating to the regulation oi relations
not exceeding the lramework oi its legal
system. But ior practical reasons the suite.
re ol action oi such treaties never covers
with absolute exactness the sphere oi a
certain kind oi relations with the loreign
element: some portion ol such relations
turns out to be outside ol the treaty acti-
on. whcreaa some purely «internals relati-
ons are involved in its sphere. B incor-
porating treaty provisions in its aw the
contracting state is bound by the snhere
oi their action deﬁned in the treaty. it
cannot diminish this sphere but it may
expand it by appl ing its rules establish-
ed as a result 0 international uniiicatl-
on ol law to eintcrnala relations ii there

Domestic law rules resulting lrorn the
international uniiication oi law have a
place in domestic law not only
lrom the point oi view oi the sphere ol
their action but also due to their legal lor.
ce in the hierarchy ol legal rules at a gi-
ven state. The participating state in an

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
international treaty on

mils itseli to ensure the reeutation oi w sense. in case oi indirect unliication and
Iations deﬁned in such I. "my in (mm. in case oi the mixed uniiicallon method
uer established therein irrespective oi the til the state uses the option to deviate
manner in VII'titIl these relations are regu- irom the text oi the unilled rule) a comp.
laicd by its 0'"l t“!- Stlth commitment tex combination oi the common will by
brings solution to the robtcn- oi coniiiet the party .0 an international ‘
oi thus created rulea vi the other rule the will oi ".9 state creatln

at law oi such state re tring thereeogni- in accordance with u“ tmty

tlon 0‘ WWW! 0' the all" resulting irom is such a source oi law. in case of direct

unlllcatton.

There is no unambiguous answer to the

question °t whether it is ”35‘5" to “’3' ol unliied rules and a will nivur
sitter an international treaty on law um- quality 0‘ domestic law

tication as a source oi domestic law it u is “m common will

the direct unilication memos! is used such treaty which terms

a treaty may be considered as a source oi the latter case it is the will
domestic law oi the state in the iormal participating in a treaty is

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘3" “"“k'ii‘tlt “"“b question mt the source at law in material

uniiication it

sense. It is more dlillcult to answer the

UNITED NA“

A new convention was approved in Ham- a vial itocmuent at all
burg on March 30. I978.—iM United "1' curler-party is the only exception). the
lions Convention on the Carriage oi Goods «wnvmmm is appli¢.b|c to
by Sea. l‘JiB. (the Hamburg Rules) ‘t‘hiﬂt ui carriage between «liliereut
place the international port oI loading or the port oi
Unilication oi Certain located in a contracting state as well
Bills of Lading. t92t in the case it the hill oi tailing or other
nd the Protocol to Ilnttlmr-ttl is issued in a contracting ~tatv.
responsibility is :II~

is designed to re
Convention tor the
Rules relating‘ to

ulea)

(the Hague

0P GOODS 3V SEA. ma
0. 0. tonnes, Candidate 0] La-

Summary

amend the said Convention. I968 (the Via- ‘ihe i-nrrn-r's pi-rimt oi

by Rules).

.., i-eivmiut' it ittciutt

with the necessity to adtust it to new con- iicientl d9",

iiitions oi carriage.
which belonged to t

“"3 m“ “'5“. The asic rule oi carrier's liability is
. he political sphere and tonnulatcd in ”mm.”
played a decisive role.

“‘0 appearance in “‘9 “'0‘“ arena °' 3 for loss reSulting irom

tar e number oi developing countries who i th d

it in the creation oi the Iii-cry: "o 3‘ 3’ well ”
thought 0‘" the "3" loss. damage or delay toolr
"“5 9‘“ l° rettulalc in“ the goods were in his charge. unless til
it develo ed countries carrier proves that he.
"uh" °’ regulating agents toolt all measures
. . “WNW“ "“1 d°"°‘°' sonabty be required to avoid the
ping countries or even between developing cc and its consequences.

did not participate
Hague Rules and
me established in
terrclatlons betwee-
was no longer app
relations between

ANNIIIII'IVS.

request oi the UN (Zonlercnce on Trade there is no ap main!

and Development t

UNCTM» i“ ““3 “N we (including he so called

Commission on international Trade Law erro ‘ -
tUNClTRALl. was considered at its ninth The';t,ngﬁg‘§,gt§b§;{

session in ltl7ti

ration to the inter
toolr place to llatnbur

ticles and is compo

g in t9?

they are evidenced by the bill oi iading. an hs ‘ and 6. while

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

treaty and
I! a legal rule
provisions.

seems necessary to disitn.
guish between a will deitnlng the content

' g item a
. in the to
oi the parties to a
uniiled rule. and in
oi each state
Its-it wrrarately.

0N5 CONVEN‘I'lON ON THE CARRIAGE

tcarriage by n

all contracts
‘IMt‘S ii the
discltarrze is

vs .‘III lltt‘ time- “I!-

The criticism oi the tlague Rules WIS run: which the carrier l‘t in charm- oi “II‘

caused ltil “'0 "'35" reasons. The W“ °“.° goods at the port oi loading. during the

iii;'°§ni°~‘.".°;ti'.i:§ui‘:i’i‘i‘t‘iii‘ﬁox'fo‘ii serum; em “our.“ 3.:
. , v s ns

mings oi the 1924 Convention rise“ "“1 the «period at responsibility-pare not aut-

. l oi article 5.
‘39 connected ‘Vm' According to this rule the carrier is liable
loss at or damage
irom delay in de-
h'ich caused the
place while

. ii the occurrence it!

his servants or
that could rea-
occurren-
the um
Convention. the rule oi the carrier's liabi-
A new ("3" convention. 9"de 3‘ “W iity is iormutated in a positive term and
rren-
tonal

Unlike

ate list oi oocu
«navigat
irom liability.
. tor lault is tor-
and “WW“ '0' “"5"." mutated in this rule wthout a suiiicient
national eonicrence th" precision and it required to adopt a spe-
, ,- eiai «Common Understandings as A
We I918 Convention consists oi as ar- ii to the Final Act of “,2 Conlerence under
. “d °' seven pm" Its which the liability oi the sea ca ' '

sphere ul application has been consnlcrah- W on the principle oi «presum
ly bruadeneti- it applies to all contract! "we are only two exceptions m.
at carriage ll’INlll't‘Ith‘ oi the tact whether general rule which are contained in para-
, the rule oi paragraph

other document or are not cwdencrd lav a ‘ (iabilily in case oi lire) ditters only in
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500070061-2

COPYRIGHT :

cso:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the distribution oi the burden ot prool.
Under paragraph 5 the carrier is not liab-
le in those cases where damage was cau-
wti as a result at measures to save lite.
llowever a new approach is applied to sao
ving property by introducing an additio-
nal criterion oi reasonable measures.
The liability oi the carrier has a certain
limit whose amount is calculated on the
basis oi a dual criterion—per aclrage or
per hilogramme oi gross weig t. whiche-
yer is the higher. The Special Drawing
Right serves as the unit oi account. ho-
wevrr. states which are not members oi
the International Monetary Fund may use
i’uincztre lrancs. The right at the carrier
to the limitation oi liability is sindestru-
ctihle. In the maximum extent. although
Il\‘ may he denied it lI it is proved that list!
In“. thinnige nr III‘IIV in detiw-r resulted
lrum .ut .wt nl’ mnminn at t e carrier
.que mitt the. intent to cause the damage

or recklessly and with the knowled that
such damage would probably resut Um
like the Hague Rules. the Hamburg Rules
directly provide ior two cases when the
carrier may be denied the right to the It.
ntitation oi liability: at the carriage oi
goods on declr it the partica es ressty a:-
reed tor carriage under deck. an it the car-
rier includes in the bill oi tadlng lalse in-
iormation with the intent to dctraud a third
party.

Servants or agents ol the carrier tinctu-
ding such independent subcontractors as
stevedores and terminal operators) are
also entitled to the limits at liability it
they prove that they- acted within the
sco e oi their employment.

ntter article 10. ii the carrier entrusted
the performance oi the carriage or part
thereoi to another person. the carrier nc-
vertheless remains responsible lor the en.
tire carriage and he is responsible tor the
acts and omissions oi the actual carrier.
his servants or agents. The so called
«through carriages is the only exception
(article it). where the carrier may be re-
leaved lrom liability only in the case it

1800/ 701

Izdatel ' stvo "Nettles" , 1980

he (I) provides explicit
that a lied part ol t
lorrned y a person othe
(2) provides the name c
mlng that part ol the ca
that the occurrence eat
tool: place while the g
charge ol the actual car
serious drawbacks. tor
rlvate international m
a ll «legalize» the ex
earria and gives the t
riers 0 continue this ct
althou h. under the con
rable or the artles.

The genera rule at
shipper (article 12) is i
mewhat dilierent way
the rule ot the carrier's i

For the lirst time ti
make an attempt at ac
oi letters at guarantee.
2 ol article 11 any letlt
agreement by which th
kes to indemnity the c
resulting lrom the issu
lading the carrier. 1
ting on is behali. will
servalion relating to p
by the shipper. or to I
tion oi the goods. is vr
as against a third part
ol lading has been tr:
the rule iorrnulated in
which such letter is v
shipper unless the cart
reservation. intends t
party. may give rise it

The limitation periot
lated to the carriage is
to two years com arel
vention. The Ham urg
and 22) contain provi:
ction and arbitration
nunciation ot a long
to solve the matters 0
pules on the basis at
the parties.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500070061-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

INTERNATIONAL TIES OF SOVIET INSTI’NTB 0]" HISTORY

[Editorial Report] Moscow ISTORIYA $8811 in Russian No 3, May-June 1982. carries
on pp 216-219 a S300-uord article titled "International Scientific Ties of the
Institute of the History of the USSR of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR" by
N. P. Bossy. The article describes the foreign contacts of Soviet historians
bet.:een 1976 and 1980 and the published results of this form of scientific
cooperation.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", "Istoriys SSSR", 1982

(:80: 1800/ 686

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEH BROHIEY ARTICLE ON CONTEMPORARY ETHNIC PROCESSES
Moscow SOVBTSKAXA ETNOCRAPIYA in Russian No 2, Mar-Apr 82 pp 3-15

[Article by Yu. V. Bromley: "Main Trends of Bthnic Processes in Present-Day Horld"]

[Text] while it represents a single biological species evolving in accordance with
common social laws, modern mankind at the same time is divided into a multiplicity
of diverse historically evolved communities. They are, for example, race. class,
family, state, etc. A special place among these human communities is occupied

by formations now conventionally termed ethnic: tribe, folk. nationality, nation,
people. etc. According to the most modest calculations. present-day mankind has
inherited from the past at least 2,000 to 3,000 such communities which, moreover.
differ markedly in level of development and numbers. These differences range from
nationalities of ancient origin, or even tribes numbering as few as thousands or
sometimes hundreds of members, on the one hand, to multi-million peoples, on the
other. It is indicative that a mere 11 nations account for about one—half of all
mankind. The seven largest nations have populations of more than 100 millions each.
They are (in order of decreasing population, according to 1978 data): Chinese (934
million); Indians (180.5 million); Americans in the United States (172.2 million);
Bengalis (138.7 million); Russians (138.6 million); Japanese (115.7 million); and
Brazilians (112 million).1 At the same time, some 1,500 small peoples with popula-

tions of up to 100,000 each account for less than 1 percent of the world's total
population.

The non-uniformity of historical development of the world's peoples has distinctive-
ly affected the ethnopolitical structure of modern mankind. All the peoples inhabit-
ing our planet dwell in a little more than 200 countries (states and territories).
Hence, most present-day countries are multi-ethnic. As is well known, such coun-
tries exist both among the socialist countries (e.g. the USSR, Yugoslavia, Vietnam)
and among the developed capitalist countries (Great Britain. Canada, Belgium). But
it is the developing countries that are most often characterized by the diversity

of their ethnic nix. For example, in India there exist several hundred different
ethnic divisions and in Indonesia, at least 150 (or even more than 350 according to
calculations by certain authors). As for Africa. current statistics show that

more than 730 languages are spoken there. In Nigeria, for example, the official
count of the different ethnic groups is 200 and in Kenya and Sudan, roughly up to

60 each, and so forth.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should also be borne in mind that the habitats of many peoples are subdivided
among different states. The scale of this phenomenon is illustrated. in particular,
by the following (1978) data: 58.3 percent of Albanians live in Albania; 3b.8 percent.
in Yugoslavia. Similarly, 59.8 percent of Pushtuns (Afghans) live in Pakistan

and 39.9 percent, in Afghanistan. Or, 50.6 percent of Tajiks live in Afghanistan

and 68.7 percent. in the USSR.2

The diversity of the ethnosocial or. more simply. national structure of modern
mankind makes particularly complex the development and interaction of the ethno-
social, national features. This process evolves differently in different social
milieux-under socialism and under capitalise. The classantaggnisms.existing under
capitalism inevitably engender ethnosocial antagonisms. This phenomenon, which had
already been perceived by the founders of Marxism, is particularly evident in the
modern capitalist world. of which international conflicts are so characteristic.
This alone makes particularly significant the study of the present-day ethnosocial
processes which at present operate among the prime factors in the social development
of mankind.

of fundamental importance to understanding these processes is V. I. Lenin's concept
of two tendencies of the nationalities' question under capitalism. As he pointed
out in this connection, "developing capitalism is familiar with two historic ten-
dencies of the nationalities' question. First. the awakening of national life and
national movements, the struggle against all ethnic oppression, and the founding of
national states. Second. the development and growth of all relations among nations.
the breakdown of barriers among nations. the development of international unity of
capital as well as of the unity of economic life in general. politics, science,
etc."3

These two tendencies, in the final analysis, are among the manifestations--in the
social sphere--of a more general law--the law of the dialectical unity of the
integrating and the differentiating principles.

These two tendencies manifest themselves throughout world history,“ but their ope-
ration becomes particularly intense with the advent of capitalism. It manifests
itself, on the one hand. in the formation and development of the main ethnosocial
subdivisions of the erao-nstions and, on the other, in the growth of their mutual
ties. i.e. in internationalization.s This law also is uncovered by V. I. Lenin's
concept of two tendencies in the nationalities' question whose unity represents,
as he had stressed. the “worldwide law of capitalism."6

In the presence of a general crisis of capitalism these tendencies become further
intensified. This especially concerns the tendency toward internationalization in
the sphere of economics. The general crisis of capitalism has, in particular. expe-
dited the evolution of monopoly capital into state-monopoly capital, thereby con-

tributing to a further amalgamation_of production. The internationalist trend has
also manifested intself in the broader development-~on the basis of the scientific

and technological revolution--of the mass media (from transport to radio and
television).

Foreign trade is growing at a vigorous pace. Exports of capital increase at an even
faster rate. During the 1945-1975 period the long-range foreign investments by the

3!.
Iron orncur use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

major imperialist countries soared roughly tenfold and reached US$580 billion.
But an even higher record, perhaps. was broken by the international commercial
exchange of technologies, patents, and licenses. lts average annual growth rate
has even overtaken the rate of export of entrepreneurial capital.7 International
co-production has increased in scale. Such a form of the internationalization of
modern capital as the multinational corporations (MNC) has developed extensively.

A special form of the internationalization of economic life under present-day con-
ditions is economic integration. Underlying it are the objective neeeds of the
development of productive forces. the steadily closer interaction among the
economies of discrete countries. and the steadily deeper interweaving of their
production processes and regulation ofmutualrelations among these countries. De-
pending on the socio-economic conditions that prevail, economic integration has
its own forms specific of the system of society concerned. and its own traits and

features. which cause socialist and capitalist integrations to be fundamentally
different.9

But inter-imperialist relations are governed not only by the integrative, unifying
tendency but also by a tendency "opposing some imperialists to others."10 The
former is engendered by the unity 6fthe class interests of the world bourgeoisie and
the latter, by its inevitable economic mutual competition. The late 1940s as well
as the 19503 and 19608 were years of predominance of the "unifying" tendency, which
resulted in the birth of NATO and of the complex whole of military. political, and
economic agreements uniting most of the developed capitalist countries. In the

first half of the 1970s the operation of the second tendency, and of the centrifugal
processes it engenders. became intensified.11

0n the whole, however, on the scale of the entire capitalist world. the differentiat-

ing tendency manfests itself chiefly in that "among the various imperialist powers
... the non-uniformity of economic development gets intensified."1

Thus while in mid-twentieth century the internationalist tendency still predominated
in the developed capitalist countries, in the developing countries the predominant
tendency was that characterized by V. I. Lenin as "the awakening of national life
and national movements."13 A special expansion was experienced by the national-
liberation movement of the colonial and semi-colonial nations and dependent coun-
tries following Horld Her II. As a result, thus while on the eve of that war these
countries had accounted for 66 percent of the world's population. now colonies
account for less than 1 percent. Having accomplished in the main the tasks of na-
tional liberation, the peoples of the young states have faced the need to promote
their economic and cultural development. The center of gravity of national life
has chiefly shifted to the socio-economic sphere. A number of countries took the
path of noncapitalist development, the path of socialist orientation.

The liberated countries strive to put an end to the legacy of colonialism. to
direct and indirect exploitation by the imperialist countries. To this end, above
all. they are taking control of their own natural resources.14

The liberated countries increasingly develop cooperation with the countries of the
socialist community, which plays a decisive role in the struggle of the young

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY

notably reflected in the complication of contradictions between the United States,
on the one hand, and France, the PBS, and other BBC countries, on the other. Along
with factors of a constant nature (such as the competition for influence in

Africa, Arab countries, and a number of regions in Latin America), other major
factors are the differing degree of dependence on imports of crude oil and other
types of raw materials, the--on the whole-~more extensive ties between the economies
of the West European countries and those of the developing countries. the lower
economic potential of West European capitalism coapared with its North American
counterpart, etc.

Along with the socio—economic sphere. the effect of the two tendencies considered
has also manifested itself in the domain of culture. This is most graphically
reflected in the so-called mass culture, whose functioning under capitalism is of

an extremely contradictory nature. 0n the one hand, it tends to break down national
barriers,and it would clearly be an overaimplification to disregard this. since.like
the unity of economic life. culture--as propagated by the mass media~-contributes

to breaking down the isolation of cities and regions which as late as 100 years

ago had lacked regular mutual ties. "It has brought along awareness of what is
happening in the world. supplanting provincial boredom. brawls. bear-baiting, and
public executions which had until then, along with religious holidays. provided

sole entertainment for the masses for many centuriesylb 0n the other hand, it
should be borne in mind that in the capitalist world "mass culture is utilized

to regularly manipulate public awareness, to promote conformism. and to standardize
and primitivize spiritual life.17 At the same time, mass media are widely used by
the imperialist powers to impose on other nations reactionary views, tastes, be-
havior stereotypes, and models and imprints of culture.18

The tendency toward the internationalization of spiritual life, which in the capi-
talist world assumes chiefly forms of "mass culture," is even now, however, com-
bined with the tendency toward differentiation. The latter manifests itself, in
particular, in the rebirth of interest in traditional legacies of national culture
as a valued national heritage, in the creation of ethnically distinctive pro-
fessional works of art, and in the combination of indigenous cultural components
with standardized mass components. The social-class differentiation of culture
persists and is largely deepening. This is particularly characteristic of ideology;
in this respect the positions of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie are deeply
antagonistic toward one another.

36
FORIDFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
The non-uniform rate of the socio-economic development of the world's countries
under the conditions of capitalism has resulted in a great diversity of ethnic
processes and their rates, types, and varieties. A major role in the development
of these processes is played by the ethnic input parameters of the peoples on
whose basis they develop. It is one matter when this basis is represented by

a nation or even a nationality, and it is another when several nationalities

are involved, and still another when not only nationalities but tribes are
involved. The importance of the ethnopolitical structure of the state also is
great.

In monoethnic (single-nation) states usually the basic processes are those of
intra-ethmic consolidation, i.e. merger into a larger ethnic grouping owing to
the smoothing of differences among the discrete component ethnographic groups and
subgroups. The scale, depth, and rate of these processes largely depend on the
level of a nation's socio-economic development, and even in the developed capita-
list countries these processes often still are under way. Thus, there still exist
tangible differences of an dialectal and ethnocultural nature between the

German subethnic groups in the FRG and GDR: Bavarians, Saxons, Hessians, Hecklen-
burgers, etc. In a sense, the consolidation of the Italians still remains
incomplete as their genetic kin, the Friul and Ladin (Rhaeto-Ronanic) peoples
which also live in Italy still continue to merge with them.

The Chinese may provide an example of a far from complete ethnic consolidation of
peoples of ancient origin. Thus. the dwellers of northern China do not understand
southerners. The unified system of hieroglyphic [ideographic] writing serves

as a means of mutual communication.

Extremely active processes of ethnoconsolidation are under way in many developing
countries that have recently become liberated from colonial dependence. There,
these processes are not only intracethnic but also inter-ethnic. In some cases,
these processes already have led to the rise of new ethnic communities. Thus,

the mergers of affine ethnic groups in Kenya have led to the rise of the Nilotic
Luo people (about 2.2 million) and in Tanzania, the Niambezi nationality (about

3.7 million). A similar phenomenon is observed in Nigeria, where the consolidation
of kin groups into the Ibo nationality (about 13.3 million) proceeds at a rapid
pace. Analogous though somewhat less advanced processes take place in the People's
Republic of Congo where, according to certain forecasts, a consolidation on the
nationwide scale of the numerous kin (Bantusi) ethnic groups (about 70) is to be
expected.

Special mention should be made of the so-called processes of ethnogenetic mixing--
the rise of new peoples owing to the mergers of various unrelated ethnic groups.
Extremely interesting in this respect is the process of the formation of the Anglo-
Canadian people resulting from the mixing of settlers from Great Britain. The
point is that initially it was the Irish (40 percent& rather than the English (33
percent) who had predominated among these settlers.2 A particularly large number
of examples of present-day ethnogenetic mixing is provided by Latin America, and
these examples are extremely graphic as well, since there, as a rule, representati-
ves of varied ethmoracial groups are taking part in the formation of new ethnic
nationalities. so that this formation is accompanied by racial mixing. For example.

37
FOR OFFNJA1.USE20NL¥
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

in El Salvador, where the mixing of individuals of European origin (Creoles) and
Indians has been continuing for more than two centuries, early in the nineteenth
century the mestizos (Ladinos) accounted for 56 percent of the country's popula-
tion while in the 19303 their share exceeded 75 percent and at present it is more
than 90 percent. A similar picture is observed in Honduras. where at present the
Ladinos account for 91 percent of the country's population; Indians. 6 percent;
blacks, 2 percent; and whites, 1 percent. At the same time, in many countries of
Latin America the process of ethnoracial mixing is still relatively far from being
completed. Thus in Guatemala the Spanish-speaking population (chiefly a mixed
population) accounts for only about one-half of the country's inhabitants.21

Processes of racial and. along with it, ethnic mixing are characteristic of many
other countries as well. But their rate largely depends on the extent of discrimi-
nation practiced against various racial groups. In this sense. the example of the
United States is perhaps the most indicative. There. according to the laws of
certain states. a "Negro" is considered one who has at least one-eighth-and in
some states even one-sixteenth. "Negro blood." Moreover, recently the category

of "mulattoes" has in general disappeared from American statistics. However, cal-
culations by experts show that as early as in the 1930s three-fourths of American
Negroes were in reality lulattoes.22

In all foreign countries, to one degree or another, processes of ethnic assimila-
tion are under way; this especially pertains to multi-ethnic states, and, within
these. to widely scattered ethnic groups, minorities, and immigrants. In the
postwar period, as a rule. the number of immigrants has markedly increased in many
industrial developed countries. Thus. in the ran in the early 19603 there had
been some 700,000 immigrants. while in the late 19703 their number grew to as

many as 4 million. In West Europe as a whole at present there live at least 12
million immigrants. To a large extent. they are newcomers from the countries of
the Mediterranean Basin. chiefly unskilled workers. Thus. in the FRO there are
about l-million Turks and 600.000 each of Yugoslavs and Italians. At the same
time the number of immigrants from former colonies has increased. Particularly
indicative in this respect is Great Britain where the postwar period witnessed the
coming of large numbers of Negroes from the West Indies as well as of Indians and
Pakistanis from former British possessions in South Asia and East Africa. (De-
spite the promulgation of various laws sharply restricting the influx of "colored"
immigrants into England, their number in that country is rapidly rising owing to
their high natural population increase: from 1 million in 1966 to about 2 million
in 1980.)23 The composition of the immigrants also is changing. Indicative in
this respect is the United States. Thus while early in the twentieth century

90 percent of all newcomers originated from Europe. during 1950-1975 only 36.9
percent of the total influx was from Europe, with 46.2 percent of the remainder .
coming from other countries of the Americas and 15.1 percent from Asian countriesé
In South East Asia a particularly large group of immigrants is represented by
Chinese--the so—called huatsaos. who in many countries play an extremely active
but far from always positive role (they number more than 20 million).25

The course and rate of assimilation processes depend on a complex whole of factors:
length of residence. occupation. ethnic origin. level and ethnic features of cul-

ture of the country immigrated into, its racial structure. degree of discrimination
against immigrants. and the spread of mixed marriages. In

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE‘ONLN
FOR‘0FFKHAI.USE(MVLY

English-speaking countries (United States, Australia, Canada), children of inni-
grants from Great Britain can no longer be distinguished from the local population.
The assimilation of immigrants from Central Europe in these countries is more dif-
ficult. Even in the presence of ethnically mixed marriages the process of the
ethnic assimilation of such immigrants takes, as a rule, several generations. Indi-
cative in this sense are the processes occurring in the United States where, on
the eve of World War II. as many as 50 percent of all marriages in some regions
were ethnically mixed, but nevertheless the present-day ethnic situation in the
United States is characterized by the fact that a majority of the offspring of
European immigrants, while considering themselves Americans. remember their

ethnic origin.

A far from unambiguous situation exists with respect to racially mixed marriages.
In such cases, the factor decisive to the rate of assimilation is the presence or
absence of racial discrimination. In particular, the discrimination practices in
the United States and Great Britain markedly impede the assimilation of "colored"
immigrants. Conversely, the virtually total absence of discrimination in a number
of Latin American countries has, as known. been extraordinarily conducive to the
development of the processes of ethnic mixing, as mentioned before.

Owing to the extension of the processes of ethnic assimilation over a number of ge-
nerations, as a result of the operation of various factors, immigrants-—like other
individuals subject to assimilation--not infrequently find themselves existing in

a unique state of transition when their original ethnic ties are completely or
nearly severed and their new ties are not yet consolidated. Foreign literature
applies the term "marginal man" to such individuals, and Soviet literature has
introduced the broader concept of the "transition group."27

The "marginal men" of various generations often display definite differences in
their standards and values. This not infrequently leads to conflicts in relations
between the first generation of immigrants. which attempts to retain traditional
ethnocultural values, and the second and third generations which strive to blend
with the ambient ethnosocial milieu. There arises the notion of the "old-fashioned"
values of the older generation, and often also the desire to skirt them. "To this
end, the second and third generations of immigrants may move to another region

and even change a "foreign" name or transform it into a local-sounding name."28

It must be stressed again that assimilation in foreign countries is far from always
natural. In some cases, as pointed out earlier, it is impeded by ethnic and
racial discrimination, while in others. conversely, it is "accelerated" by force.
Mention should be made. in this connection, of the forced assimilation of ethnic
minorities in the Chinese People's Republic.29

Along with assimilation, another ethnic consequence of immigrations is the growth
of the ethnic mosaic in many countries. In particular, owing to the tide of in-
migration, in the last 15 or so years the PRC has turned from a virtually mono-
ethnic state (until 1960 the Germans accounted for more than 99 percent of its
population) into a country with a complex ethnic composition: at present, it
contains nine ethnic groups of more than 100,000 persons each.30 In some cases,
even. immigrants account for a majority of a country's population (e.g. in Kuwait

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

native inhabitants account for only 48.6 percent at present).31

Owing to migrations, including internal ones. the ethnic mosaic of the cities has
markedly increased in the postwar era. It is indicative. e.g. that in cities of

the United States the share of the still unassimilated immigrants is much higher

than in the country as a whole.

Processes of inter-ethnic integration (homogenization) are under way intensively
in many foreign multi-ethnic countries; by such processes we construe the inter-
action smong basic ethnic units that markedly differ in origin-an interaction that
results in the formation of certain common ethnocultural features in these units.
Processes of this nature are especially characteristic of the multi-ethnic deve-
loping countries such as India, Indonesia. Nigeria, etc. However, it would

be quite premature to claim on this basis (as is sometimes done in professional
literature) that unified nations exist within the borders of each such country;
that is. if the Marxist interpretation of the term "nation“ is borne in mind. The
formations arising in the course of the processes of inter-ethnic integration rep-
resent inter-ethnic or meta-ethnic C°ﬂﬂun1t1¢8 with only 8 thin amalgam '

of common ethnocultural traits.

0f major importance to the formation of such communities is the language of
inter-national and inter-ethnic communication. Thus. in many African countries

the languages of the former colonial powers have been adopted as official languages.
At the same time. in many other liberated countries some or other common native
languages are supplanting the languages of the former colonial powers. Thus. in
Zaire, where French remains the official language. native langua es-Lingala in

the west and Swahili in the east--are steadily gaining currency. 2 In this connec-
tion. sometimes the lingua franca in use is the language of one of the lesser
nationalities. Host indicative in this respect is the example of Indonesia where
the official language is not Javanese (although there are more than 67 million
Javanese there) but the so-called Indonesian. basically the Halgsian language.
although there are only about 8 million Malays in that country. 3 A unique situa-
tion has arisen in Malaysia. There, 80 percent of the population are Malaysian-
speakers. In recent years. however. English has been steadily gaining currency
(especially among the Chinese and Indian population).34 The scope of use of the
English language in India is increasing. although officially the propagation of
Hindi and Urdu is supported.35

Even so. however, in most cases the lingua francs of a country is the language of
its largest ethnic group. This is so. as known, in nearly every West European coun-
try. To a certain extent. a similar picture is observed in Latin America. where
in most countries the lingua franca is Spanish. as well as in Asian countries.
e.g. in Thailand where normally the lingua francs is Siamese {Thai} (Kchonthsi).
the country's official language. In Africa. this variant may be exemplified by
Ethiopia. where the official language is Amharic--the language of Amhara. A some~
what conditional form of this variant exists in Tanzania. where the lingua franca
(along with English) is Swahili. which is widely used in all countries of East
Africa, although this language is not native to an overwhelming majority of the
larger ethnic groups in Tanzania. it is extremely close to the languages of the
Bantu-speaking majority of its population.36

ho

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKIAI. USE ONLY

(shipbuilding. textile industry, coal mining, etc.) following World "hr II; new
sectors develog there to a limited extent, which results in an increase in

unemployment.3

mentioned partition of British India into two independent states, India and Pakis-
tan. That partition was, as known. based on the criterion of religion. "The
bloodless revolution," as the English imperialists called the partition of India.
was accompanied by the resettlement of nillions of people, pauperization of the
refugees, and mass pogrons and slaughter. These took on a particularly bloody
nature in Punjab. According to rough statistics, the number of victims there ex-
ceeded $00,000. Virtually no SikB and Hindu Punjabis have remained in Pakistan-
and no Moslem Punjabis in Indi .4 Religious differences similarly are producing
explicit consequences in the Ulster conflict, which often develops into armed
collisions between the oppressed Catholic Irish minority and the Protestant
Anglo-Scottish majority attempting to preserve its privileged position."1

is also played by such a legacy of the past as discrepancies between ethnic and
political boundaries. This is especially characteristic of the developing coun~
tries, and primarily of modern Africa. As known, the colonizers there determined
the boundaries of their possessions without regard to traditional ethnic bounda-
ries. As a result, in most cases, ethnic groups became dismembered since they
often were subdivided among different colonial powers. This situation persisted
after the liberation as well. since the new states usually arose within the con-
fines of the former colonies. It should also be considered that the exacerbation
of nationalist sentiments among ethnic groups kept in inferior status is to a
large degree fostered by the spread of the mass media accompaning the scientific
and technological revolution, since this makes extremely graphic. and hence also
particularly intolerable. the discrimination they experience. 2

The complex ethnic picture of the modern world is changing not only as a result of
the ethnic processes proper discussed above. These changes are to a sizable extent
associated with demographic processes. which do not evolve uniformly in different
ethnic connmnities.

As known. throughout world history. the rate of increase in global population has
been steadily rising. This is demonstrated, in particular, by the fact that the
doubling of the world's population from 1 billion to 2 billion required a little
more than 100 years (from 1820 until 1927), whereas its increase from 2 to 3
billion took 33 years (by 1960), and from 3 to 6 billion, only 15 years (by 1975).
In other words, while 100 years were needed tOdouble the population in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, in the mid-twentieth century only 50
years sufficed. At present. the population of our planet amounts to 4.5 billion.
By 2000 it is expected to reach about 6 billion."3 According to UN forecasts. by
the year 2100 when, apparently world population growth will become zero. there
will be approximately 10.5 billion people on earth.44

h2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I

In a word, bilingualism is becoming increasingly widespread throughout the world.
Moreover, there exist extremely frequent cases in which several different nations
speak the same language: the most widespread international languages are (accord-
ing to 1978 data): English. 380 million speakers; Hindi and its kin language Urdu,
275 million; Spanish, 230; Russian, 220; Arabic, Bengali, and Indonesian. 160
each; Portuguese, 125; German, 100; and French, 90.3

Along with the unifying. integrating tendency in modern ethnic processes. differen-
tiating tendencies are under way as well. The latter manifest themselves in both
the "inter-state" and intra-state" planes. In the former case, the principal
factor in ethnic differentiation is the dismemberment of individual peoples
(ethnic communities) among different states, which usually results in the forma-
tion of specific ethnocultural features in each of the discrete parts. Most of~
ten such dismemberment is a legacy of a relatively distant past, but sometimes
this phenomenon takes place in our times as well. Perhaps the most significant
such example in terms of its scale is the formation in 1967, as a result of the
partition of British India, of two independent states--India and Pakistan, and
subsequently the isolation from the latter of the state of Bangladesh, accompa-
nied by mass resettlement of Hindus and Hoslems; as a result. two large peoples
who had taken the path of national consolidation (Punjabis and Bengalese)

have been separated by new political boundaries.38

As for the "intra—state" manifestations of the tendency toward ethnic differentia-
tion, here perhaps the most prominent is the exacerbation of nationalist feelings
in comparatively large minorities having a rather inferior status in a given
country (as compared with the "basic" majority of its population): the Basques in
Spain and France; the Scots and welsh in England. etc. This entails a distinctive
paradox: on the one hand. the economic and cultural integration of these mino-
rities with the basic majority of the population in their countries (Spaniards,
Frenchmen. Englishmen) is steadily growing, but on the other there is the afore-
mentioned growth of their nationalist sentiments. As a result, as known. under the
conditions of capitalism. there not infrequently arise acute inter-ethnic conflicts.
Thus, there are the confrontations between the English and the Irish in Ulster;

the Anglo- and Franco-Canadian contradictions in Canada; the actions of the Basques
in Spain; the struggle between the Plemia} and the Halloons in Belgium; the
conflicts between Greeks and Turks on Cyprus; between the Singhalese and Tamils

in Sri Lanka. and so forth.

Underlying all these inter-ethnic contradictions. like national proccsses as a whole,
in general, is a complex whole of socio-economic, political. and ideological

factors. They usually are closely interwoven. although only one or another of them
emerge in the foreground at a time.

In the final analysis. the inter-ethnic contradictions usually are determined by
socio-economic factors. This is demonstrated very graphically in cases in which,
owing to the non-uniformity of socio-econonic development inherent in capitalism,
changes take place in the relations among and roles of discrete nationalities in

the domestic life of multi-national states. In particular, a worsening in the
economic situation of discrete national minorities is a root cause of the exacerba-
tion of ethnic contradictions in Great Britain. This concerns primarily the decline
of the traditional sectors of the economy of North Ireland, Scotland. and Wales

kl
FINI(JFF1CJAI.IJSEZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a

Currently the rate of population increase varies broadly in individual regions of
the world, in different countries. As a result the population ratio of different
regions of the world is changing markedly. Thus, while in 1959 the inhabitants
of the developed countries (excluding the USSR), i.e. of non-USSR Europe, North.
America, Australia, Japan, and the United Arab Republic had accounted for 24.6
percent of the world's population and the developing countries-non-USSR Asia
(excluding Japan), Africa (excluding the United Arab Republic), and Latin America
accounted for 67.9 percent, in 1978 the corresponding figures were 20.8 and

73.0 percent, respectively. Thus, the share of the former regions decreased 3.8
percent and the share of the latter, increased 5.1 percent.45 i.e.the gap between
the populations of these two groups of countries has increased nearly 9 percent
in 20 years.

Marked differences between the developing and economically developed countries con-
tinue with respect to the basic demographic indicators. Thus, birth rate in the
developing countries is nearly twice as high as in the developed ones, but death
rate in the latter is nearly 35 percent lower than in the former. Correspondingly
there is the extremely broad gap between the average lifespans (46 years in Africa
against 71 years in Europe), which also exists with respect to the ratio between
the adult population and children. In the countries of Asia, Africa. and Latin
America, children usually account for more than 40 percent of the population, whereas
in the developed countries they account for from one-fourth to one-third of the po—
pulation (with the lowest proportions existing in Sweden, 20.7 percent, and
Hungary, 20.8 percent). The developed countries usually are characterized by a
high proportion of the elderly. This proportion is the highest in the ERG (21.3
percent), Sweden (21.0 percent), and Austria (20.5 percent).

The world's regions also differ greatly in so-called median age (with one-half of
people being younger than that age and the other half, older). Thus. in non-USSR
Europe median age is 32.5 years; in North Africa, 28.9 years; in Australia and
Oceania, 25.5 years; in non-USSR Asia. 21.2 years; in Africa, 17.8 years (in the
USSR, 29.3 years). In this context, the "youngest" countries are Iraq, Kenya.
Libya, Mali, Nicaragua, and Surinam-~where the median age is 16.0 years. and the
“oldest" countries are Sweden. the PRC, and the GDR. where it is more than 35
years.“6 All this inevitably affects the manpower resources of countries.

There also exist regional differences in population structure by gender: in Africa
and Latin America the proportions of males and females are roughly equal; in non-

USSR Europe there are 12.9 million fewer males; while in non—USSR Asia. conversely,
there are 46.9 million fewer females.47

what then are the developmental prospects of ethnodemographic processes on the
scale of the world as a whole? The answer to this question largely hinges on the
general tendencies of the future rate of change in population reproduction on our
planet. Among demographers there is no unanimity in determining these tendencies.
It is not unlikely. however, that in the future the differences in age structure

of population among the various countries will increase at a slower rate, although
the differences in the proportions of population inhabiting different regions of
the world will clearlv continue to increase for a long time yet.‘8 Thus, according

h3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to UN r orccasta, South Asia will become the world's most densely populated region
in 2100. Its population will increase from the current 1.6 billion to 4.1 billion.
which will by then account for some 40 percent of the world's population. In 2100
as well, the population of the African Continent will increase roughly to 2.19
billion from 400 million, i.e. it will account for about 20 percent of the inhabi-
tants of our planet. In that year. too. the population of Latin America will in—
crease to 1.8 billion from 366 million; of Europe. to 5&0 million from 686 million;
and of North America, to 318 million from 268 million."9

As for the changes in the population ratio among the world's countries. they are

a resultant of the interaction of demographic and ethnic processes. Altogether,
the proportion of the major ethnic groups in the nations of the world will increase.
Thus while in 1961 there were 66 countries with a population of more than 10 mil-
lion each. which accounted for 75 percent of the world's population, in 1978

the number of these countries rose to 67 and their share in the world population
was about 80 percent.50 We are thus dealing with one of the manifestations of the
integrative tendency of modern ethnic processes in the sphere of demography. This
tendency manifests itself in other forms as well, e.g. in the narrowing of the
ethnic mosaic of the inhabited world, in the global spread of the so--called urban
culture, etc. Judging from all. in the final analysis, the ethnointegrative ten-
dency is the dominant one. but. as we have seen. its course runs across its
dialectical and sometimes acutely contradictory interaction with the ethnodifferen-
tiating tendency. For this very reason, under capitalism. as pointed out previous-
ly, the current ethnic situation is pregnant in conflicts between nationalities and
ethnic groups. It is not by accident that nearly all the present-day conflicts.
all the hot spots on the planet, whether they arise in the Near East, in West
Europe. in South East Asia, in southern Africa, or on the American Continent, dis-
play a distinct ethno—nationa] ist or ethno-racial coloring.

Particularly evident against this background are the achievements of the Leniniat
nationalities' policy in our country, which convincingly demonstrate the well-known
thesis of the founders of Marxism that the disappearance of class antagonism will
entail the disappearance of antagonisms among nationalities. These achievements
are. on the whole, widely known. Hence. I will confine myself to the most general
information on ethnic processes proper in the USSR and the countries of the social-
ist community.5 as well as on the demographic aspects of these processes.

Recently. in particular. there has been a marked change in the numerical propor-
tions of the peoples of our country. These changes are chiefly due to definite
differences in the reproduction rate of the populations of various regions of this
country. Thus, during the 20-year period between the 1959 and 1979 censuses,

the population of the southern regions of this country increased by 75-100 percent
and more. whereas in the other regions the increase was 10-20 percent and sometimes
even less.52 This is inseparably associated with the problem—pointed out at the
26th CPSU Congress-~of the ethnodemographic aspects of manpower reproduction--the
surplus of manpower resources in some regions and their shortage in others. This.
in its turn, raises to the forefront the problem of conducting an ethnically dif-
ferentiated demographic policy adapted to the acute need to promote an increase

in birth rate among the peoples for which it is at present particularly low. This
problem has been, as known, mentioned at the 26th Congress: the report of comrade
L. I. Brezhnev especially pointed out that: ”a provision is being made for in-
creasing child allowances, especially in the case of giving birth to second and

Mt
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

third children."53 This proposal has already been partially embodied in new
legislation.54

As for the ethnosocial processes occurring at present in the USSR and other coun-
tries of socialism, the aforementioned teachings of Lenin about two tendencies

in the nationalities' problem are of immense significance to understanding these
processes. Of course, in this case, a mechanical application to the socialist
society of the theory of such tendencies operating in the capitalist society would
be absolutely incorrect. After all, the economic foundation of a people, its class
structure, and spiritual image get radically altered upon its transition from capi-
talism to socialism. But the ethnic qualities inhering in a pe0ple then survive
to a large extent (Russians remain Russians, Georgians remain Georgians. Uzbeks
remain Uzbeks).

socialism proceeds under the influence of such new patterns of ethnic relations as
the affirmation of the equality of races, peoples, and languages, and national self-
dctermination. The process of inter-ethnic integration. rapproachement of

peoples, likewise unfolds on a different economic and social basis under socialism.
The principal feature of this process then becomes equalization of the levels

the historic experience of the evolution in the USSR of a new historic community-
the Soviet nation, representing the first ever inter-national. inter-ethnic

peoples andnationalitiesconstituting this community is accompanied by the forma-
tion of a general Soviet culture. the spreading of the Russian language as

the lingua franca, and the strengthening of a unified general Soviet
consciousness.

The processes of rapprochement of nationalities under socialism are not limited
to any single country. To one extent or another, they encompass the entire
community of socialist countries. In this connection, this tendency manifests
itself far from uniformly in different spheres. It is very explicit, for example.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE¢JNLY

nity is under way, especially as regards intensifying their common ideological
interests. Along with the general antic-economic premises, an important role

in this context belongs to the varied forms of joint ideological activity, exten-
sive exchange of cultural values, and combining of scientific potential. In parti-
cular. socialist countries cooperate on a broad scale in the field of education
and enlightenment. A major role here is played by mutual exchange of students.
During the period from the 1950 until the early 1970s alone, more than 50,000
students from other socialist countries were graduated from higher educational in-
stitutions in the USSR. Exchange of scientific and technical infatuation among
the socialist countries has reached a major scale.

An important role in melding the spiritual life of the socialist countries is
played by their growing cultural exchange. This refers to creative encounters of
writers, artists, and art experts, festivals of various arts, exhibitions, days of
culture, regular radio and TV programs, joint work of representatives of the crea-
tive intelligentsia from various countries in creating works of art, etc.

All these growing contacts significantly contribute to both the equalization of the
cultural level and the consolidation of the community of ideological interests in
the spiritual life of the countries of the socialist conzunity. 9 This is leading
to the rise of a new socialist (communist) civilization? 0 to an important stride
forward on the path toward the emergence of the future global socio-cultural

human community.

FOOTNOTES

1. S. I. Bruk, "Naseleniye mira. Etnograficheskiy spravochnik" [The World's
Population. An Ethnographic Guidebook]. Moscow, Nauka, 1981, p 165, Table V.

2. For more detail see V. I. Kozlov. "Btnicheskaya demografiya" [Ethnic Demo-
graphy]. Moscow. Statistika. 1977. pp 33-46; "Strany i narody. Zemlya i
chelovecheatvo. Ohshchiy obzor" [Lands and Nations. The Earth and Mankind.
A General Survey]. Moscow. Hysl'. 1978, pp 180, 337-340; Bruk, op. cit..
pp 165-167, 170, 615. 427, 605, 637, 657, 658, 870-880.

3. V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy" [Complete works], Vol 26, p 121..

4. See Yu.v. Bromley, "The International and the National in the Construction of
Socialism." SOVBTSKAYA ETHNOGRAFIYA, No 5. 1977, p 11.

5. Note the need to distinguish between the terms "internationalization" and "inter-
nationalism." In the former case we are dealing with objective processes lead-
ing to the rise of international phonemena, the formation of international
unity. This precisely is the sense in which the term "internationalization" was
used by V. I. Lenin, speaking of the "internationalization of economic relations,"
"internationalization of capital." As for the term "internationalism," it
pertains to the sphere of social consciousness and denotes the adequate re-
Election in that consciousness of the tendency toward the internationalization
of the life of society. representing a historical law. The rise and existence

h6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of internationalisa stem from the fundamental interests of the working class
and manifest themselves in its ideology, politics, and social practice. The
basic goals of internationalism consist not only in the rapprochement of ne-
tions but also in the assurance of conplete unity of the working class so that
it may acconplish the task of fully liberating all workers from exploitation
as well as of building socialism and conmunisn.

Lenin, op. cit.

Yu. Ostrovit'yanov, "The Creative ﬂight of Lenin's Thought and Present-Day
Capitalism," KOHHUNIST, No 7, 1981, p 82.

See A. M. Kul'kin, P. V. Snirnov. ”The Internationalization of Hodern Capital:
Basic Contradictions and Development Trends," VOPROSY PILOSOPII, No 6, 1979;
R. S. Ovchinnikov, "Transnational Honopolies and the Historical Process."
NOVAYA I NOVKYSHAYA ISTORIYA, No 5, 1979.

See "Economic Integration in the Modern world," P3031!!! MIRA I SOTSIALIZHA,
No 7, 1973, pp 15-17.

Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 36, p 332.

"Imperlalizn 70-kh godov: uglubleniye obshchego krizisa" [Imperialism of the
1970s: the Deepening of the General Crisis]. The Prague. 1976, p 81.

"Hezhdunarodnoye soveahchaniye koamunisticheskikh i rabochikh partiy. noku-
menty i materialy" [International Conference of Communist and Workers Parties.
Documents and Materials]. Moscow, Politizdat, 1969, p 296.

Lenin. op. cit., Vol 26, p 126.

V. s. Senenov, "Internatsionalizm i obshchestvennyy progress" [Internationa-
lism and Social Progress], Moscow. 1978. pp 606-607.

K. N. Brutents, "Osvobodivshiyesya strany v 70-e gody" [The Liberated Coun-
tries in the 1970s], Moscow, 1979. p 135.

"Strany i narody," op. cit., p 323.

See "Hassovaya kul'tura--illuzii i deystvitel'nost'" [Mass Culture-Illusions
and Realtiy]. Moscow. Iskuastvo, 1975.

See H. T. Iovchuk. "Problems of the Development of Soviet Spiritual Culture
and the Modern Struggle of Ideas," VOPRDSY PILOSOPII, No 3, 1976. p 53.

See "Btnicheskiye protsessy v stranakh Yugo-Vostochnoy Azii" [Ethnic Processes

in the Countries of Southeast Asia]. Moscow, Nauka, 1976, p 167; B. V. Andria-
nov, "Formative Aspects of African Nations (as Exemplified by Kenya).""Rassy

1 narody" [Races and Nations], 7th ed., Moscow. Science. 1977, pp 175-176;

R. N. Ismailova, "Etnicheskiye problemy sovrenennoy Tropicheskoy Afriki"

"Ethnic Problems of Modern Tropical Africa], Moscow, Nauka, 1973, pp 183-185;

B. V. Andrianov. R. N. Ismailova. "Ethnic Groups and Ethnic Processes in Africa."
SOVETSKAYA WOGRAPIYA, No 5, 1979. p 27.

1:7
son omcm. use ONLY
20.
21.

22.

23.

2"
25.

26C

27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

37.

ton omcul. use ONLY

"Natsional'nyye probleny Kanady" [Nationality Problems of Canada], Moscow.
Nauka, 1979. pp 12-13.

"Natsionual'nyye protsessy Q Tasntral'noy Ameriks i Heksike" [Ethnic Processes
in Central America and Mexico], Moscow, Nauka. 1975, pp 116, 15‘. 176, 217.

See Sh. A. Rosina, V. i. Kozlov. E. L. Nitoburg. and L. N. Pursova, "Ethnic
Processes and Relations in the Countries of West Europe and North America,"
50V. ETNOGRAFIYA. No 5, 1975, pp 10-11.

V. I. Kozlov, "Ethnoracial Changes in the Conposition of the Population of
Great Britain." 80V. ETNOGRAFIYA, No 4. 1980.

Eogina et a1., op. cit., p 7.

See "0b etnicheskikh kitaytaakh vo V'yetname" [On Ethnic Chinese in Vietnam],
Moscow, Progress, 1979, p 12.

See Bogina et al.. op. cit.. p 8.

See H. Ya. Berzina, "Pornirovaniye etnicheskogo sostava naaeleniya Kanady" [The
Formation of the Ethnic Composition of the Population of Canada], Moscow,
Nauka. 1979, pp 26 and if.

Sec V. I. Kozlov. "Dinamika chislennosti narodov" [Population Dynamics of
Peoples], Moscow. Nauka, 1969, p 329.

See e.g. PRAYDA, 1981, 10 Oct.
See Eruk, op. cit., p 331.
Ibid.. p 473.

See L'vova, E. 8.. "The Ethnic Situation and Policy of the State of West Equa-
torial Africa," "Rassy 1 narody." 7th ed., Moscow, Nauka. 1977, p 189.

See "Yugo-Vostochnaya Aziya: problemy regional'noy obshchnosti" [Southeast Asia:
Problems of Regional Conmunityl. Moscow, Nauka, 1977. p 154.

See Yu. A. Osipov, "0n Problems of a Common Language in the Young Independent
States of Southeast Asia," "Rassy i narody," 5th ed.. Moscow. Nauka, 1975.
pp 138-140.

"Etnicheskiye protsessy v stranakh Yuzhnoy Azii" [Ethnic Processes in the
Countries of South Asia], Moscow. Nauka, 1975, pp 95-99.

See Ianailova, op. cit., p 198; "Etnicheskiye protseasy v stranakh Yugo-
Vbstochnoy Azii." op. cit., p 273.

See Eruk, op. cit., p 87.

MB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
39.
40.
‘1.
42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.

48.

49.
50.
51.
52.

S3.

54.

55.

56.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See V. I. Kochnev, "Bthnopolitical.Situation on the Indian Subcontinent."
"Rassy i narody," 5th ed., p 105.

See Begins, op. cit., p 6.

See Kochnev, op. cit., p 105.

See Basins. op. cit., p 6.

See U. V. Bronley, "Sovrenennyye probleny etnografii" [Present-nay Problems of
Ethnography]. Moscow, Science, 1981. p 322.

See Bruk. op. cit., pp 16, 24.

See PRAVDA, 1981. 16 June.

See Bruk, op. cit.. pp 16, 542, 684; ”Natsional'noye i internatsional'noye v
aovrenennon mire" [The National and the International in the Modern World],
Kishinev, Shtiintaa, 1981, pp 92-94.

See Bruk, op. cit.. pp 19-29, 39-42.

mm. . pp 42-43.

In the world as a whole toward the late 19609 the annual population increase
stabilized at the level of 70-73 million. whereupon it was followed by a
decrease: fron 19.5 in 1970 to 17.8 percent in 1978. This had been chiefly

due to the rather drastic decrease in the mean annual rate of population increase
in non-USSR Asia and Latin America on the whole. (Brut. op. cit., pp 20-29.)

PRAVDA, 1980. 16 June.

Bruk, op. cit.. p 93.

For more detail see Bronley. 80V. ETNOGRAPIYA, No 5, 1977, op. cit., pp 11-12.
See S. I. Brut, "The Soviet Nation," NADKA I ZBIZN'. No 4, 1981, pp 78-80.

"Haterialy XXVI s'yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow.
Politizdat. 1981, p 55.

PRAVDA, 1981, 31 March, 31 September.

"Sovetskiy narod--novaya istoricheakaya obahchnoat' 1yudey" [The Soviet Nation-
A New Historical Community of People], Moscow. 1975. pp 73-155.

See I. V. Dudinskiy, "The Operation of Econonic Laws of Socialism in the Horld
Socialist Economy." OBSHCHESTVENNYYB NAUKI, No 2, 1977. pp 40-41; B. H. Pugachev.
"Sblizheniye stran sotsializna. Voprosy teorii i praktiki" [The Rapprochenent
of the Countries of Socialism. Problena of Theory and Practice], Moscow, Nauka,
1981. pp 147-172.

R9
ron omml. use ONLY
56.

57.

58.

S9.

60.

FOR OFT1C1A1.USE1DNLY

For more detail see “Sovremenennye etnicheskiye protsessy v SSSR" [Present-
Day Ethnic Processes in the USSR], 2nd ed., Moscow, Nauka, 1977.

See I. V. Dudinskiy, "The Operation of the Economic Laws of Socialism in the
World Socialist Economy," OBSHCBESTVENNYYE NAUKI, No 2, 1977. pp 40-41;

B. H. Pugachev, "Sblizheniye stran sotsializna. Voprosy teorii i praktiki"
[The-Rapprochenent of the Countries of Socialisn: Problems of Theory and
Practice]. Moscow. Nauka, 1981, pp 147-172.

See K. I. Hikul'skiy, "Klassovaya struktura obshchestva v etranakh sotsializma"
[Class Structure of Society in the Countries of Socialism]. Moscow. Nauka,
1976; P. D. Pavlenok, "Formirovaniye i razvitiye sotsial'no-klassovoy struktury
sotsialisticheakogo obshchestva" [Formation and Development of the Social-
Class Structure of the Socialist Society]. Moscow, M60 Press, 1978; Pugachev,
op. cit., pp 58-87.

See T. I. Snegirova, "Dukhovnaya kul'tura razvitogo sotsialisticheskogo obshche—
stva. Probleny formirovaniya sotsialisticheskogo soznaniya v evropeyskikh
stranakh sotsializna" [The Spiritual Culture of the Developed Socialist Society.
Problems of the Formation of Socialist Consciousness in the European Countries
of Socialism]. Moscow, Nauka, 1981.

See H. Hchedlov, "0n the Becoming of the Columnist Civilization," MIST,
No 12. 1976, pp 35-36; by the same author. "Sotsializm-stanov1eniye novogo
tipa tsivilizatsii" [Socialism-the Becoming of a New Type of Civilization],
Moscow, 1980.

common: Izdntel'stvo: "New“. "Sam-Wu etnosraﬁyn". 1932

1386

080:

1800/ S91

50
FOR‘0HHCJALIEEZOBHJ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

GUIDANCE FOR LECTURERS ON 6011! ANNIVERSARY OP USSR

[Editorial Report] Moscow SLOVO LEKTORA in Russian No 5. May 1982, carries
on pp 1-8 a SSOO-Vord article titled "The Ever-Stronger Unity of the Soviet
People" by H. Sergeyev. The article provides explicit instructions for
Znsniye Society lecturers on what and how to say about the 60th anniversary
of the USSR. The following points are "recommended": "The establishment
of a society homogeneous in terms of social class is the basis of the
social-political, ideological, and international unity of the Soviet people.
The leading role of the working class in this process." "Friendship of the
peoples is a powerful moving force of societal progress in the USSR." And
"In unity with the people is the strength of the party; in unity with the
party, in its leadership is the strength of the people." The article pro-
vides extensive anplifications on each of these points. [COPlklcurz
Izdatel'stvo "Znaniye", 1982]

C80: 1800/ 668

51
FilltlﬂﬂCIAl.USEIMULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REGIONAL

INFLUENCE OF RUSSIAN LANGUAGE 0N UZBEK
Moscow VOPROSY YAZYKOZNANIYA in Russian No 2, Mar-Apr 82 pp 75-79

[Article by 1. Yu. Asfandiyarov: "Russian Lexical Borrowings in the Uzbek
Language"]

[Excerpts] Linguistic construction during the Soviet period is characterized
by an intensive development of the national languages of the peoples of the
USSR, and by an expansion of their social functions. "The Soviet Union,"

as is noted by F. P. Filin. "has turned into a country of universal literacy
in which all of the national languages, those which have long had writing
and those which have newly acquired it, have become a powerful lever of cul-
tural progress, and have risen to the level of the most developed languages
of the world which are capable of transmitting all of the information that
has been accumulated by modern civilization." [1]

Of all of the layers of language, vocabulary has been subject to the greatest
changes, having been added to during this period by an enormous number of

new words and meanings. The enrichment and development of the word composi-
tion of the national languages of the peoples of the USSR is being accomplished
along two lines: a) by means of the creation of words through a language's
own internal resources, including the direct translation of foreign language
lexemes--everyday words and terms; b) by means of the borrowing and assimila-
tion of foreign language lexemes; the process of creating semi-direct trans—
lations may be included here. It is the great Russian language [2-4] which

has become for the fraternal Soviet peoples the language of inter-national
communication that is the foreign language source for the Uzbek language,

as it is for other languages of the USSR. It is very characteristic here

that the Russian language which itself has absorbed a substantial strata of
international lexicon, chiefly in the area of terminology, transmits this
wealth to the national languages of the peoples of the USSR.

As the specialists point out, the most rapidly developing part of the word
composition of any literary language in the Soviet Union is terminology.

in most of the languages of the Soviet peoples, 70-80 percent of the new scien-
tific and technical, socio-political, pedagogical and other terms is made

up of borrowings from the Russian language and through it from other languages.
But also purely Russian words are borrowed. According to the definition of

Sh. R. Rashidov, "terms, concepts, and categories which have been engendered

S2
FINI¢HﬂﬁC1A1.lEﬂE(MULY
F0!‘0FFKIA1.USE¢3NLY

by the modern Russian language enter organically and grow into all of the

other languages of the peoples of our country like, incidentally, the languages
of many other peoples of the world. who today on our planet does not know,

for example, the Russian word "sputnik," "Bolshevik." and "soyuz," the Russian
term "pyatiletka," such a philosophical category as "Leninism," and hundreds

of ether Russian words. They are not in need of translation. They are under-
standable to everybody." [5] Thanks to the common borrowings from the Russian
language of both ancient Russian words and words of international origin,

a common lexical fund is being formed in the languages of the peoples of the
USSR which is considerably facilitating their inter-national communication.

Even during pre-revolutionary times the development and enrichment of the

word composition of the Uzbek language took place to a definite extent under
the influence of a growing number of loan words from the Russian language

which resulted from the socio-political and economic changes in the life of

the region when the Uzbek population was in direct contact with the Russian
population. The process of borrowing became especially intensified during

the last third of the 19th century. Russian words were assimilated chiefly

in oral communication and, for this reason, most of them changed their phonetic
make-up.

in conclusion, it should be noted that the enrichment of the lexicon of the
national languages under the influence of the Russian language, as well as

the lexicon of the Russian language under the influence of the national lan-
guages. is in essence a progressive phenomenon which promotes not only an
expansion of the vocabularies of the borrowing languages, but also to a defin-
ite extent their further development as a whole, a fact which has become
possible only in socialist society which guarantees the free and equal develop-
ment of the languages of the peoples of the USSR.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. F. P. Filin, "0n the Important Tasks of Soviet Linguistics," V YA, No 1,
l981, p 3.

2. V. V. Vinogradov, "The Basic Stages of the History of the Russian Language,"
R. YAZ. V S"K., No 5, I940.

1. i. P. Pronchonko, "The Lexicon and Hord Formation of the Russian Language
During the Soviet Era," Moscow, 1975, pp 82-83.

a. V. V. lvanov, "The Russian Language in the Light of the Peoples and Lan-
guages of the Soviet Union," V YA, No 3, 1978, pp 5-6.

5. Sh. R. Rashidov. “The Language of Friendship and Brotherhood," Tashkent,
Publishing House of the CC C? of Uzbekistan. 1978, p 55.

53
FOBGNHHCJALIEHEONLN
b.

7.

8.

10.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. Vinogradov. "The Great Russian Language." Moscow, 1965.

N. A. Baskakov, "The Development of the Languages and the Writing of the
Peoples of the USSR (Based on the Material of Turkish Terminology in the
Languages of the Peoples of the USSR)." Moscow, 1969.

Yu. D. Desheriyev, "The Role of the Russian Language and of Russian Culture
in the Development of the Languages and Cultures of the Peoples of the
USSR." In the book: "The Relationship Between the Development of National
Languages and National Cultures," Moscow. 1980.

C. G. Musabayev. "The Lexicon of the Contemporary Kazakh Language: Abstract
of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of a Scholarly Degree of Doctor of
Philological Sciences,“ Alma-Ara, 1960.

S. A. Dzhafarov, "The Lexicon of the Contemporary Azerbaijan Language:
Abstract of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of a Scholarly Degree of
Doctor of Philological Sciences," Baky, 1959.

i. M. Akhunzyanov. "Russian Borrowings in the Tatar Language," Kazan'.
I968.

l. K. Beloded. "Lenin's Theory of National Language Construction in
Socialist Society." Moscow, 1972.

A. K. Borovkov, "The Uzbek Literary Language During the Period 1905-1917,"
Tashkent. 1940.

A. c. Guiyamov, "The Development of the Uzbek Literary Language During
the Soviet Period," iZV. AN UzSSR, No 5, 1948.

N. Mirzayev, "Soviet-international Words in the Uzbek Periodical Press
(1965-1950): Abstract of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of the Scholarly
Degree of Candidate in Philological Sciences," Tashkent, 1951.

N. D. Bulatov. "The Influence of the Russian Language on the Uzbek Language
(Problems of Lexicon and Word Formation): Abstract of a Dissertation

Written in Pursuit of the Scholarly Degree of Candidate in Philological
Sciences." Moscow. 1953, p b.

R. Daniyarov. "The Borrowing of Russian-international Personal Names by
the Uzbek Language: Abstract of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of
the Scholarly Degree of Candidate in Philological Sciences," Tashkent, 1967.

l Rasulov, "The Development of the Lexicon of the Uzbek Language During
the Period of the Great Patriotic War: Abstract of a Dissertation Written
in Pursuit of the Scholarly Degree of Candidate in Philological Sciences,"
Tashkent, 1955.

FIHRCNHHCJAl.lEﬂE(ﬂWLY
I9.

20.

2|.

22.

23.

C. Mukhamedzhanova, "Certain Problems of the Development of the Uzbek
Lexicon: Abstract of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of the Scholarly
Degree of Candidate in Philologicai Sciences," Tashkent. 1972.

S. Akabirov. "The Lexigraphicai Working Up of Terminology in Bi-Language
Dictionaries (Based on the Materials of Russian-Uzbek and Uzbek-Russian
Dictionaries): Abstract of a Dissertation Written in Pursuit of the
Scholarly-Degree of Candidate in Philological Sciences," Tashkent, 1969.

A. N. Tikhonov. "The Role of the Russian Language in the Enrichment of
the Lexicon of the Uzbek Language." In the book: "The Russian Language
as the Means of Inter-National Communication," Moscow, 1977, p 155.

R. Dontserov, "Uzbek Tili Tekhnik Terminologiyasining Ayrim Masalalari."
Toshkent, 1977.

N. N. Ruziyev, "The Methods of Transmitting into the Uzbek Language Russian
Hord Combination Terms of the Adjective-Noun Type: Abstract of a Disser-
tation Written in Pursuit of the Scholarly Degree of Candidate in Philolo-
gical Sciences," Tashkent, 1979.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Voprosy Yazykoznsniys", 1982

2959
C50:

1830/350 mo

55

FOR<OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY