FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10547

27 May 1982

USSR Repoﬂ

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 16/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trancliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by e ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGIT HHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MBRSHIP OP
kWI'BRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
01? THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I VA III I chm.- UU.‘ u. can

JPRS

27M:

USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(2000 16/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL

Foreign Policy Views of 0.8. National Security Council Aide
Scored
(N. V. Romanovskiy; VOW ISTORII, Mar 82) ...........

'Hypertrophied' Am Role in PRC me To Distrust of Mass

Spontaneity
(L. N. Gudoshnikov; SOVBTSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PEAVO,

“81‘ 82) .00..0Cosooooootoooooeoonoooooo.0.00.00.00.00...

NATIONAL

Mistakes in Soviet Law Enforcement Analyzed
(N. N. Voplenko; SOVETSKOYE OOSUMRSTVO I PRAVO, Apr 82)

Distinctive Siberian-Russian Language Found by Scholar
(wtorial new”) .COOOCCOIOOOOOOIOOC..OOOOOOCCCOOOICOOC

oa- [III-USSR-35E

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL -

FOREIGN POLICY VIM OF U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL AIDE SCORE!)
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 3, liar 82 pp 27-62
[Article by N. V. Ronanovskiy: "Richard Pipes - Professional Anti-Soviet"]

[Bxcerptsl The political role of specialists on the USSR within the U.S. govern-
eent nachinery has increased significantly in recent years. Richard Pipes. the
author of a nuaber of works on the history of Russia and the USSR. has risen

to the fairly high position of aide to the U.S. National Security Council. His
political posture as a "vehement anticommist from the academic world" is
familiar to a broad range of Soviet people iron numerous publications in the
Soviet press. Historians also have on nunerous occasions been forced to refute
Pipes' atteepts to "rewrite" history, whether it was the problem of forsation
of the USSR, the origin of the Saint Petersburg Union of Struggle for the Liber-
ation of the Working Class. the history of the early period of the Russian
social democratic novenent, or the problens of the Soviet and Russian intelli-
gentsia. The present article is concerned with the question: What kind of
historian of our country is Pipes. and what are his views on the problems he
considers?

Pipes' frank and hostile anti-Sovietisn per-eates his statements on issues of
USSR foreign policy. This vehement anti-Soviet is truly at hone in this area.
The author began dealing with these probleas in the early 1970's. At that
tine he was a professor eneritus at Harvard University and director of the
Russian Research Center. In the United States he was considered a "prominent
specialist" on Russian history. The scbolar's acadenic position and reputa-
tion were subordinated to the objectives of vigorous political activity and
backing up those circles who were not pleased by the processes of detente that
appeared in the early 1970's, who needed to incite anti-Sovietisn. spur on the
arms race. and build up fear of "comunist aggression." Pipes became a very
active spokesman for the "anti-detente" school. Since the early 1970's Pipes
has appeared lore and more often in popular, far tron academic. publications
(er-y publications, ultraright publications, and publications directly linked
to special services).65 As an "expert" he takes part in co-ittee work of
the 0.8. Congress,“ attacks the policy of detente violently, and fights for
a hard line toward the Soviet Union (the Soviet press has already pointed this
out).

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this cycle of publications by Pipes a large number of concrete issues,
both large and small, concerning the international situation, nilitary aspects
of detente, and Soviet foreign policy have been tauched in passing.

The position of the professional anti-Soviet was influenced both by the general
situation in the world and by the situation in Sovietology circles involved
with issues of Soviet foreign policy. It is comn knowledge that in this area,
in particular the question of the origin of the supposed aggressiveness of the
Soviet Union (which is greatly exaggerated in the United States), two primary
schools exist and compete with one another. The followers of one emphasize

the "national" aspect ("Russian" motifs), while the others stress the
"comaunist" principle.66 The debate between them sometimes becomes quite bit-
ter. It was that way, in particular, in the early 1950's, at the height of the
"cold war," when Pipes' teacher 14. Karpovich was drawn into the battle.67

A dispute arose on these same problems in relation to Pipes' foreign policy
views.68 It is perfectly obvious that he is inclined to the "nationalistic"
version, employing the following initial criteria: "Russian foreign policy,"
"Russian traditions," "Russian history," "Russian national character," and so
on. But Pipes also demonstrates an ability to dodge and use conflicting evalu-
ations.69 Pipas' "nationalistic" premise is ill-founded if for no other reason
than that the history of Russia is the history of a country of multiple na-
tionalities. Limiting himself to the sphere of the ruling circles and their
ideology, Pipes ignores the true creators of Russian history, the popular
masses, the struggle of the working classes, and the struggle of the people for
freedom, people's power, social justice, and the like. In general, he does

not see the history of the people, of the "lower orders."

The same thing should also be said about Pipes' euphasis on the historical roots
of Soviet foreign policy. "The roots of the Soviet regime go deep into Russian
history, especially the history of the era before Peter," he asphasized in
statements before the special v.5. Senate Connittee on SALT, while starkly
contrasting Russia to the west. In this way he constructs analogies between

the foreign policy of Tsarian and the policies of the Soviet Union.

If we attempt to define the methodological Credo of Pipes in one word, it is
anti-historicisn. Pipes' schemes and anaolgies flagrantly distort historical
reality. He resolutely rejects the idea that the October Revolution and the
Soviet order broke with the traditions of old Russia, and the idea that the
legacy of the sutocracy cannot be applied as a key to interpreting modern times.
In general he sees no difference at all between old Russia and the Soviet Union.
"I believe that this idea is incorrect,"" he writes about the famous statement
from the "Manifesto of the Columnist Party," which characterizes socialist
revolution as the "most decisive break" with the past.72 Soviet historians have
pointed out the anti-historical, anti-scientific nature of such parallels, which
are very widespread in bourgeois historiography, many times.73 The fact that
Pipes "believes" in the succession of traditions between old Russia and the
Soviet Union does not change the real state of affairs. The foreign policy of

a particular state is determined by its social order. Our policy is a policy

of peace and securing conditions for building comnism.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pipes' preemptory, one-sided approach and refusal to consider objective
reality are embodied fully in his foreign policy excursions into history. And
they are folloued by the set of irresponsible statements usually held in the
spirit of the ”cold war" on such exceptionally important aspects of Soviet
foreign policy and Soviet-American relations as the level of armament, the
ratio of forces between the USSR and the United States, the relationships be-
tween development of military hardware and foreign policy. international rela-
tions in Europe and on other continents, and much more. Pipes' views invari-
ably correspond to the objectives and interests of the most aggressive circles
of American imperialism.

Here is a typical example. The title of one of Pipes' articles speaks for it-
self: "Why does the Soviet Union tLink that it can wage and win a nuclear war?"
(It is remarkable how this echoes the interests of the present U.S. Adminis-
tration.) Pipes' reasoning is based on the same pseudohistorical analogies
mixed with distorted figures on the Soviet armed forces. These fabrications
have been solidly refuted from the Soviet side. In interviews with the news-
paper PRAVDA and later the magazine DER SPIEGEL, and during his visit to West
Germany, L. I. Brezhnev stated clearly and unambiguously, as did D. P. Ustinov
in his report devoted to the 64th anniversary of Great October, that the Soviet
Union resolutely opposes nuclear war, global or limited, and views such a mili-
tary clash involving the use of nuclear weapons as a catastrophe for the human
race in which there could be no winners and losers.7“ The inhumane character
of statements about the possibility of nuclear war under contemporary condi-
tions was emphasized with complete substantiation.

Pipes addresses his "studies" in the field of Soviet foreign policy to influ-
ential circles in Washington. He aspires to the role of mentor. He called
one of his statements a "crash course in applied Russian history for those who
make policy."75 Pipes' irresponsibility is boundless. He bases his foreign
policy assessments and conclusions on semianecdotal statements, foolish aphor-
isms, bare statements. and direct fabrications. Anti-Sovietism is the foundation
of all his advice and recommendations. Pipes' "methodology," as we have seen,
offers the broadest opportunity for fabrications and distortions. He exhorts
the members of the SALT subcommittee to believe that the Russians, supposedly
because of their national characteristics, have a general, historically inbred
"aggressiveness,“6 and that the Soviet leadership is trying to establish the
"communist world" by force.77 In his blindness Pipes declares that the Soviet
order is "illegal." 5 and not just in the historical sense but even in the
legal sense. His statement that "the Soviet population on the whole lives
worse than it did under Tsarism and in the early 1920's" is equally bare and
unfounded.79 Re is a professional anti-chiet. and a pseudoacholarly one.
Pipes ignores the expression of the will of Soviet people and vast statistical
data that testifies to a rise in the standard of living of Soviet people,
successes in solving the housing problem, the steady rise in the level of edu-
cation. the consolidation and development of socialist democracy, and the
unity of the (knnunist Party and the Soviet people. Pipes' anti-Soviet
fabrications and slander are aimed at justifying the aggressive foreign policy
of the United States and sowing mistrust and hostility toward the USSR among
ordinary Americans. Pipes is a historian who has turned into a professional

3
FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OWWWCJAI.USEIDNLH

anti-Soviet. This metamorphosis, it seems, is instructive for Sovietology.
Outwardly this discipline resembles an iceberg: it gives the appearance of

a scholarly, scientific, and objective discipline, but the underwater part is
the main part, and it is tied with the establishment, with the imperialist
special services, with the most aggressive representatives of the ruling classes,
and with their policy that is directed against peace and detente, against
peaceful coexistence between states with different secial systems, with a
policy that aims at social revenge and a global struggle against communism.

The example of Pipes also shows other characteristics of this category of
Sovietologists, such as their outdatedness, their refusal to consider the
realities of the contemporary world, and their stubborn yearning to go back

in history. Sovietology is a very dangerous discipline for the cause of

peace, and the example of Pipes confirmst this completely. Pipes' conceptions
reflect the class interest of the enemies of socialism, the worldview, ideology,
and politics of those representatives of this class which is leaving the his-
torical scene who are ready to sacrifice the entire human race to prolong

their domination. This is exactly why Pipes is ideally suited for the current
U.S. administration. Mia hostile preaching is evidence of the renewed vigor

of the aggressive, unprinciplrd imperialist circles.

FOOTNOTES

64. See R. Pipes, "Russia's Mission, America's Destiny. The Premises of
U.S. and Soviet Foreign Policy," ENCOUNTER, 1970, Vol 35, No 6; Pipes,‘
"why Russians Act Like Russians"; Pipes, "Soviet Foreign Policy: Back-
ground and Perspective," SURVEY, 1971, Vol 17, No 6; Pipes, ”Why the
Soviet Union Thinks It Could Fight and Win a Nuclear War," COMMENTARY,
1977, Vol 64, No l; Pipes, "Soviet Global Strategy," COMMENTARY, 1980,
Vol 69, No 4, etc.

65. R. Pipes, "International Negotiation. Some Operational Principles of
Soviet Foreign Policy," Hashington, 1972. This was Pipes' statement to
the Senate Subcommittee on National Security and International Operations.
The chairman of the subcommittee was the well-known senator M. Jackson.
Pipes' "Why Russians Act Like Russians" was his statement to the Senate
Special Subcommittee on SALT. Pipes was the chairman of Team 8, formed
in 1976 as a consulting committee for the President of the United States
on the conduct of intelligence work abroad in order to develop a docu-
ment on the strategic objectives of the USSR which would supplement and
refine the report submitted by the CIA (COMMENTARY, 1977, Vol 64, No l,
p 21). He should also note Pipes' participation in the debate with '
former U.S. ambassador to the Soviet Union G. Kennan ("Encounter with
Kennan. The Great Debate. Pipes, R. Mr. X's Revisions," London, 1979,
pp 123-130, 165-167).

66. See Ye. Yu. Bougsh, "Mif ob 'Eksporte' Revolyutsii i Sovetskaya Vneahnyaya
Prlitika" [The Myth of Exporting Revolution and Soviet Foreign Policy],
Moscow, 1965; B. I. Marushkin, "Istoriya i Politika. Amerikanskaya
Burzhuaznaya Istoriografiya Sovetskogo Obschestva" [American Bourgeois

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
67.

68.

69.

70.

71.
72.
73.
76.
75.
76.

77.

78.

79.

INDR‘OFFICIAI.IISEI(NNLY

Historiography of Soviet Society], Moscow, 1969- pp 323-376; N. V.

ngladin, "Alerican Bourgeois Ideas of Soviet roreigh Policy and Their
Bankruptcy," VOPROSY ISTORII KPSS, 1978, Mo 11, and others.

See NEH YORK TIMES, 8 July 1951, p 8; R. SIall-Stocki, "The Nationality
Problem of the Soviet Union and Russian Coanuaist Iaperialisn,"
Milwaukee, 1952, pp 306, 383-388.

H. Rrasnou, "Richard Pipes' Foreign Strategy: Anti—Soviet or Anti-Russian,"
RUSSIAN REVIEW, 1979, vol 38, No 2; R. Pipes, "Response to Vladislav G.
Krasnou”; J. Geran Pilon, "Letter to the Editors," RUSSIAN RBVIRH, 1980,

Vol 39, No 6.

RUSSIAN REVISE, 1980, Vol 39, No 4, p 536.

R. Pipes, "Uhy Russians Act Like Russians," p 52; R. Pipes, "Mr. X's
Revisions,“ p 126; R. Pipes, "Russia's Mission, America's Destiny," p 11.

R. Pipes, "Response to "ladislsu G. Rrasnou," p 193.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Works], Vol 6, p 666.

Marushkin, op. cit., pp 108-130.

PRAVDA, 27 October and 3, 7, and 24 Rovenber, 1981.

R. Pipes, "Reeponse...," op. cit., p 192.

R. Pipes, ”International Negotiation," p 6.

R. Pipes, "Russia's Mission...," op. cit., p 7; R. Pipes, "Why Russians...,"
op. cit., p 53; R. Pipes, "International Negotiations," p 2; R. Pipes,
"Interview," U. S. NEHS AND NORLD REPORT, 1977, Vol 82, No 25, p 66;
R. Pipes, "Soviet Global Strategy,9 p 31; U. S. NEWS AND WORLD REPORT,
1980, Vol 88, No 9, p 33.

R. Pipes, "Why Ruseians...," op. cit., p 52; R. Pipes, "Soviet Global
Strategy," p. 32; R. Pipes, "Mister X's Revisions," p 125.

R. Pipes, "Why Russians...," op. cit., pp 52, 55.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982.

11,176

CSO:

1800/461

5
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

'HYPERTROPHIEI' ARMY ROLE IN PRC DU! 10 DISTRUST 0P MASS SPONTANBITY
Moscow SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVC in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 111-118

[Article by L. N. Gudoshnikov, sector chief at the Institute of the Far East of

the USSR Academy of Sciences, doctor of juridical sciences, professor: "0n the
Political Regime in China"!

[Text] The petty bourgeois counter-revolution in China and the degeneration of

the PRC into an aggressive social chauvlnistic state and an accomplice of imperial-
ism and reaction is one of the most tragic events of our day. In its time the for-
nation of the PRC was greeted ecstatically by communists and by the progressive
forces of the entire world. It had completed a lohg revolutionary process in the
country. and many years of stubborn struggle against foreign imperialism and
domestic reaction. The defeat and expulsion by the Soviet Army of the Japanese

China. led by the communists, to create a solid revolutionary base with USSR
assistance in the Northeast of the country. From here a powerful offensive by

the revolutionary armies was deployed which led to the collapse of the reactionary
Kuomingtang regime that was supported by American imperialism and to the estab-
lishment of people's power on the entire territory of the country, with the ex-
ception of the province of Taiwan and several coastal islands where, with United

Chinese communists of many years of experience in the construction of people's
power and. especially, by the possibility of asking use of the comprehensive
experience of the advanced socialist countries and, first of all, of the Soviet
Union. Unfortunately, the Chinese people did not succeed in making full use of
the experience of world socialisn because at the end of the 1950's Mao Zedong's
nationalistic line predominated in the Chinese leadership. As for the utilization
of the experience of the liberated areas of China, it received a very one—sided
development chiefly through the hypertrophy of the role of the stay in the
political structure of the country, while a great deal of the positive experience
in democratic construction in these areas was later consigned to oblivion.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tutions of the socialist type which had been consolidated in the 1954 PRO Consti-
tution, the 1956 Charter of the CCP, the charter documents of the single front

and other public organizations, and in a number of legislative and other normative
acts. However, by themselves those institutions were not able to effectively
oppose the "cultural revolution" which was carried out by the extremist wing of the
Chinese leadership headed by Mao Zedong and which subordinated the armed forces to
itself. This revolutionary change was possible because of a special position of
the army in Chinese society and in the Chinese state.

In China, the army is not merely a part of the state apparatus, along, for example,
with administrative agencies. the courts. and so forth, but the officially de-
clared basis of the state. The army was long ago declared to be a model for all
of society which is steadily being militarized. This position of the army is
partially connected with its special role in the Chinese revolution: During the
course of the long struggle of the armed revolution with the armed counter-
revolution, the revolutionary army frequently became the creator of party and public
organizations and of agencies of people's power. A centralized army organization
of the revolutionary forces arose much earlier than the centralized state system.
Beginning with the middle of the 1930's the top leadership of the CCP coincided

in personnel with the command and political leadership of the army. The Military
Council (Military Commission) of the CC of the CCP occupied the position of the
leading body in the party hierarchy.1 In addition, the position of the army in
China was influenced by the militarist traditions of the past, a fact which has
been admitted by the leaders of the CC? themselves. [1] But all of this in and
of itself did not yet predetermine the preservation of the traditions of mili-
tarization in the administration of the country and in its life, including the
army's special position in the state. The preservation of the special position of
the army was a matter of interest, above all, for Mao Zedong who, like almost every
petty bourgeois political leader, gravitated toward military methods of the admin-
istration of the state and society. The "cultural revolution" was a seizure of
power in the country by the most extremist and chauvinist wing of the Chinese
leadership which intended to make use of the enormous organizational and
mobilization possibilities of the new system for the historically most rapid
achievement of hegemonist Great Ban ends. As a result of the "cultural revolu-
tion,” popular democracy in China was in fact eliminated as a political regime and
replaced by a military democratic dictatorship of the social chauvinistic Mao
Zedong group.

At the same time, it should be noted that the "cultural revolution" was not a one-
tine act. but the completion of a process of the seizure of power by the above-
nsmed group. The process itself which reflected the struggle of two lines in the
leadership of the CCP had begun at the end of the 1950's, but its prehistory goes
back to the 1930's when Mao Zedong and his minions succeeded in striking the first
serious blow against the party's internationalist forces. After the formation of
the CCP Cao Gang was removed from office and then killed, and this was followed

by a campaign of the slaughter of cadres in connection with the struggle against
the "anti-party bloc of Gas Gang-Rao Shushi" (1953), the campaign of struggle
against the so-called right-wing bourgeois elements (1957), and the punishment of

Peng Dehua, Zhang Hentian, and others (1959). As a result, the internationalist
forces in the CO? were greatly weakened.

7
lﬂﬂltﬂﬂﬂClAl.USllMVLY
I1)R OWWHCJAI.IEHE(NNLY

During the noisy political campaigns which followed one after another and which
were accompanied by mass repressions, the Haoists in practice had demonstrated
their hostility to the real power of the people, their distrust in its creative
abilities and initiative and energy, and an open fear of the people's will. Be-
nlnninx 91th the end of the 1950's there began to grow bureaucratic distortions

in the state and party apparatus of the PRC which were expressed in an endeavor

to militarize state and social life. to create a single hierarchical apparatus for
the administration of state and society, nullify the role of representative
bodies, emasculate the law, discredit the experience of the construction of social-
ism in the USSR and other socialist countries, and so forth. At the same time.
although they were subjected to strong distortion, formally the basic political
institutions of the PRC were preserved and could be used by forces in opposition
to Mao Zedong.

This became especially clear when Mao Zedong entered into conflict with Liu
Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping who were trying to carry out a great power policy without
the crazy ideas characteristic of Mao Zedong of the type of the failed "Great
Leap Forward" (1958-1959! and with the use of rational methods of administration
and economic management. Host of the cadres of the local and central apparatus
of the state, party, and public organizations were on the side of these leaders.
Seeing that the real power was slipping out of his hands, Mao.2edong at the head
of a group of close associates resorted to a monstrous action-the scrapping of
the constitutional bodies of the state and the charter bodies of the COP and of
public organizations. This scrapping was carried out by "support troops of the
leftists" who had been worked over psychologically in the Maoist spirit and youth
shock detachments of pupils which had been created outside of the framework of
the party and Konsomol, by young workers and employees--the Hongweibing ("Red
Guards")--who had been corrupted under the influence of Maoist propaganda and
detachments of the Tiaofan ("Rebels") which joined them at the end of 1966 and

were active only at the first stage of the coup, later yielding their place to
soldiers.

The purpose of the coup was to have wider reprisals against the real and potential
(and sometimes imaginary) political opponents of Mao Zedong and his entourage. As
a result of the coup, not only was a new political regime created, but also a new
power mechanism which was alienated from society and in all of its elements
obedient to the working group. The army was becoming its chief component part.
The communist party was not eliminated altogether. but under the sign bearing its
name a new political organization was created-the uncomplaining executor of the
designs of the "Great Helmsman," as Mao Zedong began to be named at that time in
the PRC official press. A similar fate was prepared for public organizations.
Both with regard to the methods of its formation and to the methods of its work.
the state apparatus became completely isolated from the people. But this is not
all--the coup led to a change in the state's basic goal which previously had been
formulated as the construction of a socialist society. Now, although the
socialist slogans were not removed. the chief goal became the creation of a
militarist power capable of making a claim at first to regional and, then, to
world hegemony.

8
I!”I(Nﬂﬂ(lAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

A military bureaucratic regime was established in China which was characterized
above all by the all-penetrating militarization of state and social life that
manifested itself in the ruling elite having its basis in the army and in the
training of the basic cadres of the power apparatus through the People's Libera-
tion Army of China, in the spreading of the army system to labor processes, the
militarization of education, the universal establishment of a military-command
style in the work of state institutions and public organisations, and so forth.
This regime was also characterized by a bureaucratic isolation from the masses,
the complete ignoring of the will of the people, and an emphasis in the perfor-
mance of adainistration on a vast "ganbu" strata--professiona1 bureaucrats

strictly subordinated on the vertical and selected through an especially
established procedure.

The establishment of a military bureaucratic regime in China was facilitated by
a number of factors. Cultural backwardnesa, the preservation of feudal and
semi-feudal traditions, and also, to a certain extent, the ideological influence
of militarist cliques which had been dominant for a long time, and the influence
of China-centric ideas-all of this taken together facilitated the introduction
of military bureaucratic methods of administering the country and the suppression
and dispersal of democratic institutions.

At the same time, the establishment of a military bureaucratic dictatorship in
China was not an inevitable consequence of the social conditions in which the
People's Revolution had been victorious in that country; indeed, it contra-

dicted the paths for the transformation of society which had been chosen by the
Chinese people.

The consolidation and development of the gains of the revolution and rapid pro-
gress towards socialism could have been brought about by such factors as fidelity
by the leadership of the CC? to Harxism—Leninism, a strengthening of the prole-
tarian character of power, and close relations and fraternal friendship with the
CPSU and USSR and with all of the socialist countries and Marxist-Leninist
parties, and with the world socialist system. However, the operation of these
factors was artificially cut short by Mao Zedong and his followers. The death
of Mao Zedong, the departure from China's political scene of his closest en-
tourage ("The Band of Four"), and definite changes in the life of the country and
in its political system did not, unfortunately, lead to the restoration of the
operation of these factors and, consequently. to a change in the political regime
among whose basic criteria are the character of the party, its role and policies
in society, the operational methods of state power, the real possibility for the
use of their rights and freedoms by the workers, and the state's foreign policy
orientation. [2]

Measures to create an effective apparatus for administering the state and society
have become an important part of the domestic political course of the present
Chinese leadership. In addition, the path has been chosen of the formal restora-
tion of the basic institutions of the political system which existed in the early
1960's, with the simultaneous elimination of a number of state and public insti-
tutions which served Mao Zedong and his "orthodox" followers as weapons in their

9
FOR'OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

struggle for power and which were created by them during the course of or after
the "cultural revolution"; for example, the "revolutionary committees." the

ments for the struggle against capitalist roaders' in the public security

agencies, "schools of the Seventh of May," "theoretical detachments,” the city
"workers' militia," and so forth. It is necessary to observe that some of the
tendencies of a return to the previous political system had already taken shape
during Mao Zedong’s life: Thus, already in 1969 the restoration had begun of the
structure of the party whose committees and organizations, with the exception of
those in the army, had been smashed during the period of the "cultural revolution";
in the early 1970's the elimination was begun of the "gongqianfa"-—united puni-
tive agencies of the time of the "cultural revolution" which combined the functions
of security, procura'or, and court agencies-~and judicial agencies began to be
restored; in 1973 trade union, women's, and youth organizations which had been
dispersed in 1966 were restored to the provincial level, and so forth.

China’s post-Mao Zedong leadership has accelerated this process and, at the same
time. has resolutely eliminated all of the political institutions which were
created by its "orthodox" opponents. By the beginning of the 1980's, in its
organizational forms, the political system of the PRC had ceased to differ
essentially from that which existed before the "cultural revolution." 0f the
component parts of the political system of the PRC, the greatest importance is

basic part of the work to carry out the ambitious program of "four moderniza-
tions."3 At the same time, this program has also been put at the center of the
work of the CC? and of public organizations. The new Chinese legislation is also
directed in the first place at its realization. [3]

strengthening the entire state machine and, especially, the agencies of security,
of the procurator's office, and of the courts. This bureaucratic apparatus is
formally based on definite legal norms which, in fact, serve as an external cover
for the repressive essence of the regime. In practice, the chief criterion for

category of "enemies.“ In establishing an alliance with the world imperialist
bourgeoisie which is aimed against world socialism, the Chinese leaders are
shifting their blow from the "remnants of the old exploiting classes" to
"counter-revolutionary" and "enemy agents" among whom are usually numbered
ideological and political opponents of the authorities. and also everybody who
does not suit them. The trial of the "counter-revolutionary groups" of Ling

Biao and Qiang Qi was a typical example of judicial reprisals and the gluing of
arbitrary labels upon political opponents. [4]

10
non¢xnnt1at.ust¢m~tv
INDR‘OFINCJAI.IJSEZ(MVLY

The repressive activities of the state apparatus are supplemented by corresponding
actions by the armed forces which the post-Mao Zedong leadership also regards as
the chief support of the regime. Official Chinese reports have spoken many times
about the use of regular army forces and units of the People's Militia (vin-
bing) to "instill order,” and, particularly, to suppress protest actions against
the policies of the authorities. At an All-Chinese Conference on the Establish-
ment of Public Order in the Cities (November 1979) which was called by the
Beijing leadership the "special role" of the army in "establishing order in the
localities" was emphasized. [5] Concealing the punitive functions of the army
with the slogan of "the unity of the army and the people," Chinese propaganda
points to the necessity of making use of it in order to “consolidate a politiw

cal situation of stability and solidarity" and in order to "overcome difficulties"
in realizing the "four modernizationa" program. [6] Translated from the
language of propaganda, this means a more active use of the armed forces to
suppress dissatisfaction with the actions of the Chinese leaders.

0n the whole, the present Beijing regime is characterized by a shift from the
amorphous Mao Zedong "line of the masses" to organized forms of carrying out
repressions which are stipulated by legislative acts which, in the words of the
Chinese press, are a "powerful weapon for striking against all counter-revolu-
tionary and criminal elements." [7] At the same time, despite procedural norms
which have been introduced in a formal manner, the political process of present-
day China does not exclude punishment at mass kangaroo courts which represent a
violation of the elementary norms of legality. During the present period especial
attention is being devoted to the "regulation” of the agencies of public security
from which the demand is being made that they "turn the punitive sword of the
agencies of the dictatorship" against various kinds of people who are united by
the labels of "counter-revolutionaries,“ "enemy agents," and also "class enemies."
Criminals whose numbers, according to the official data, have increased compared

to the beginning of the 1960's by 10 times are numbered by the Beijing leadership
in the latter category.

During the course of this political maneuvering and struggle for power the
Chinese elite made use in its interests of a widely advertised campaign for the
"democratization" of political life. However, soon after the consolidation of

the positions of one of the groups of Chinese leadership (the Deng Xiaoping

group) a process of the intensive curtailment of formal democracy began. In fact,
taking place in China is a strengthening of a far-flung system of all-embracing
control by the state apparatus over societv. In order to consolidate the regime
use is being made of the previously existing Ycultural-revolution" and newly formed
security committees under the leadership of the agencies of public security

and posts at enterprises and institutions, and population committees and groups
which have been put under the control of neighborhood offices whose activities

are also controlled by the agencies of public security. Thus, a mechanism for the
control of the population is functioning which is analogous to the old Chinese

and Kuomingtang "baojis" system which was organized on the basis of mutual
guaranty.

Simultaneously with the measures to strengthen the effectiveness of the state

apparatus. including the punitive policy being carried out by it, the Beijing
leadership has also taken definite measures with respect to the CCP.

11
FOI1DFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the death of Mao Zedong and the overthrow of the "Four" of his closest
henchmen, the Chinese leadership took certain steps to increase the party's
effectiveness as an implement for the realization of its political program.
These steps include a definite revival of the organizational life of the party,
the reforming of its leading bodies, the restoration of the branch sections of
the local party apparatus, greater attention to the issues of studies, and so
forth. However, the basic mass of party members in fact do not take part in the
activities of the party; this work is performed by narrow leaditg groups in the
center and in the localities. Host of the members of the CCP are characterized
by a state of ideological stagnation, passivity, disorientation, and a lack of
understanding of the changes taking place. On the whole, the CCP at the present
time is ill-matched organizationally and ideologically, and, as before, a
political organization which is divided into factions and united and incited by
nationalistic aspirations. Certain steps by the present Chinese leadership in
the direction of the “democratization" of intra-psrty life, and a formal return
to certain of the ideas of the Eighth CCP Congress (1956) should not be mis-
leading. Neither organizationally nor politically does the CCP represent the
vanguard of the working class. Even after the death of Mao Zedong, the leader-
ship of this party proved to be incapable of returning to the ideological and
political platform of Harsism-Leninism. [8]

Striving to expand the regime's social base and to attract wider strata of Chinese
in the PRC and abroad into the realization of the "four modernizationa" program,
the Chinese leadership has galvanized the organization of a united front-the
People's Political Consultation Council of China (PPCCC). The Beijing leaders
gave it the task of uniting on a broad nationalistic platform "all of the forces
which could be united." The nationalistic bloc which is being created on the
basis of the organization of a united front has the task, according to the plans
of the Beijing leaders, also of serving for the unification on the international
arena "with all of the forces with which it is possible to unite in order to form
the broadest united front of struggle against hegemonism." In fact, this means
the incitement of hostility toward the Soviet Union, socialist Vietnam, and world
socialism as a whole.

The new charter of the PPCCC which was adopted by the first session of its All-
Chinese Committee of the Fifth Convocation (February-March 1978) has consolidated
the course aimed at a broader representation of the Chinese bourgeoisie in the
agencies of the united front and the allowance of an illusory political pluralism
under the newly dragged out slogan of the "prolonged coexistence and mutual
control" of the CC? and the so-cslled "democratic" parties. It is not accidental
that the membership of the All-Chinese Committee of the PPCCC of the Fifth Convo-
cation included a substantial number of representatives, who had been invited

by the Beijing leadership, of foreign (also from Hong Kong and Macao)

Chinese and "patriotic figures" who occupy half of the seats in the supreme body
of the united front. At the same time, the mass public organizations (trade
union, youth, and women's) were represented by only five percent of the delegates
to the All-Chinese Committee of the PPCCC.

12
FIHRIIHHCJAI.IEHE(MVLY
FPR‘OFFNJAL.USE10NLY

At the second session of the All-Chinese Oomittee of the PPCCC whizh took place
in June-July 1979 the framework of the "revolutionary united front" was ex-
panded through the inclusion in it of all Chinese, regardless of citizenship
("all who love their homeland“). It was taken even further to the right by the
decisions of the Conference on the Hork of the United Front which was held in
August-September l979. At the conference the front was declared to be "a broad
political alliance of all socialist toilers, patriots who support socialism. and
patriots who favor the reunification of the homeland." [9] The very name of

the front was changed--it began to be called the "Revolutionary Patriotic Front."
In addition, mention is no longer made of what had earlier been recorded regarding
its being "under the leadership of the working class and based on the alliance
of the working class and peasantry." Horeover. according to the new definition
of the front's composition, in order to become a member of it it is not even
necessary to acknowledge socialism as a political platform. The chief goal of
this organization is becoming the search for contacts with the Taiwan adminis-
tration and the enlistment in the "four modernizations" not only of the domestic,
but also of the foreign Chinese bourgeoisie, the Chinese bourgeoisie of Bong Kong
and Macao. The Beijing leaders are attempting through the united front to
make use of its capital, experience. and knowledge for the realization of their
ambitious programs. Serious modifications in the politics of the united front
have led the Chinese leadership to the conclusion that it is necessary to review
the charter of the PPCCC which was adopted in 1978. A commission for the develop-

ment of a new charter was created at the third session of the All-Chinese
Committee of the PPCCC in September 1980.

The modified policy of the united front is a part of a broad maneuver by the
Chinese leadership to strengthen the social base of the regime. This maneuvering
includes the removal of labels from the ”black categories" of the population

(for exanple, from the former landowners and kulaks). and a flirtation with the
intelligentsia which is declared to be a "part of the proletariat." In the
policies with respect to the working class and peasantry a reorientation toward
its wealthier strata (skilled workers, wealthier peasants) is obvious. China's
ruling elite is not orienting itself. as in the recent past, toward the pauperized
masses of the urban and rural poor who are interested in equal distribution.

These masses continue to be a destabilizing factor in the domestic political
situation of the country.

This is all the more reason why the Chinese leadership is directing serious
attention toward the organizations of mass support for the regime and the ideolo-
gical brainwashing of the masses which under China's conditions are the trade
unions, the'youth. and women's organizations. At the same time, mass organizations
which were engendered or galvanized by the "cultural revolution" have been removed
from the political arena: For example, such organizations as the Hongweibings

and Jiaofan, the “conferences of reprcsentatives of the revolutionary workers."
and the "alliances of bottom middle and poor."

The effecting in the interests of the ruling elite of the restoration to the
national level of the mass public organizations which existed before the "Cultural

13
FKII(Nﬂﬂ(1AI.lﬂi!(ﬂVLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.US€(MNLY

revolution" has been accompanied by a criticism of the policies of the "Band of
Four" with respect to these organizations. At the Ninth All-Chinese Congress of
Trade Unions (October 1978) which took place more than 20 years after the con-
vocation of the preceding congress, the All-Chinese Federation of Trade Union!
which had been dissolved in December 1966 was recreated. The Maoist stamps in
its documents were combined with the rejection of certain unpopular trade union
work methods which had become implanted during the time of Mao Zedong, and by

the restoration of the trade umiona' tasks in organizing rest and improving the
well-being of the workers.

However, in the chief things the present Chinese leaders are continuing Mao
Zedong's course of the "politicalization" of the trade unions; the: is, the
subordination of all of their activities to a single task--the introduction among
the masses of the ideology and politics of modified Maoism. An analysis of the
directions of the present work of China's trade unions shows that in the basic
spheres of their activities they remain in Maoist positions.

The interest on the part of the Chinese leadership in organizing relations with
various strata and groups of the population, and its attempt to expand and con-
solidate social support for the regime has also been reflected in the materials
of the congresses and activities of the women's and youth organizations.5 This
bears witness to attempts by the Beijing leadership to list these strata and . .
groups in active participation in production work and public political activities
under the slogan of the "creation of a mighty China." The Beijing leadership is
imposing eodified Maoism as the "theoretical” basis of the activities of public
organizations and is attempting to consolidate the basic theses of the Maoist
political course as their long-term program orientation. The public organizations
of the PRC are now acting as transmitters of the chauvinist and hegemonist

policy of Beijing.

As a result of the correction of a number of political and econoeic "excesses" of
the Mao Zedong course, the present modified Maoist regime is growing stronger.
within the country its greatest strength is being used by the ruling elite for
the realization of its ambitious programs, and outside of it in order to exacer-
bate the confrontation between China and the USSR and its allies and to deepen
Beijing's military-political alliance with world imperialism. [10] Such is
the foreign policy orientation of the Beijing regime.

)
0n the whole, despite certain changes of a "facade" nature, the political regime
in China essentially represents a modernized model of a military bureaucratic
dictatorship. There is every reason to suppose that its repressive character
will not only continue in the future, but will grow more cruel as the difficulties
increase in implementing the Beijing leadership's albitious plans connected with
the creation of a mighty militarist power.

FOOTNOTES

1. There is good reason why, at the present time, the post of chairman of this
body is occupied by the actual head of the Beijing regime Deng Xiaoping.

INJI<OFINCIAl.lﬁ§I:CNULY
2.

10.

me omcut use ONLY

As is clear from the materials which were published during the time of the

"cultural revolution,” Liu Shaoqi, in addition, did not agree with the policy
open confrontation with the USSR.

The program of the attaiment by China of the level of the advanced countries
by the end of the 20th century is now recognised to he unrealistic in its
initial formulation and has formally been reduced to the task of achieving a
society of "modest sufficiency." The change in the formulation of the pro-

gras has not been applied to the plans for the creation of a military
potential.

In the 1950's the united front was called the People's Democratic Front.
Ihe Fourth All-Chinese Congress of Honen took place in Beijing 8-17 September
1978 (the previous congress—in Septenber 1957); the 10th Congress of the

Chinese Columnist League of Youth took place on 16-26 October 1978 (the
9th Congress—in 1966); there were also congresses of the Federation of

Chinese Youth and the Union of Chinese Students.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mao Zedong, "Selected Berks," Vol 1. Moscow, 1952, pp 174-177.
F. N. Burlatskiy, "Lenin, State, Politics," Moscow, 1970, p 160.

L. H. Gudoshnikov and K. A. Yegorov, "0n the New Legislation of the PRC,"
80V. 005. I PRAVO, No 11, 1980, pp 61-69.

K. A. Yegorov, "A Judicial Farce Under the Guise of the Establishment of
Legality," 8M3. ZAKONNOST', No 7, 1981, pp 66-68.

WIN RIBAO, 9 Decewer 1979.
Ibid., 15 January 1980.
BEIJING RIBAO, lo January 1980.

“China: Certain Tendencies in the Domestic Situation," KDWIST, No 3, 1980,
p. 102.

RENIIIN RIMO, 15 Septedaer 1979.

0. Vladimirov, "The Sixth Plenum of the CP of the CC? and Beijing's Present
Policy," KOIHUNIST, No 12, 1981, p 86.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'etvo "Nauka", "Sovetekoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1982

2959
C80:

1807/76

MOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

mswzzs m sovzz'r uw moncmr marz-
Moscow sovrrsrort cosumnsrvo I mm in Russian No 4, Apr 82 pp 103-108

[Article by N. N. Voplenko, docent at the Volgograd Higher School of the USSR

Ministry of Internal Affairs, candidate in juridical sciences: "The Reason
for Errors in the Application of Law"]

[Text] An ilprovenent of the work of the agencies which apply the law is a
necessary condition for a further strengthening of socialist legality. In this
connection, Soviet juridical science is faced with the problem of a comprehensive
study of the factors which deternine legality and the effectiveness of the
application of the norms of the law. One of its important aspects is the question
of the reasons for and the conditions of the conission of errors in law appli-
cation. In the literature it has received a definite treat-eat with regard to
court and investigatory errors in criminal cases. [1. 2, 3] The fullest point
of view on this issue has been stated by I. L. Petrukhin who distinguishes three
groups of reasons for court errors and, correspondingly, three levels of knowing
then: a) reasons for errors which are connected with violations of the require-
ments of material and procedural law on the level of principles and concrete
norms; b) reasons for errors which are contained in the general conditions of
the performance of court business and in the level of the training of judges,

in the special characteristics of their awareness of the law, in their moral
qualities, in the conditions of their life and work, the organisation of the
court systen. the effectiveness of the activities of the participants in the
trial. in the influence of legal science on juridical practice, in the degree of
intonation support for the court systes. and so forth; c) reasons which are

rooted in the state of the general types of the guarantees of legality: economic,
ideological, political. and juridical. [6]

One cannot but note the logical coherence and the internal harnony of the above-
described view. At the same tine, this conception is in need of a certain noder-
nization regarding errors as a generic phenosenon in the sphere of law applica-
tion. First of all. it is necessary to distinguish the causes and conditions, or
factors. which determine errors. Causes are inediate juridical phenouena which
give rise to an error and determine its character and place in the general system
of legality violations. They could be: a failure to reach the truth in an
investigation of the factual circumstances of a case, an incorrect selection and
interpretation of the norms of asterial or procedural law, a verdict's lack of
correspondence to the actual or legal basis of a case, and so forth. It is use-

16
I'OI OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ful to call than the internal, or concrete, causes of errors in law applica-
tion.

Conditions should he understood as the circumstances which are nediately
connected with the errors which favor their emergence. They, as it were, create
the general background and the circumstances under which the possibilities for
an incorrect application of the law increase. The following may be numbered
among such factors: the level of the professional training of the subjects of
law application, their noral and political qualities, the specific conditions of
their lives and work, the degree of the organisation and effectiveness of the

systeu of agencies, and so forth. These factors are the external causes of the
errors in law application.

The dialectic of the interaction between the causes and conditions of law appli-
cation errors consists in the fact that they are closely interconnected with one
another and are able to save into one another. For example, an incorrect selec-
tion and analysis of a legal norn as the concrete internal cause of an erroneous
application of law can in an individual case be connected with many conditions:
a large work load for the law applier, shortconings in the selection and dis-
position of cadres, a lack of specialization in work, the contradictoriness of
legislation. and so forth. And, on the contrary, every condition which fosters
the emergence of errors in law application can manifest itself and activate the
action of several concrete causes depending upon the circumstances of the juri-
dical case and the subjects of the activity. Thus, the lack of a stable juri-
dical practice can be expressed in the following causes of errors in law
application: an incorrect assembling and evaluation of proofs, the incorrect
drawing up of the law application document, the erroneousness of qualification,
and so forth. In studying this problem, all of this makes it possible, in our

view, to use a single list of factors which determine errors in law application
work.

A study of the special literature and of court and investigatory practice on the
topic, discussions with those who apply the law, and questionnaire work with

them have made it possible to compose and test during the course of a sociological
study the following list of the most frequent causes and conditions of errors

in law application: 1) lack of clarity and contradictoriness of legislation;

2) a lack of stable juridical practice; 3) insufficient juridical knowledge on
the part of the law applier; 1:) the counteraction of interested persons; 5) un-
favorable work conditions; 6) shortcomings in the selection and disposition of
cadres; 7) one-sidedness and incompleteness in the proof; 8) the couplexity of
the procedural demands upon individual juridical action; 9) a heavy work load;
10) the lack of specialization in work.

The purpose of the study was to establish the hierarchical importance of each
of the above-named factors in the general system of the causes and conditions
that promote the co-ission of errors in law application. ‘i‘owu'd this end, law
appliers were asked to designate with figures the degree of importance of each
factor (first place, second, third, and so forth). Questionnaire work was per-

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formed on the investigatory apparatus of the Administration for Internal Affairs
of Volgogradskaya Oblast, a group of investigators studying at the advanced
training faculty of the higher Investigatory School of the USSR Ministry of
Internal Affairs (94 people), people's judges and members of the oblast court

of Volgogradskaya Oblast. and also a group of people's judges from the bashkir
ASSR. In all, 327 law appliers (218 investigators and 109 judges) were questioned.
Of course. in a study of this kind it is only possible to establish the sub-
jective importance of each of the factors which determines law application

errors. At the same time, the high competence of the respondents makes such
replies extremely valuable.

In totalling up the results of the study it became clear that the subjective
importance of each of the above-enumerated factors is determined on the basis
of two criteria: the frequency with which the respondents mentioned or empha-
sized one or another cause of errors, and the ranking of all of the causes for
errors in concrete figures. The point is that not all of the respondents named
the 10 causes proposed by us. but frequently limited themselves to pointing to
some of them. This resulted in the fact that the frequency of the causes noted
by the law appliers does not correspond with the total nuaber of respondents
(327 people) and fluctuates from 103 to 244. As for the total sum which expresses
the ranking of each of the 10 factors, it fluctuates from 498 to 610. As a
result. the subjective importance of each of the factors is defined by a frac-
tion whose numerator is the total amount of the ranking indicators, and whose
denominator is the frequency with which each of the factors is mentioned. This
makes is possible to deduce uniform indicators of the subjective importance for
the law appliers of each of the 10 factors. They are obtained by dividing the
total amount of subjective preferences by the number of times that each factor
is mentioned.

A large work load is named by investigators and judges as one of the chief
factors giving rise to errors in law application work. The idea that the
quality of the work of law appliers is dependent upon the amount of their work
load has already been expressed in the literature. Thus, according to data
cited by v. N. Kudryavtsev , if among a group of judges who hear 7-10 cases a
month there is an average of 1.04 annulled and 1.74 changed verdicts per year
per judge, with a work load of 20 and more cases these figures increase to 2.31
and 12.96, respectively. (5] Data which establishes their employment in work
in hours testifies to the large work load of law appliers.

During the survey of the working conditions of law appliers they were asked a
question regarding their satisfaction with their work and their position. Host
of those who replied expressed satisfaction with their work, taking note in it
of elements of search, creativity, and social importance. However, of the 327
investigators and judges. 70 people (55 investigators and 15 judges) stated that
their work did not satisfy them. Excessive work and a disproportionate work
load for law appliers (46 people) were named as the basic reason. In this case,
we are talking about investigators and judges who expressed a desire to transfer

18
Finl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEII(HULY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

to other work. At the same time, many of the respondents who stated their
satisfaction with their work took note of shortcomings in its organization, and,
among them, a large work load figured in one of the first places.

The lack of a stable juridical practice occupies second place in the scale of
factors which determine errors in the work of investigators and judges. This
factor is derivative to a substantial degree from the ability and persistence of
superior law application agencies in implementing the demands of unity in the
understanding and application of legal norms. From a broader point of view, it
is a component part of the stability of legal regulation and presupposes the
relative stability of laws and of the practice of their application. and the
continuity of the work methods of legal application agencies regardless of the
replacement of concrete officials. [6] The fact that this factor proves to be
in second place in its degree of importance for law appliers was something of a
surprise, and this determines its importance.

The stability of law application practice manifests itself most vividly in the
unity of the legal qualification of juridical cases of the same type. During
the course of the study investigators and judges were asked to designate with
figures the hierarchical importance of the factors which promote correct quali-
fication. They singled out: i) consultations with one's immediate chief;

2) the help of workmates; 3) the directive decrees of the plenuns of Supreme
Courts; 4) monographic literature; 5) commentaries; 6) departmental orders
and instructions; 7) the procurator's opinion. It turned out that each of
the above-enumerated factors is perceived differently by the investigators and
judges. For example, for the investigators whose work position presupposes
relationships of subordination in the investigatory apparatus and in relation-
ships with the agencies of the procurator's office the greatest value is
represented by such factors as: the influence of one's immediate chief, work-
mates, the directive decrees of the plenums of Supreme Courts, the opinion of
the procurator, and commentaries. The judges, on the other hand, give first

‘ place to the role of the directive decrees of the plenums of Supreme Courts,
and then to workmates, the i-ediate chief, and comentaries. The importance
of help from the procurator in the correct qualification of juridical cases is
clearly understated among judges.

Another important aspect in the establishment of a stable juridical practice is
the experience of qualifying juridical cases on the level of oblast courts,

the investigatory departments of the oblast administrations of internal affairs,
and the oblast procurator's office. A concrete expression of the policy of
these agencies in the sphere of law application is represented by their acts of
control and supervision. concrete law application acts, and reviews of the
practice of hearing and resolving individual categories of cases. For this
reason, as additional causes of errors in law application, in addition to the
proposed list, many judges name: “the formalism of the oblast court," "the
unstable practice of the oblast court," and "overoinsurance h" rayon and oblast
judges in matters of qualification." of course, in such replies there can be
felt the "age-old" purely psychological critical attitude of lower agencies
toward superior ones; nevertheless, they demonstrate with sufficient accuracy
the role of oblast law protection agencies in establishing stable juridical
practice.

19
FOI‘OFFIJA1.U§E(NVLY
One-sidedness and inconpleteness in the assembling of proof as a reason for law
application errors is placed in third place. This testifies, in at view, to a
sufficiently high level of objectivity in the evaluation given by law appliers

to the results of their own work. This cause. which is among the internal
causes. has been treated repeatedly and in detail in the literature. [3, p 63;
7; 8] In daily practice the one-sidedness and incompleteness of proofs manifests
itself in various concrete defects in the process of proof, and in an inability

by the law applier to correctly analyze and evaluate the factual circumstances
of a case.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fourth place for its degree of subjective importance was occupied by such a
factor as the vagueness and contradictoriness of the legislation. In their
replies to the question as to whether the legislation in effect contained in-
perfect norms, the investigators and judges demonstrated a quite high level of

a critical attitude toward the law: Of the 327 respondents. only #6 expressed
their full approval of the operating system of legal regulation, while the
remainder (281) pointed to individual imperfections in the legislation which
hinder effective work. A careful analysis of these replies provides grounds for
critically evaluating them. The point is that most of the respondents only
stated the existence of imperfect norms in the legislation; however, they did
not point to concrete norms which could be characterised as obsolete, not useful,
and so forth. In certain replies, one feels a desire to become free from certain
procedural norms, and an endeavour to over—simplify the juridical procedural
form. At the same time, many replies contain sensible proposals which have

been tested by many years of practice on improving the system of legal regula-
tion. This is witnessed, for example, by the critical analysis of the applica-
tion of Articles 16 and 334 of the RSFSR Civil Code which are realized in a
formal manner, and frequently in contradiction with the nor-s of morality.
Attention is called to the lack of norns which regulate the procedure for inter-
rogating an illiterate person, and also of norms: on halting criminal proceedings
in a case as a result of the sickness of the victim which prevents a determina-
tion of the severity of the injury received by him; on verifying testimony at
the site of an occurrence; and on the possibility of applying sanctions against
defendants who do not appear for a court session. Note is taken of the imprecise
and diffuse character of Article 206 of the RSPSR Criminal Code, of the diffi-
culty in delimiting a qualification in accordance with Part 2 of Article 108,

and Articles 102 and 103 of the RFSFR Criminal Code, and so forth.

The fifth place in the general hierarchy of causes of errors is assigned by the
investigators and judges to such a factor as the "complexity of the procedural
demands upon the performance of individual juridical actions." Note was taken
above of the discovery during the course of the analysis of the attitude of

law appliers to the legislation in effect of an aspiration to sinplify the
procedural form, and a desire to rid oneself of the rigid schedules for the
performance of individual actions and of the complexities of procedure in so-
called obvious juridical cases. This tendency was also confirmed from a docu—
mentary study of concrete errors of law application. Thus, 51 percent of the
errors committed by investigators in the halting of criminal cases were expressed
in important violations of procedural law. [9] Hhile establishing the real
importance of the problem of procedural form for the general dynanics of law
application errors, we, nevertheless, do not believe that a simplification of
juridical procedure is the only reliable and effective way to reduce errors.
First of all. the law appliers themselves showed that they experience more
difficulty in applying the norms of material law (175 people) than of procedural
law (88 people). Secondly. the character of procedural difficulties is such
that they decrease with an increase in the experience and professional expertise
of the law appliers. Thirdly, any underestimation of the role of the procedural
form and rejection of it means in practice a concession to legal nihilism and

is capable of developing into violations of legality. For this reason. systematic

21
FOIIHHHCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

studies by law appliers, a rise in the level of their professional expertise,
the elimination of labor turnover, and the ensuring of the stability of legal

regulation represent an important direction in decreasing the number of pro-
cedural errors.

Insufficient legal knowledge on the part of those who apply the law is in

sixth place in the hierarchy of causes of errors. It is not difficult to see
that this factor is closely connected with others, particularly, with the "vague-
ness and contradictoriness of the legislation," "the lack of stability in
juridical practice," and others. If a law applier has an insufficient "baggage
of knowledge," then the existing legislation Hill, of course, seem to him to

be vague and contradictory, and the possibilities for the results of his work
being influenced by other factors which determine errors grow. In evaluating
the role of this factor a definite amount of self-criticism was demanded from
the law appliers, since in their replies there was a tendency to give preference
to objective conditions: work load, the instability of practice, shortcomings
in the legislation. and so forth. All of this makes it possible to assule that

the true importance of this factor in the system of causes of errors is much
greater than the law appliers themselves believe.

Seventh place is assigned to unfavorable work conditions. This includes the
social and individual psychological characteristics of the examination of juri-
dical cases, organizational-work and housing and domestic shortcomings which
hinder the effective realization of law application functions, and so forth. A
concrete expression of these conditions might be nervousness in the relationships
between associates, a lack of the technical means needed for successful work,
personal troubles on the part of the workers, had housing and domestic condi-
tions, and so forth. Factors of this kind influence the quality of law appli-
cation not directly, but indirectly, by creating the conditions for the commis-
sion of errors. In the questionnaire the investigators and judges classified
the following among such conditions: poor work by the organizational and
technical services and departments, unesthetic work places, a lack of coordina-
tion in the actions of different services, a lack of attention paid to young
specialists, interference by superiors in the procedural independence of the
investigator, and so forth.

Interesting information has been obtained as a result of questioning law
appliers regarding their use of technical means. It turned out that investiga-
tors are more involved with technical means and make use of them more frequently
and more variously than judges. Of 203 investigator respondents, 86 make use
of technical means constantly. 107 use them sometimes. and only 10 people
admitted that they managed without then. Of 105 judges, 73 replied that they do
not use technical means, and only 32 said that they sometimes resort to them.
This. in our view, is an indicator of a poor situation with the organization of
labor in court agencies.

Providing workers punctually with legal information--the texts of normative acts,
codes, commentaries, the decrees of plenums of Supreme Courts, departmental

22
FOI‘OFFKJAI.UGBIHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

orders. instructions, and so forth-~is also an important factor in creating normal
conditions for the application of la . As the study has shown. this question

has been solved best in the court agencies. Of 106 judges, 95 replied that they
are provided with the necessary legal infer-scion, and only 11 noted shortcomings
in information support. In the investigation agencies only 95 people out of 217

In particular, it would be useful to create special legal information funds on
the level of oblast investigatory administrations for newly hired investigators.

the purpose of a decision being adopted in which certain people are interested.
Overcoming the intellectual, psychological, moral, and juridical obstacles which
are created by witnesses, victims, the accused, and other individuals who are
interested in the concrete outcome of a case is a frequent instance of such a
situation. Let us note that no serious attention at all has been devoted to this
phenomenon in science, although in the literature on court psychology there is
nention of the extremely unfavorable conditions under which an investigator
frequently has to work. [10] It is clear that not only investigators. but the
majority of law appliers have occasion to come up against the opposition of in-
terested persons. Overcoming this negative phenomenon goes beyond the framework
of a purely psychological question, since the problem takes en a rather broad
social importance. This is a result above all of the fact that the application
of law is a powerful activity in the regulation of social. including personal,
interests. Hence. the inevitability of overcoming conflicts and contradictions
between the interests of different people. It would seem that this problem should
attract the attention of such a direction of jurisprudence as the sociology of
law. The study which has been conducted has shown that, in the opinion of inves-
tigators and judges, this factor causes more harm in the sphere of law applica-

tion than the lack of specialization in work or shortcomings in the selection and
disposition of cadres.

The lack of specialization in work as a factor which gives rise to errors in the
application of law is in ninth place. The juridical literature has already taken
note of the positive influence of specialization upon the quality of law applica-
tion. Ill, 12) The questionnaire, as a whole. confirmed this conclusion. At the
same time, it testifies to the fact that law appliers do not see in a universal
and all~enbracing specialization a radical means for improving the quality of the
examination and resolution of cases. The investigators and judges who opposed
specialization motivated their position by the fact that specialization leads to
"stereotypes" in work and narrows the professional interests of the law applier.
Of 317 respondent investigators and judges, 250 favored the wide introduction oi
specialization. 61 were against. and 6 expressed an indiffere.ce to this matter.
It is curious that judges were more resolute than investigators in their opposi-
tion to the idea of specialization: of 109 judges, 33 were against. while of 202
investigators, only 28 were opponents.

23
liﬂlt”ﬂﬂ(1Al.U§B(l§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The last and tenth place in the overall hierarchy of the causes of law applica-
tion errors is occupied by shortcomings in the selection and disposition of
cadres. I believe that this evaluation of this factor reflects the increased
level of the training in recent years of cadres of law appliers. especially in
the courts and investigatory apparatus. The high professional qualifications

of the present-day law applier presupposes a constant improvement of knowledge
and skills. a study of the new legislation. and a generalization of the practice
of examining and resolving cases; that is, it demands systematic self-education,
and also studies at special seminars, studies at advanced training courses, in
graduate school, and so forth. In this respect, interesting replies were obtained
from the investigators and judges to the question as to whether they wished to
continue their education. Such a desire was expressed by 146 people out of 327
(111 investigators and 35 judges); 122 people (56 investigators and 66 Judges)
believed that the educational level reached by then was quite satisfactory, and
59 people did not reply. One is struck by the quite large nmber of judges who
do not see any necessity for a further continuation of their studies. This is
connected, obviously, with the age of the court workers (73 out of 109 have a
work seniority of 10 and more years). Two people expressed a wish to enter
graduate studies. As for the investigators, 20 stated they wished to enter the
Academy of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, 17 graduate studies, and the rest
were oriented toward studies in the advanced training system.

The problem of the selection and disposition of cadres of law appliers is not
limited, of course. to increasing their education. 0f great importance is pro-
fessional selection on the basia of practical, political. moral, ideological,
and psychological qualities, the creation of conditions for growth in work and
the elimination of circumstances which give rise to labor turnover, and so forth.
Hhat has been said means that superior law application agencies must constantly
give attention to a study of the above factors, and take measures to eliminate
the negative consequences of the causes of errors. I believe that the question
of the causes of errors in law application could become a special subject of
discussion at a sitting of the Plenum of the USSR Supreme Court for the purpose
of working out general recommendations.

The 10 basic above-examined factors which cause errors in the application of law
belong chiefly to the so-called external conditions. But they have a tendency
to be transformed into the internal concrete causes of errors. For this reason,
the problem of the causes of law application errors has to be studied only in a
complex of the external and internal factors which influence the application of
law. It is not to be excluded that in the individual spheres of law application
(social security, the administration of the economy, and so forth) there are
specific causes of errors. The analysis of the phenomenon which has been under-
taken in the present article could serve as a methodological "key" for the
practice of branch special studies.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. G. 2. Anashkin and I. L. Petrukhin, "The Effectiveness of Justice and Court
Errors," 80V. 808. I PRAVO, No 8, 1968, pp 59-67.

2h
son omen. use ONLY
2.

3.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. L. Petrukhin, G. P. Baturov, and T. C. Morshchakova. ”Theoretical Pounds-
tions of the Effectiveness of Justice,” Moscow, 1979, 392 pp.

T. s. Corskiy. "Scientific Foundations of the Organization and Hork of the
Investigatory Apparatus in the USSR," Voronezh, 1970, 208 pp.

1. L. Petrukhin, "The Causes of Court Errors," 80V. COS. I'PRAVO, No 5,
1970 , pp 100-101 .

V. N. Kudrysvtsev. "The Legal System and the Strengthening of Socialist
Society," KOHHUNIST, No 9, 1981, p 77.

V. N. Kudryavtsev. "Law and Behavior," Moscow, 1978, p 119.

A. P. Derbenev, "Objectivity as a Legal and Moral Principle of the work of
the Investigator," PRAVOVBDENIYE, No l. 1977, pp 52-57.

Yu. Korenevskiy. "An Investigator's Prejudice-The Source of Errors.“
sors. zmoums'r'. No 10, 1969, p 22.

V. A. Hikhaylov, "The Procedural Order for Belting Crininal Cases at the
Stage of Preliminary Investigation," Volgograd, 1970, pp 95-96.

A. V. Dulov, "Principles of Psychological Analysis at Prelininary Investi—
gation." Moscow, 1973, pp 35-36.

P. K. Horshchakova and I. L. Petrukhin, "The Sociological Aspects of a
Study of the Effectiveness of Justice." In the collection: "Law and
Sociology." Moscow, 1973, pp 287-288.

N. V. Radutnaya. "The People's Judge. Professional Expertise and Training,”
Moscow, 1977, pp 75-76.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Nauka", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1982

2959

CSO:

1800/469

FOIOFFIOALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAT IONAL

DISTINCTIVB SIBBRIAN-RUSSIAN LANGUAGE FOUND BY SCIDLAR

[Editorial Report] Moscow VOPROSY YAZYKDZRANIYA in Russian No 2, lhrch-April
1982, carries on pp 81-89 an 8,000-word article by A.l. Pedorov titled "The
Russian Language in Siberia." A linguistics specialist who works in
Novosibirsk, Fedorov wrotes that "the Russian language in Siberia is the sane
Russian national language but one which has many distinctive aspects" mainly
in its lexical fund but also in phonetics, norphology. and syntax. Ila suggests
that this is the result of the lengthy contact between Russians and other
groups living in Siberia. In the sane issue of this journal, there is also a
2,700-word review of Pedorov's book SIBBRIAN DIALBCT PHRASEOWGY. This review
(pp 142-145) is by Leningrad scholar mu. Mokiyenko, who questions Pedorov's
methodology and his conclusions.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo 'mauka", "Voprosy yazykoznaniya", 1982

cso: 1800/512 END

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY