FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10377

10 March 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 8/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from neas agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and ma.erial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 8/82)

CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL
Maoist Falsifiers of Kirghiz lliatory Attacked
(M. Ya. Suahanlo, et al.; PROTIV MAOISTSKIKH PAL'
SIFIKATSIY ISTORII KIRGIZII, 1981) . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...... . . . . .

Bloc-Wide Ideological Coordination Described
(V. A. Rylach; VOPROSY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZMA, No 47, 1981) .

Continuing Need To Combat Petty bourgeois Influences Seen
(A. Higashova; VOPROSY MUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZHA, No L7, 1981) .

NAT IONAL

Alienation Under Socialism Diacuued
(r. Yu. Saukh; VOPROSY uwcuuoco KOHMUNIZMA, No 49. 1981) .

Ethnic Relations in the Workplace Surveyed
(N. S. Kavunets; VOPROSY NAUCHNOGO KONMUNIZHA, No 48, 1981)

Functions. Problem of Soviet Family Described
(N. N. Kovtun. et 11.; VOPROSY NAUCE‘NOGO ROWIZMA, No 109,

1981) ........... .....

-a- [III-USSR-35!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HAOIST FALSIFIERS 0F KIRGHIZ HISTORY ATTACKED

Frunze PROTIV HAOISTSKIKH FAL'SIFIKATSIY ISTORII KIRCIZII in Russian I981
(signed to press 16 May 81) pp 1-2, 128-140

[Book; introductory paragraph and conclusion from book "Against Maoist Fulsifi-
cations of the History of Kirghiziya," by H. Ya. Sushanlo, V. T. Gurevirh, V.N.

Ploskikh. and C. P. Suprunenko, Frunze. Kyrgyzstan, 1981. 140 pp]

[Text] 0n the basis of a vast amount of historical material, the book examines
the history of the relations between China and the peoples who settled Central
Asia and Eastern Turkestan from ancient times to the 19th century. Taking account
of the work of Soviet historians and of the data of sources, the authors establish
the common nature of the economy, culture, and everyday life of the people who
settled Kirghiziya in ancient times, how relations between the Kirghiz vvuvlv and-
Russia were born and grew stronger, and in what historical-ethnographic situation
and under what political circumstances the Russian-Chinese territorial demarcation
in Central Asia took place.

Conclusion

The entire path which has been covered by the peoples of Kirghiziyn quet Lhu
Great October Socialist Revolution confirms the correctness of the choice which
the Kirghiz people made when it voluntarily accepted citizenship in Russia and
tied its fate to it. Despite the colonialiat policies of Tsarism, this historic
act objectively was an outstanding progressive event in th- life of the Kirghiz
people. Kirghiziya's voluntary entry into Russia protected it against the ox—
ternai danger from China and helped to dampen inter-tribal warfare. Thv walkers
of Kirghiziya joined in the revolutionary struggle of the great Russian peoplu
and together with the Russian working class. led by the Leninist party ni
Bolsheviks, struggled for the overthrow of tne power of the landowners, haul-
geoisie, and petty feudalists, and for the establishment of the dictatorship of
the proletariat. The progressive nature of Kirghiziya's voluntary entrance into
Russia also consisted in the fact that the Kirghiz began to experience the in-
fluence of advanced Russian culture. Under the influence of capitalism the pro-
cess was begun of the decomposition of the patriarchal-feudal system and tho
development of capitalist relations and the formation of a working class.

1
"(33? 0' FINN. I‘Q“ 0?" Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only the Great October Socialist Revolution made it possible for the Kirghiz
people to move in such an historically brief period of time from a patriarchal—
feudal system right to socialism, bypassing the capitalist stage of development,
to overcome its economic and cultural inequality, to build a soviet national
statehood, and to be formed into a socialist nation. This leap is a triumph of
the Leninist nationalities policy of the communist party.

In the Summary Report of the CC to the 26th CPSU Congress L. I. Brezhnev empha-
sized: "From the first years of Soviet power our economic and social policy has
been organized in such a way as to lift the former national outlying districts of
Russia to the level of development of its center as rapidly as possible. And this
task has been successfully achieved. The close cooperation of all of the nations
of the country and, above all, the disinterested aid of the Russian people played
a most important role here. Today backward national outlying districts . . . do
not exist."1

The accomplishment of this historic task can rightly be placed in the same rank as
such victories in the construction of our new society as the socialist industrial-
ization of the country, the collectivization of agriculture, and the cultural
revolution. For this reason. at the current stage of social development the
further perfection of the new historical community of the Soviet people is taking
on especial importance as a necessary condition for the development of socialism
into communism in our country.

Along with all of the others, the workers of Soviet Kirghizstan are also making a
worthy contribution to the construction of a communist society and to the
strengthening of the friendship of peoples.

The strengthening and expansion of the economic basis of the fraternal cooperation
of the people of the USSR is testimony to the further strengthening of the moral
and political unity of our people. A decisive role is being played in this by
such directions of party policy as the development of socialist production rela-
tions and their gradual transformation into communist relations, the strengthening
of the commonwealth of our people during the course of the joint construction of
the material and technical base of communism, and the consolidation of the single
national economic complex of cur country. The Leniniat nationalities policy of
our party has always been based on a profound combination of concern for the
national development of each people and the growth of the public wealth of our
entire multi-nationalist cOuntry.

The successes which have been achieved by the workers of socialist Kirghizstan
during the years of Soviet power are truly historic. This region of former
nomads and primitive agriculture has been transformed into a highly developed
industrial and agrarian republic.

During the postwar years large production capacities have been created in the
republic. Such highly important branches of industry as nonferrous metallurgy,
machine tool building, the electronic, electrical engineering, instrument making,
motor vehicle, light, food, and others have been successfully developed. In 1980

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Kirghiz SSR had 405 large industrial enterprises which represented more than
130 branches producing 3,700 different items of output.

Fixed productive capital is the material base which determines the level of pro-
duction in any branch. In the republic's economy as a whole. as of the beginning
of 1980 it came to 8.5 billion rubles, or 4.2 times more than the 1965 level. In
addition, 80% of the productive capital was reconstructed on a new technical basis
or created anew during the years 1966-1979 when more than 200 large moaern enter-
prises and shops were put into operation and the gross output of industry increased
by 4.6 times, and that of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes by 1.6 times. while national
income increased by 2.3 times. Kirghiziya's agriculture is an organic part of

the country's total agricultural complex and constantly experiences the beneficial
influence of the consistent realization of the party's agrarian policy. During
the 8th Five-Year Plan capital investments in agriculture came to 312 of the total
capital investments in the republic, during the 9th--3ZZ, and, according to the
plan of the 10th Five-Year Plan they were to be 352. In 1979 the fixed productive
capital of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes exceeded the 1965 level by almost three
times, and gross output increased by more than 1.5 times.

"The powerful economic and scientific and technical potential which has been

created in Soviet Kirghizstan." the First Secretary of the CC of the Communist
Party of Kirghiziya T-U.Usubaliyev said at the 26th CPSU Congress "is making
it possible today to accomplish qualitatively new economic tasks."

Of course. such a powerful upsurge in the republic's economy could only be
achieved as a result of the joint efforts of the workers of all of our nations
and peoples and thanks to the consistent realization of Leninist policies--
policies of a correct combination of the interests of each nation with the
interests of all of society.

Implementing the decisions of the 25th and 26th CPSU Congresses, and taking active
part in the All—Union socialist competition for a further increase in production
efficiency and improvement of work quality, the republic's workers are achieving
large successes in development of its economy. science, and culture and in

raising its standard of living.

Representatives from the liberated countries acquaint themselves with great inte-
rest with the experience of the social and economic transformations of the first
socialist country. In 197! an international seminar was held in the capital of
Kirghiziya, the city of Frunze, on the topic: "The Experience of Agrarian Trans-
formations in the Republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan and Its Significance
for the Liberated Countries." The conclusions which generalize the rich exper-
ience of the Soviet East will undoubtedly be used in the liberated countries
during the course of carrying out the entire complex of socio-economic trans-
formations in them.

Hasan Hafez, the Deputy General Secretary of the Organization for the Solidarity
of the Countries of Asia and Africa, made public a letter to the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Kirghiziya and the Council of Ministers Kirghiz SSR which

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

had been adopted at the seminar and in which it was said that the participants in
the seminar had becoae convinced of the fact that in the harmonious family of Soviet
peoples Soviet Kirghiziya had achieved outstanding successes in economic and
cultural construction. "The fundamental transformations in the republics of Cen-
tral Asia and Kazakhstan occurred on such a scale as causes sincere delight," the
Vietnamese economist Le Toan stated to journalists. "We are endlessly grateful to

the people of Kirghiziya and to all Soviet people for their complete solidarity
with the Vietnamese people."

The guests acquainted themselves with the life of the Kirghiz people. During a
visit to the kolkhoz "Syntash" the Indian Professor Gogula Partkhasaratkhi stated
that the Indian peasant can only dream about such a level of mechanization--soviet

Central Asia cOuld be considered a standard for the developing countries of Asia
and Africa.

And hear the words of the general director of the Ministry of Planning of Somalia
Jams Rabile: "He can rightly call the seminar a school in the new life. I see
the future of my country in the present-day republics of Central Asia."

Seriously upset by such a revolutionizing influence on the liberated peoples from
the graphic example of the national development of Soviet Asia, the imperialists
and their ideological underlings, together with whom the Maoists are singing in
the general chorus, are attempting to falsify the history of the Soviet Central
Asian republics. Our ideological opponents are increasingly spreading malicious
slanderous assertions about "Soviet colonialism" in Central Asia, about the
forced Russification of the Central Asian peoples, including the Kirghiz people,
and about the allegedly unequal position of the Central Asian republics in the
Soviet Union. But here is what the prominent French journalist Henri Bordazh
who visited Kirghiziya has said: "Kirghiziya became socialist rather recently.
And we can understand what enormous difficulties had to be overcome and that far
from all of them were of a purely material nature. All of the peoples of the
Soviet Union gave Kirghiziya great and measureless assistance in order for it to
become a modern country. That which has been accomplished in such a short period
of time resembles a miracle, a socialist miracle. Here, as in any other place.
one can see with what respect the Soviet state regards the distinctive character-
istics of each union republic. To those who in the West irresponsibly speak about
'Soviet colonialism,‘ I can give no better advice than the following: 'Visit
Kirghiziya.'"3

With the cultural flowering of ancient Kirghizstan there have occurred truly
astonishing changes in the spiritual life of the people which until the revolu-
tion was at an extremely low level of cultural development. Thus, as recently as
1920 of 510,000 Kirghiz, 489,000 did not know how to read or write. During the
years of Soviet power illiteracy has been completely eliminated in the republic.
Today it has more than 1,600 general educational schools and 45 higher and
secondary specialized educational institutions; more than 1 million people. or
every third inhabitant of the republic, is covered by the various types of
education.

I.
FOR‘OFTICJAI.USE(JNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Kirghizstan is a model of an indestructible commonwealth of people-brothers.
There are living together and working harmoniously on the territory of the republic
Kirghiz and Russians, Uzbeks and Kazakhs, Dungans and Uyguri, and the representa-
tives of many other nationalities who along with the Kirghiz enjoy the equal

rights and opportunities defined by the Soviet Constitution.

"The nationalities policy which is being conducted by the CPSU in Kirghiziya,
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Tajikistan," the First Secretary of the CC of the
Communist Party of Kirghiziya comrade T. U. Usubaliyev writes, "is close and
understandable to the people of Yinjiang who are very attentive to the experi—
ence which has been gained in some of the nationalities questions and constructing
socialist national statehood in the Soviet republics. This is connected with the
fact that the indigenous inhabitants of Xinjiang represent either a part of the
peoples whose basic mass lives in the republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan
(Kazakhs, Kirghiz, Uzbeks, Tajiks), or have numerous former compatriots in the
Soviet Union (Uygurs, Dungans, and so forth). In addition. historical economic
and cultural relations have existed since far away times among the peoples of
Xiniiang and the republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan." when in 1949 the
people's revolution was victorious in China, in Kinjiang it was greeted as a
national holiday which opened a road into a bright future.

"The people hoped," Major General Zunun Taipov writes in his memoirs, "that the
time of humiliation and oppression has gone into the past and that the People's
Liberation Army of China had come not to subjugate and conquer, but to liherate,
and that a time of equal rights and respect for the value of every nation was
coming, and the Chinese administration's first steps strengthened these hopes.

In 1969-1950 Chinese cadre workers in Xinjinng tried to show that they had come
to Xinjiang as friends."5 Indeed, the first successes in the field of industry,
agriculture, and culture in the Xinjinng Autonomous Region encouraged hope.
They were achieved to a substantial degree thanks to the selfless fraternal aid
of the peoples of the Soviet Union. It was precisely the USSR which provided
China with modern technical documentation and supplied enterprises which were
being built with modern equipment and materials. Deficit cargoes flowed in a
continuous stream thrOugh Kirghiziya into China on a specially built highway.

A large number of Soviet specialists worked in Xinjiang and with their active
assistance the first detachments of the working class and of the technical intel-
ligentsia were formed from among the different nationalities. During the period
1950-1955 many young men and women, the representatives of the various nationali-
ties of Xinjinuu received a higher education in the USSR; they also studied
in Soviet Kirghizstan as well as in other republics of the Soviet East.

Increasingly solid economic and cultural relations were established among the
peoples of Xinjldnn and the peoples of Central Asia and Kazakhstan.

"The successes gained during the first decade of the existence of the Chinese
People's Republic convincingly demonstrated to the non-Chinese peoples that they
were achieved only when the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party based them-
selves upon and acted on the basis of the universal laws of Harxism-Leninism and
in close alliance with the CPSU and the Soviet Union and the socialist countries.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

The failures and mishaps in the economy and other spheres of the life of China
always set in when the policy of the Chinese Communist Party was determined by
petty bourgeois nationalism and adventurism."6

The leaders of China long ago retreated from the Marxiat-Leninist solution of the
nationalities question which provides, first of all. for the rights of nations to
self-determination. Peking refused this right to non-Han peoples, including
Moslems. Recently on the pages of the periodical KMUMTSI a speech given by Zhou
Enlai in 1957 was published. In it the right of nations to self-determination
was announced to be "not in correspondence with the historical condition” of
China. Instead of self—determination, the non-Han peoples acquired only a
truncated territorial autonomy.

Beginning at the end of the 19503, when the great power-hegemonistic platform of
the Maoists took form. they began to openly carry out a chauvinistic course with
respect to the non-Chinese nations and peoples. Mow pernicious this policy is can
be seen from the example of Xinjiang. With regard to the area it occupies

(172 of the territory of china) it is in first place among the other provinces
and autonomous regions. Despite the fact that local national cadres at one_time
expressed themselves in favor of granting the Uygurs self-determination and pro-
posed calling Xlnjiang Uyguristan, the Maoist leadership completely ignored
this demand of the Uygur people, granting it only the right of local national
autonomy. The chauvinistic national policy of the Maoists in Xinjiang took on
an especially unbridled character during the years of the "cultural revolution"
which brought the Uygurs, Kazakhs, Kirghiz. and other peoples of this area ruin
and hunger and outrages against the distinctive characteristics of their life and
their cultural and religious convictions. It is not accidental that during
1959-1966 not less than 200,000 people moved from Xinjiang to the Soviet Union.

Speaking in December 1964 on the question of education in the village, Mao Zedong
cynically stated: "There are so many people in China that several tens of
thousands of people can be allowed to run away. Did not several tens of thousands
of people leave Xinjiang? There are only a few people of this nationality--
Kazakhs. It would not be a disaster if several million people were to leave
China-only that after running away they abuse us."7 And this is the response of
the "Great Helmsman" to the uprising of local peoples in Xinjiang and to their
escape to the Soviet Union as a measure of salvation.

Refusing the nonihui peoples of the Chinese People's Republic the right to
national self-determination, the Beijing leaders imposed upon them truncated
territorial autonomy. Thus, for example, an administrative reorganization
carried out in the autonomous region of Inner Mongolia of the Chinese People's
Republic was executed in order to eliminate the Mongolitn people as a large
ethnic group by dissolving it among the Pans. The resettlement into this
region of hundreds of thousands of Chinese has led to the fact that the size of
the Mongolian population in it now comprises only 3.4: of the total number of
people living in Mongolia.

6
FOR OFF"JA1.USE¢DNLY
fOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With the beginning of the "cultural revolution" in the Xinjiang-Uygur
Autonomous Region, just as in other autonomous regions, the entire national
intelligentsia and all of the party and state workers who were non-Chinese

became the victims of savage reprisals and were sent to so-called "labor re-
education schools"--the Chinese variant of concentration camps.8 The estab-
lished staff workers--the Khantsi--became the masters of the situation. These
areas are being flooded with masses of Chinese settlers, at the same time as
their indigenous inhabitants are gradually being squeezed into relatively un-
settled places. According to the testimony of the American scholar Owen Lattimore
who in the early 19705 visited Xinjiang, the percentage of the Uygur population
here had decreased by 1973 compared with 1949 from 80,000 to 50,000, while the
number of Chinese had increased during this time from 200,000 to 2,800,000 people
(according to other data. 6 million Chinese are already living here). The
English newspaper FINANCIAL TIMES noted not too long ago that Peking was planning
to bring the population of its "northwestern district" to 100 million people.
This means that an entire people--the Uyguri--stands before the threat of turning
into an insignificant national minority on its own historical homeland. The
process of the forcible assimilation of the non-Han peoples of China is moving
ahead at full swing; this includes the Turkish speaking peoples of Xinjiang
whom the Maoists are trying to deprive of their history and individuality by
damaging the development of their culture in every possible way.

Xlnjiang has served as a forepost of the Chinese military for a long time now.
After the April revolution of 1978 in Afghanistan, it turned into a springboard
for the secret and open struggle of the Maoist leadership against the Afghan and
other peoples of the region. The Beijingauthorities have completely stopped
paying attention to the vital interests of the Uygur, Kazakh, Kirghiz, and
other peoples of this multi-national region. Practically all of the able-bodied
men and women are members of detachments of the so-called people's militia.
One-fourth of the population of Xinjiang has been put under arms. It is not
without good reason that popular demonstrations do not cease here. According to
the reports of the foreign press, one of these demonstrations occurred, for
example, in the spring of 1978 in the districts of Avat, Aksu, Kel'pin, and
Uch-Turfan, and in October of the same year there were mass anti—Chinese demon-
strations in Xiniinng. A wave of protest demonstrations against the policy of
the Beijingleadership with regard to the youth which were being sent to the
villages swept across all of China in 1981, enveloping Xinjiang. No matter how
much Maoist propaganda is camouflaging it today, the policy of oppression and
arbitrariness is encountering growing resistance both from the Chinese and from
the non-Chinese people of the Chinese People's Republic who are seeking to have
their national and civil rights respected.

A sharp interest in Islam has suddenly arisen today in China. Propagandistic pub—
lications, programs, and the radio designed for foreign, above all, Moslem
countries abound in materials about the "happy life of the peoples of China who
profess lslam"--the Dungsns. Uygurs, Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Kirghiz, Tajiks, and others.
True, the events of recent years are mentioned hurriedly--the mocking of things
sacred to Islam during the period of the "cultural revolution" and the harbaric
persecution by the Khunveyﬁln of believers in Moslem areas--the Xinjiang-Uygur
autonomous region. and the provinces of Hebei, Henan, Yunnan, and Qinghai.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But these timid admissions drown in a sea of materials about the "heavenly

life" of the Hoslem peoples of China. The Peking leadership allegedly cares only
about the good of the Hoslems. On every occasion the Beijing leaders hasten to
demonstrate their "sympathies” for the 13 million Hoslems who, according to the
latest Chinese data. live in the Chinese People's Republic and for the entire
Moslem world in general. All of this is only for show.

The present-day Peking leaders are trying to create the illusion that the history
of their relations with the Hoslens of China are beginning with a new page. But

this attempt will scarcely succeed. For the entire history of the relationships

between the great Han chauvinists and the non-Chinese peoples of the country in

the past and the present-day nationality policy of Peking are too similar to

one another.

Thus, it is becoming indisputable that in distorting and falsifying the history
of the peoples of Central and Middle Asia, including the history of Kirghiziya,
the Maoist leadership of China would like in this way to justify not only its
frantic anti-Soviet course, but also its grent power chauvinist policy in the
nationalities question. However, the facts against which certain Chinese his-
torians and Maoist propaganda are now warring irrefutably testify to the hope-
lessness of their attempts to support with some references to the past the
clearly adventurous foreign and domestic policies of Beijing which is following
in the wake of the forces of international imperialist reaction.

"Our class opponents." T. U. Usubaliyev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, "would
very much like to undermine the unity and solidarity of the Soviet peoples around
its tested vanguard-~the communist party,--and weaken the growing international
prestige of the Soviet state. But the attempts of the ideologists of anti-
communism are in vain. . . .

The communists and workers of Kirghizstan support with all their heart the peace-
loving and genuinely Leninist foreign policy which is conducted by the Central
Committee of the party. The delegation of the Comnmnist Party of Kirghiziya
fully supports and shares the words said by comrade Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev in

the Summary Report about relations with the Chinese People's Republic."9

FOOTNOTES

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Summary Report of the Central Committee to the 26th CPSU
Congress. . . ." p 75

2. PRAVDA. 27 February 1981

3. T. U. Usubaliyev, "Leninism--The Great Source of the Friendship and Fraternity
of Peoples," Moscow, 1976, pp 383-385

4. T. U. Usubaliyev, "The Triumph of the Leninist Nationalities Policy in the
USSR and Great Power Chauvinism in Contemporary China." Frunze, 1976, pp 25-26

8
IWJRIJFFNJAI.USE10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. Z. Taipov, "In the Struggle for Freedom," PROSTOR. No 2, 1972
6. T. U. Usubaliyev. op. cit., pp 26-27

7. "Unvarnished Maoism. Some already known, and also previously unpublished
1n the Chinese press statements by Mao Zedong," Moscow, 1980, p 253

8. ‘l‘. U. Usubaliyev, op. c1t., p 28
9. PRAVDA. 27 February 1981
mPYRIGH‘I: Izdatel'stvo "Kyrgyzstan," 1981

2959
CSO: 1830/21?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

BLOC-WIDE IDEOLOGICAL COORDINATION DESCRIBED
Moscow VOPROSY NAUCHNOCO KOMHUNIZHA in Russian No “7. 1981 pp 3—10

[Article by V. A. Rylach, graduate student at Kiev University: "Toward the
Question of the Ideological Cooperation of the Marxist-Leninist Parties of the
Socialist Commonwealth Countries"]

[Excerpts] The development of the ideological cooperation of the countries of the
socialist commonwealth has gone through definite stages of maturity. Thus, while
at the early stages of the development of relations between the Marxist-Leninist
parties there occurred,_as a rule, only bilateral forms of cooperation, at the
present time there has developed a stable mechanism of multilateral cooperation
between the ruling parties of the socialist commonwealth countries.

The strategic line and the prospects for ideological cooperation are worked out at
multilateral and bilateral meetings of the general and first secretaries of the
Central Committeesof the Marxist-Leninist parties which, as a rule, take place
every year. Thus, the high level meetings in the Crimea which took place in 1978
made an important contribution to strengthening the interaction of the fraternal
countries and parties in accomplishing their domestic and itternational tasks. The
long-term cooperation of the socialist states and their ruling parties, including
ideological cooperation, was at the center of the attention of the participants

in these meetings.

Since 1973 conferences have regularly been held of the secretaries of the Central
Committees of the fraternal parties who run ideological and international affairs.
At these conferences detailed analyses are made of the prospects for ideological
cooperation and concrete joint measures are mapped out in the field of party
ideological work. A Moscow conference (December 1973) initiated the regular
meetings of ideological workers on this level. Its participants exchanged the
work experience of the parties in the ideological field, discussed a further
deepening of ideological cooperation, and expressed the hope of developing multi-
lateral cooperation along with a deepening of bilateral relations.

The conclusions of the Moscow conference helped to improve the ideological work of
the Harxist-Leninist parties in the communist education of the workers and in pro-
pagandizing the ideas of Harxism-Leninism and the comprehensive achievements of
socialism. The conference emphasized the necessity for a resolute rebuff to
bourgeois ideology and to the ideological diversions of the Maoists against the
countries of the socialist commonwealth.

lO
IKNROFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To date there have been six conferences of the Central Committee secretaries which
have worked on the above questions: Moscow (1973), Prague (1975). Warsaw (1976).
Sofia (1977). Budapest (1978). and Berlin (1979). On the basis of a detailed
discussion of the important problems of ideological work and of a friendly ex-
change of experience, these conferences made a substantial contribution to per-
fecting the ideological cooperation of the fraternal parties. Thus, speaking
about the Berlin (1979) Conference of the Secretaries of the CCs of the Marxist-
Leninist Parties of the Socialist Commonwealth Countries. the member of the
Politburo of the CC CPSU and secretary of the CC CPSU comrade M. A. Suslov em-
phasized: "New and useful steps in expanding ideological cooperation were taken
by the Conference of Secretaries of the Central Committees of the Communist and
Workers' Parties of the socialist countries on international and ideological
matters which took place in July of this year.“ At this conference es-
pecial attention was given to cooperation by the socialist countries in the field
of studying and developing the theoretical and practical problems of socialism and
the new phenomena and tendencies of the contemporary world.

The collective development of ideological positions by the sides within the frame—
work of a single world view consists in finding the optimal variant of an ideolo-
gically agreed upon policy. Only then does ideological unity become a factor in
the unity of action of the parties and the socialist states.

The methodological approach to achieving unity of action through elucidation and
permitting theoretical disagreements on the basis of Marxism was worked out by

V. I. Lenin. "If we do not wish under the name of 'unity‘ to present the working
class with a formless confusion of the most diverse elements." he wrote, "if we
wish real unity of work, then the first mandatory step toward this has to be an
elucidation of 'points of difference.‘ Let 'points of difference' be accurately
clarified with the help of a 'general exchange of opinion,‘ and then it will

become clear: is it possible to speak about some practical steps toward unifica-
tion."

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye obyedineniye "Vishcha shkola". 1981

2959
C50: 1800/252

ll
INDR OFIWCJAL USEZCNULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

CONTINUING NEED TO COMBAT PETTY BOURGEOIS INFLUENCES SEEN
Kiev VOPRDSY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZMA in Russian No 47,1981 pp 55-61

[Article by A. Migashova, graduate student at Kiev University: "The Essence of
Philistine, Petty Bourgeois Ideology and Psychology and Its Manifestation During
the Crisis Years of the 19603 in the Czechoslovakian SSR")

[Excerpts] The struggle against philistine, petty bourgeois ideology is an impor-
tant direction of the ideological work which is being performed by the communists
and workers' parties of the countries of the socialist commonwealth under present-
day conditions. As was emphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress, along with the
growth of material wealth, it is important to ensure a corresponding rise in the
ideological and political and cultural levels of people and to teach then to
judiciously make use of the material and spiritual possibilities which are
possessed by society.

Under specific conditions manifestations of philistine, petty baurgeois ideology
and psychology and survivals of the past, if they are not rebuffed, can be used

by anti-socialist elements for anti-communist purposes. Adapting to the new his-
torical conditions of the conflict between the opposed social systems, bourgeois
and petty bourgeois ideologists are putting forward conceptions with increasing
frequency which have the task of influencing the consciousness and behavior of the
working masses of both the capitalist and the socialist countries, and of dis—
tracting their attention from urgent social problems. This gives rise to a neces-
sity of a punctual and effective unmasking of the methods of bourgeois ideology
and of its slanderous propaganda.

The events of the 1960s in Czechoslovakia were an example of this kind of revival
of petty bourgeois ideology and philistine psychology under socialism. "At the net
stage of the construction of socialism," 0. Hoshner has noted, "which separates tht
stage of the construction of the foundations of socialism from the stage of con-
strucred socialism there was no solution and could not be any solution to the
problem of the attitude toward the generation of 'classic' petty bourgeois, the
former small and medium property owners; a more important question was being
solved here: how to prevent petty bourgeois ideology, psychology, and morality
from developing, and how to ensure the systematic waging by ideological and educa-
tional means of the struggle for the socialist way of life which is incompatible
with the petty bourgeois way of life and with the petty bourgeois 'model' of
socialism."

12

FOR OFTTCJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

In 1958 the llth Congress of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia pointed to the
danger of a large proportion of the petty bourgeois element in the social-class
structure of society and to the necessity for aggressive and well-directed ideo-
logical and political work among those who has their origins in the petty hour-
geoisie.* However. the decisions of this congress were not put into practice with
sufficient consistency. As a result. as early as the beginning of the 19605 the
former petty bourgeois became active with his own political program and worldview.
"Errors and shortcomings," it was noted at a plenum of the CC C? of Czechoslovakia
(December 1970), "resulted with us in all the more serious consequences since
numerous petty bourgeois strata both in the village and among the urban population
had a large weight in the social composition of our society. These strata repre-
sented a developed political current with old traditions. a strong organization.
and a clearly expressed petty bourgeois ideology of nationalism, Hazaryhism. and
social democracy which was deep rooted and which penetrated the coasciousness of

a certain segment of the working class." Politically and culturally. for many
years these circles oriented themselves toward the Rest. In Slovakia the situa-
tion was made more complicated by the fact that there were strong religious
survivals there.

Social democratic traditions in Czechoslovakia were an important factor In the
spread of petty bourgeois ideology in the country. The Social Democratic Party
was one of the most influential organizations in bourgeois Czechoslovakia. During
the crisis years (1968-1969) the representatives of the former petty bourgeoisie
who comprised a large proportion in the ranks of the individual political parties
in the National Front of the Czechoslovakian SSR** actively helped the counter-
revolutionary forces and the transformation of these parties into opposition ones.
The new programs of these parties denied the leading role of the Communist Party
of Czechoslovakia and made attempts to restore the previous bourgeois democratic
system of state power. Even before 1968 a group of the right social democracy was
formed in the country. Their goal was the recreation of a social democratic

party whose ranks were supposed to be filled chiefly from among those who had been
expelled from the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia and the youth. The right-wing
social democratic groups based themselves on the counter-revolutionary emigra—

 

 

* In bourgeois Czechoslovakia the petty bourgeoisie comprised one-third of the
country‘s population. After the socialist revolution, the bourgeoisie. inclu-
ding the petty bourgeoisie. was deprived of its economic and political advanta-
ges. but it still comprised a substantial social strata of society. In 1969
the Czechoslovakian SSR had 300.000 representatives of the former bourgeoisie,
including people from bourgeois families. tens of thousands of former employees
of the bourgeois state apparatus and members of the disbanded bourgeois par-
ties, and 2.5 million representatives of the former petty bourgeoisie. ("Social-
ist International Relations and Their Critics." hoscow. 1975. p 34).

** In addition to the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, the National Front of the
Czechoslovakian SSR contained the Czechoslovakian Socialist Party. the Czecho-
slovakian People's Party, the Slovak Freedom Party, and the Slovak Revival Party

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tion and on the support of West European social democratic parties.

The theses of the Czechoslovakian bourgeois philosopher and political leader

T. G. Hazaryk served as the ideological source of petty bourgeois ideology. This
is explained by the fact that the ideology of Hazarykism is the most adequate dis-
cussion of the worldview of the petty bourgeois strata of society. At its basis
lies a philosophical and sociological "validation" of a critique of Marxism. This
ideology still fully camouflaged its bourgeois content by means of social demagogy.
In addition, the cult of Mazaryk as an "outstanding" thinker and diplomat had not
been fully unmasked in Czechoslovakia. The revival of the ideology of Hazarykism
served the right-wing socialist forces during the crisis years as an ideological
weapon for their counter-revolutionary goals.

The situation was also complicated by the fact that ideological work in the party
into which petty bourgeois elements had penetrated was underestimated. An aggresP
sive struggle was not waged against them, and this led to a strengthening of an
ideology which was alien to Marxism. The underestimation of party ideological
work, it was noted at a plenum of the CC C? of Czechoslovakia (December 1970),
"leads by law first to attempts to 'improve' or 'perfect' socialism, to the re-
placement of internationalism with nationalism, and then to a cultivation of the
ideals of petty bourgeois consumer socialism and to the creation of untrue myths
about socialist reality, issuing, finally, in a denial of and trampling under foot
of socialism altogether."

Added to the above-noted shortcomings in the party's ideological work in the early
1960s were difficulties in the economic field. An overestimation of the country's
real possibilities when the economic program for the Third Five-Year plan was worked
out was reflected in the fulfillment of the five-year plan for ebonomic develop-
ment and in the solution of other problems of the economic life of the Czecho-
slovakian SSR. ‘

Inese circumstances gave rise in certain social strata (especially among the in-
telligentsia) to skepticism regarding the advantages of socialism. Ideals of a
"human" "democratic socialism," of a "socialism with a human face,“ various models
of a "consumer socialism," and so forth began to be advanced and disseminated.

The measure of all things was presumed to be the abstract man, man in general. In
reality, this was the petty bourgeois elevated to an ideal. Disoriented by the
means of mass information and propaganda, he proved to be the reserve which was
used by the anti-socialist forces for their own ends. The petty bourgeois was
needed by them only for the restoration of capitalism in Czechoslovakia. The petty
bourgeois "affirms" in his own way certain sides and aspects of social existence.
and individual problems and shortcomings which are to be met in social life. Not
knowing how to explain what is occurring in concrete reality, he gets lost in a
vulgar apology for it. In his life and work he tries to avoid any difficulty and
expenditure of his own strength and energy, and marks out for himself a path in
life which is easily discernible in the near future. Active in finding solutions
for petty little matters and little questions, the petty bourgeois shows an inde-
cisiveness, vagueness. and even passivity in everything that is genuinely social

1a
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and of society. The petty bourgeois was needed bythe counter-revolutionary forces
as a socially indifferent individual, full of indifference. unconcern, "principled
non-intervention, false optimism. and individualistic consciousness.

The vitalityof the petty bourgeoisie and of petty bourgeois ideology and the
possibility that they could appear or even be revived in a socialist society is
explained by their plasticity, the property of adapting to changing conditions.
The petty bourgeoisie is dangerous because it does not always openly come out
against socialism, does not resist it, and outwardly even agrees with everything.
The petty bourgeois always maneuvers skillfully, performs machinations, adapts to
circumstances, keeps his peace, fawns upon the "powerful," not forgetting at the
same time to gradually and unnoticeably have a negative influence on the revolu-
tionary program of transformations in society. At a convenient moment he is ready
to influence the political relations in society in the spirit of a petty bourgeois

Petty bourgeois ideology lives as a parasite on the love for man, humanism, and
general human values. Its humanistic ideal is abstract and utopian. and it re-
mains an empty phrase incapable of influencing the real course of events. When
this phraseology is given out as the last word of Harxism, as the personification
of "real," "humane," and "democratic socialism," it becomes a means of the revi-
sion of Harxism aimed against the socialist system and the communist movement and
its scientific ideology.

The experience of our country shows that in those places where the party's ideolo-
gical work is weakened and where an aggressive struggle is not waged against petty
bourgeois ideology and psychology. the latter become a serious danger for social-
ism, and one of the instruments in imperialist policy and propaganda. For this
reason, as was emphasized at the October (1972) Plenum of the CC of the CP of
Czechoslovakia. "it is essential to reach the kind of level of socialist conscious-
ness in the workers with which they will be able to correctly orient themselves

in any s’tuation and to distinguish real values from various pseudo-values and will
learn to deeply understand exactly what it is necessary to selflessly defend,
strengthen, and develop so as not to become the victim of ideological diversions
which are being carried out by anti-communist forces." The historical experience
of the construction of socialism in Czechoslovakia has shown that the revival of
petty bourgeois phllistine ideology and psychology can be caused by a violation

of the economic, soclo-political, and ideological-spiritual principles of the
socialist transformation of society. The eradication of the various forms of the
manifestation of the petty bourgeoisie presupposes an imprcvement of economic

life and the social and political sphere of the life of society, and the perfor-
mance of aggressive and well-directed ideological and political educational work
by the communist party.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoye ob'yedineniye "Vishcha shkola", 1981

2959
C50: 1800/253

15
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

ALIENATION UNDER SOCIALISM DISCUSSED
Kiev VOPROSY NAUCHNOGO KOHMUNIZMA in Russian No 69. 1981 pp 24-30

[Article by P. Yu. Saukh, docent, Ukrainian Institute for Waterworks Engineers:
"Some Aspects of the Problem of Overcoming Alienation Under Socialism"]

[Excerpts] The forms of social consciousness, particularly morality, are charac-
terized by a definite inertia. For this reason remnants of the capitalist forms
of alienation and snrvivals of private property ideology sometimes find an ex-
pression in a number of social phenomena. Although their "proportion" is
negligible compared with the moral values which have been built up by our
society, nevertheless against the background of socialist moral relationships
these survivals are the cause of considerable pain. Host Soviet people not only
criticize them from the positions of communist morality, but show an active in-
tolerance for them. However. when they encounter violations of moral norms
certain people still turn for help to religion. Such psychological situations
are of a profoundly personal character and are only outwardly similar to aliena-
tion. The reasons for then can be different: the escape of one or another
human passion from the control of its bearer. the absolutization of a specific
kind of rules of behavior, a lack of correspondence between the results of the
purely personal actions of an individual to plan goals and so forth.

Speculating with these phenomena, bourgeois philosophers assert there exist new
forms of alienation under socialism and communism. In addition they refer to the
fact that allegedly any division of labor and every state in its very nature
engender alienation and, more than that. themselves are realized alienation. For
example. the not unknown "interpreter" of Marxism A. Shaff in his book "Marxism
and the Human Individual" asks the question: cannot alienation arise from other
sources besides private property. Despite Marx's proposition that the abolishment
of alienation is possible only by means of the destruction of private property,
A. Sheff asserts that in socialist countries alienation is preserved even in the
economic sphere, since the division of labor and market relationships continue to
exist. As a proof he tries to use the facts of the functioning under socialism
of public and state institutes. He regards the state as an "apparatus of
violence" and looks upon it as an "alienating force."

The historical practice of the construction of the new society in the Soviet
Union and in the fraternal countries of socialism irrefutably testifies to the
falsehood of such assertions. The socialist organization of society not only

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

helps to eliminate the capitalist alienation of labor and its ideological recidiviatn
excluding the appearance of new forms of alienation, but is also the only possible

and reliable means of preventing phenomena which bring the individual and society
definite damage.

For bourgeois sociologists, particularly A. Sheff. there does not exist any ex-
ploiter state and proletarian state--there is the state in general as an apparatus
of violence. Meanwhile, K. Marx convincingly proved that the state unuer the
conditions of an exploitational society is only an illusory collectivity; in

reality. it defends the interests of the ruling class which present the latter in
the form of general human interest. Since this "universal" is for the working
masses only an illusory form of community and is in contradiction with their real
interests. the state appears as an alien, independent force which stands outside of
them. For this reason the proletariat, "even if his dominion results in the .
destruction of the entire old social forms and of dominion in general-—must first

of all win political power for himself so that this class, in its turn. can

present its interest as universal, which it is compelled to do in the first moment."

The rule of the working class objectively corresponds to the interests of the
exploited and the oppressed. The state of the dictatorship of the proletariat pro-
vides genuine democracy for all workers. Socialist democracy receives a further
development under the all-popular state in which all socially important issues

of political, economic. and social life are discussed and decided with the active
participation of the workers.

Socialist democracy finds its expression in the work of the Soviets of People's
Deputies--the most representative bodies of popular power--, and also oi the system
of public organizations.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'skoyeobWedineniye "Vishcha shkola", 1981

2959
C50: 1800/255

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

ETHNIC RELATIONS IN THE WORKPLACE SURVEYED
Kiev VOPROSY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZMA in Russian No 68, 1981 pp 20-26

[Article by N. S. Kavunets, graduate student at the Kiev Polytechnical Institute:
"The Labor Collective-~The Social and International Cell of Soviet Society"]

[Excerpt] Under mature socialism a further development of the productive forces,
the planned orientation of production, and also the opening up of new areas are
accompanied by social shifts and by a strengthening of population migration. As
the results of the 1979 USSR population census showed, the relative population
displacements to the north which have been caused by the settlement of resource
rich underpcpulated areas are very great. The process of the settlement of the
Tyumen' North is a characteristic example. The migration shifts lead to a further
deepening of the national heterogeneity of labor collectives.

Thus, the following factors which determine the emergence and development of
multi-national labor collectives can be singled out: the internationalization of
the economic life of the Soviet nations, deep changes in the social structure of the
union and autonomous republics, an increase in the national detachments of the
working class, and intensified population migration.

Multi-national collectives are a lawful phenomenon in countries whose population
is made up of different nations and peoples.

Under capitalism the ruling class incites in every way it can and artificially
maintains national and inter-ethnic disputes and conflicts and tries to inculcate
in peOple of different nationalities a spirit of competition, suspicion, and
enmity. Only the victory of the socialist revolution creates real conditions for
the affirmation of the principles of genuine collectivism and leads to the dis-
appearance of the national discord which was cultivated by the possessing classes.
New socialist qualities are formed in the workers and relations of friendship and
comradely mutual assistance develop in the socialist multi-national labor collec-
tives. Work in multi-national collectives has taken firm root in the life of
Soviet people. Thus, 78 percent of the questioned metallurgical workers of
Ukrainian, Russian, and other nationalities of the Dnepropetrovsk Metallurgical
Plant imeni G. I. Petrovskiy and of the plant imeni K. Libknecht gave a high
evaluation to work in multi-national collectives.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Multi-nationai labor collectives promote the strengthening of the solidarity of

all of the nations and peoples of our country. Solidarity finds its manifestation
in the close interweaving and blending of Soviet patriotism and internationalism,
in the creation of a single national economic complex, and in the beneficial inter-
penetration of national cultures.

The international solidarity of Soviet society is to a substantial extent deter-
mined by the success in developing an internationalist consciousness in the mem-
bers of a labor collective.

Joint production work does not lead to the automatic formation of internationalist
convictions in workers. in any collective moral and material encouragement for
workers in the process of labor activity is connected not with the national member-
ship of the subject of production, but exclusively with the amount and quality of
his labor. It is important that a healthy psychological climate be created in
every collective and that the worker feels himself to be the master and actively
participates in production management and public affairs. It is precisely this
kind of atmosphere of friendly work and creative search which is being created.
for example, by the party organization of the Karaganda Nine imeni the 60th
Anniversary of Great October where the representatives of 60 nationalities work--
Kazakhs, Russians, Ukrainians, Belorussians, Germans, Poles, Tatnrs, and others.
During the course of a sociological study of 266 questioned miners, 130 stated
that, in their opinion, the collective helps to increase labor discipline and
labor productivity; 65 people believed that the collective helps in overcoming
shortcomings and with a critical attitude toward one's work; 71 believed that the
collective has a positive influence on the formation of a scientific worldview

and on increasing responsibility for one's work.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatei'skoycob'yedineniye "Vishcha shkols", 1981

2959
C50: 1800/254

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lIHIOFFKJAI.USEZONLY

NATIONAL

FUNCTIONS, PROBLEMS OF SOVIET FAMILY DESCRIBED
Kiev VOPROSY NAUCHNOGO KOHHUNIZHA in Russian No 49, 1981 pp 105-110

[Article by N. N. Kovtun, senior instructor: G. I. Kosenko, docent, Kiev Techno-
logical Institute of the Food Industry: and I. V. Horozov, docent, Orenburg
Agricultural Institute: "0n the Formation of Marital Family Relations Under the
Conditions of Developed Socialism"]

[Excerpt] As a result of the socialist revolution and the fundamental reorganiza-
Lion of the entire life of society a new socialist family has developed whose
activities are based on public ownership of the means of production and personal
participation in socially useful labor. As a result, the motives for entering
into marriage have changed qualitatively. The material interest in conjugal life
is negligible. and marriage by calculation is becoming an increasingly rare pheno-
menon in socialist society. A study of the motives for marriage which was conduc-
ted under the leadership of Z. I. Faynburg covered 871 students, 1,771 workers,
453 employees, and 316 engineering and technical workers. The vast majority of
the respondents named love as the decisive condition for marriage. [9, 185-186]

V. I. Lenin saw one of the tasks of socialism in "women workers taking more and
more part in the management of public enterprises and in the management of the
state." [3. Vol 40, 157-158]. Today in the Supreme Soviet USSR there are 475
women, or 31.3 percent of the deputies, while in the local Soviets there are more
than 1 million. or 49 percent of the deputies. [6, 87] The Soviet woman has
become equal with men culturally also. Whereas before the revolution 88 percent
of the women were illiterate, today women make up 58 percent of our diplomaed
specialists.

The USSR Constitution places upon citizens the duty of caring for the education of
their children. preparing them for socially useful labor, and raising worthy mem-
bers of socialist society. At the same time, the Constitution gives children the
duty of caring for their parents and helping them. [4, 25]

The most important functions of the family under today's conditions are the
following:

--economic. Under capitalism the family is an economic unit of society, and a
cell for the accumulation and safe-keeping of capital. The source for the exis-
tence of the Soviet family is made up above all of the income received for labor

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the good of society, and also of monies which are allotted by the state from
the social funds. The socialist family has been preserved as an economic unit since

it performs such functions. It has its own budget and its own income and expendi-
ture items;

--the function of continuing the species. The birth of a child is the private
matter of a family, but from the point of view of the state it takes on social
importance, since every child will be in the future a creator of material and
spiritual goods and a defender of his homeland. The need for children occupies
an important place in the structure of the needs of the contemporary family.

The results of the 1979 All-Union population census testify to the concrete reali-
zation of the function of the continuation of the species. 02 86.3 million
families, 29.7 percent consist of 2 people, 28.9 percent of 3, 23 percent of a,
and 18.4 percent of 5 or more people. The average size of a family in the country
as a whole came to 3.5 people, with 3.3 being the size among the urban population,
and 3.8 people being the size among the rural population [7, 17]; that is, more

than half of the families do not in fact reproduce themselves. This vital problem
is a subject of study by demographers;

--the educational function of the family. The personal happiness of an individual,
the successful arrangement of his life, the birth and education of children, the
mutual existence of generations, the transmission of culture, and the inimitable
emotional and psychological atmosphere of love and devotion which are so important
for the development of human individuality--a11 of this is connected with the
family. Hhile considering the full importance of the educational role of pre-
school institutions, of the school, and so forth, nevertheless it has to be ad-
mitted that society has not yet created an institution which can be compared to
the family for the diversity of the educational functions it performs.

The socialist family is organized on democratic principles, its members have equal
rights, and they are economically independent of one another. The enrichment of
intro-family life, the change in the relationship between the family and the indi-
vidual, and the freedom of choice and decision for each of the spouses is raising
many problems of family relationships in a new way. The maintenance of the

family's internal equilibrium has become a matter first of all of the family mem-
bers themselves.

Love, matrimonial fidelity, and moral duty are subjective concepts. The reasons
for the disintegration of families may be the most diverse ones and consist not
only in a lack of feelings and of common views, but also of other factors which
are much more profound and complex and which have not yet been fully studied.

In Russia in 1913 there were only 5,000 divorces (.03 divorces per 10,000 people).
This is explained by the fact that divorces were prohibited by law and were
allowed only in extreme and exceptional cases. In recent years the divorce co-
efficient (per 10,000 people) has reached 1.1 in the Central Asian and Trans-
caucasian republics, 2.9 in the Ukrainian SSR, 4.5 in the Baltic republics, 5.1
in Moscow, and 5.6 in Leningrad. [10, 162-163]. The large amount of population

21
FOR.0FF1CIAL USEZCHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

migration. the opening up of new areas, and the influx of population into large
industrial centers have an effect upon the divorce level.

In socialist society the principle of preserving and strengthening the family is
directed above all against frivolous and unjustified divorces. However, divorce
should not always be regarded as an evil. "If only marriage which is based on
love is moral, it remains such only as long as love continues to exist." F. Engels
wrote. "But the duration of a feeling . . . is very different with different
individuals . . . and once it has completely dried up or has been displaced by a
new passionate love, divorce then becomes a boon for both sides and for society.
It is only necessary to save people from the necessity of dragging themselves
through the unnecessary dirt of the divorce process." [1, Vol 21. 84-85] Since
in the process of the development of the family there occurs the destruction of
pro-marriage relationships and the creation of new ones, the reasons for divorces
have to be looked for above all in the changes which occur in the development of
social relations, of the spouses as individuals. and in the family in all of its
aspects.

Basing ourselves on a number of studies which have been conducted in recent years.
let us examine the real tendencies in the field of marriage relations, concentra-
ting our attention on the role which is played by the moral needs of the spouses.
and their moral and socio-psychological adaptation to each other. Of 350 questioned
workers and employees. 65.2 percent of the men and 78.1 percent of the women

entered into marriage for love and for common interests and views. [8, ‘9] As a
result of a questionnaire by the authors of an article conducted with 400 pairs of
students in the city of Kiev who were married in 1979, the basic motives for this
event were named as love and a community of interests (85 percent of the men and
85.1 percent of the women).

Love is an important foundation for entering into marriage, but it is an insuffi-
cient guarantee of stability for the contemporary form of family relationships.
There are a large number of factors which strengthen love in the family, or, on
the contrary, destroy it. For example. that which before marriage was not obli-
gatory obtains essential and rigid contours in marriage. Behavior becomes pri-
marily regulated and the mutual compensation for errors and the concealment of
shortcomings becomes more difficult than before marriage. The materials of many
studies show that the social maturity of those entering in marriage increases the
probability that it will go on without crisis since it softens the contradiction
between expectations and marital reality. This makes it possible to conclude that
not only love. but also the social and psychological nearness of spouses is a
stabilizing factor of marriage. The concept of matrimonial adaptation includes
the everyday, emotional. moral, psychological, and cultural adaptation to one
another of the spouses. However, during the course of family life frequently
feelings of love. attraction, and mutual understanding undergo an evolution both
in the direction of strengthening and in the direction of cooling and even
alienation. A normal path of development for a family is possible on the condi-
tion that the ties which are based on mutual adaptation are stronger than other
internal and external tendencies. Studies show that the motives which lead to
the dissolution of marriage basically divide up into two groups: insufficient

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efforts by the spouses to maintain feeling on the necessary level; specific de-
fetts in the marriage which occur before or after its conclusion. The dissolution
oi the marriage can also be defined as a result of the spiritual or physical im—
perfection of people and their mutual relationships.
ihe largest number of divorce actions. as the statistical data shows, occur for
the standard motive of dissimilarity oi personalities. The special feature of this
millvo is that it is easier to conceal behind it other negative factors which
serve as the true motives for divorces. It is probably for this reason that there
is J definite standard of divorce processes which makes it difficult to study the
problem and seek ways of solving it.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. K. Marx and F. Engels. "Works," Second Edition.
2. "Marx and Engels Archives." Vol 9. Moscow. 1941.
i. V. i. Lenin. "Complete Works."
4. "Constitution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." Moscow, 1978.
9. "Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress," Moscow, 1981.

6. "Sixty Years of the National Economy." Moscow, 1978.

7. "USSR Population"(according to the data of the 1979 All-Union population cen-
sus), Moscow. I979.

8. "The Young Family," Moscow, 1979.
9. A. G. Khnrchev, "Marriage and Family in the USSR," Moscow. 1979.

10. L. V. Chuyko, "Marriages and Divorces," Moscow. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'skoye ob'yedineniye "Vishcha shkola", 1981

2959
050: 1800/256 END

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY