FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10640
7 July 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(FOUO 23/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL mo SOCIOLOGICAL Amuns
(F000 23/83)

Courams

INTENTION“

snul‘govskiy Book on Latin mrioan Hilitery Reqises Reviewed
(8a “a mnktn’ WP”! Imtq AP: oz)eeeeeeseeeeaeeeeee

New Study of Peoples in Northeastern India
(N. ll. Guava) savanna WWIYA, lat-Apr B2)........

Organisation. Activities of Afghan Youth Organisation Described
("e N1k°1ay.v’ mm WI“: “I! .2,vvvososoeeeoeeeee

Book on western Opposition to. Soviet Support for Military
Detente
(PM VOYBNNOY WWI, 1981).......................

Socialiet Countries nold Arbitrage Conference
(ulwri'l mmxt)O.COOOOOOOCOOO‘OOOOOOOO000.000.00.000...

Briers
Soviet Historians Visit Vietna-

“TIM

Obkosl Secretary on Avoidance of ‘Ditticult' Questions
(“0 vormy.v’ mm mm, at 82’0000000l0000000‘0

Problem in Social Science Research. Instruction Outlined
(T. Islaylovay menu! mm. Jul 82) ...........

Further Details on Baku Nationalities Conference
(A. A. Sueokolov: sow-rerun mm. liar-Apr 82)“...

Interaction or Class Struggle. Party Organisation Sketched
(“a Va 31"“, WW 1810311. ‘p‘ 32)...................

-a- [III-0888-35!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WWW?

Kiehlnev Nationalities Conferenoe Reported

(A. Babty) IZVBS‘I‘IYA mu IIMJ'K WW!“ 8811,
Jm-Pemr-apt 82)0.0.0.0...'OOOOOOOCCOOOOOOOOOOODO...

Electronically Stored Interlele Protected by Copyright
(Bd‘tort.1 3.th)000.000.0000...OOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOO0.00.0.

a: iete

Netlonellet Volume Wine Prue
Bvolutlon of Coot of Arne

”WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNET!“

sm'covsrn 800K 0!! LATIN AMERICA! MILITARY seams mm
Moscow VOPROS! ISTOIII in Russian lo 19. Apr 82 pp 133-135

[Review by 3. n. nusnkin of book "Arniya i politiks v Latinshoy Ameriks" [Army
and Politics in Latin America] by A. P. Shul’govskiy. Hoscw. lauka. 566 pages]

[Text] The politicization of Latin American armies. accompanied by an unending
succession of military coups d'stat. has become a focus. as it were, for my
tendencies count: to both the armed forces of the liberated Bro-Asian countries
and those of the developed capitalist countries. In Soviet literature the poli-
tical role of the army has been fairly suiticiently analyaed only for tbs comtries
of Asia and Africa.1 vherees Latin Ansricsn problems have. with certain exceptions.2
been clearly inadequately investigated.

The monograph by doctor of historical sciences A. P. Shul'govskiy. division head at
the Institute of Latin America. 0883 Academy of Sciences, represents the first
cosprehensivs analysis of the political role of the army in present-day Latin America
in our historiography. 0n the basis of extensive documentary material. periodical
publications. and monographs by representatives of lierxist and bourgeois historio-
graphy. the author dissects a broad range of questions: premises for the interven-
tion of armed forces in political life; "models" of military regimes; ideological
struggle about evaluting the role of army; the militant policy of the United States
in Latin America; the attitude of the region's co-Iunist parties toward the prob-
lem of the armed forces. etc. This solid study is, as it were. a logical actuation
of the many years devoted by A. P. Shul'govskiy to tbs investigation of various as-
pects of the problem. as embodied in his other works.

:6. l. Hirsbiy. "Armiys i politibe v stranakb Aaii i Afrihi" [Army and Politics in
the Countries of Asia and Africa]. lbscov, 1970; by the same author. "Tretiy mir:
obshchestvo. vlast'. armiya" [The Third World: Society. Power. Amy]. noscov. 1976;
R. B. Sevortyan. "Armiya v politicbeskom rezbime sovremennogo Vostoks" [The Army
in the Political Regimes of the Present-nay Orient]. lioscov. 1973.

1“See. e.g. Yu. A. Antonov. "breriliye: armiya i politiks (istoricbsskiy ocherk)"
(Brazil: Army and Politics (an historical Outline”. Hoscov. 1973
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book is based on a country~by-country approach. This seems to be a valid ap-
proach since it serves to. on the one hand. uncover the general pattern of a
growing involvement of army in politics and, on the other. analyze in depth various
forms of that involvement. In his introduction A. P. Shul'govskiy turns to the
Harxist-Leninist ideological legacy of problems relating to the army. A composite
analysis of numerous comments by the founders of scientific socialism provides. so
to speak, a methodological key to the analysis of complex processes occurring in
the armed forces. particularly in Latin America. in these times.

In examining the reasons for the intervention of armed forces in political life.
the author justly points to the exacerbation of the structural crisis of Latin
American capitalist societies. which has deeply affected the army as well. Of

no smaller importance to the existence of this phenomenon is.as follows from this
book, the emergence of a certain socio-political vacuum in the presence of that
crisis in various countries on the continent. That vacuum is associated with the
distinctive “equilibrium of forces" in civilian society between the insufficiently
organized proletarian and folk masses and the politically relatively weak bourgeois-
landowner forces. and it is this vacuum that is filled by the military. This pre-
cisely is a major reason for the spread of Messianic. paternalistic moods among

the officerdom. which often regards itself as the arbiter deciding the fate of the
nation according to his own judgment. as pointed out by the author. In analyzing
the factors in the politicization of the army it is also important to allow for the
specific features of the military organization: its monopoly in weapons, centrali-
zation of command. discipline. and hierarchic order-features that turn the army

into the mightiest. organized. and mobile institution of the bourgeois society.
capable of a rapid change in orientation.

A. F. Shul'govskiy draws attenton to the diversity of military coups d'etat in Latin
America, which often lead to the rise of regimes with fundamentally different socio-
political orientation. During the 1960s and 1970s rightist authoritarian military
dictatorships were established in a number of countries. Drawing on extensive
documentary material. the author shows that their seizure of power was the response
of the reaction to the vigorous upsurge of mass anti-imperialist movement in the
region. Many common features of the rightist authoritarian "model" were embodied

in the Chilean military-fascist re ime which. following the counter-revolutionary
coup d'etat in September 1973. rep ced the government of the bloc of National unity

after the latter had carried out basic eocio-economic transformations. The author
isolates the following principal qualitative features of the Chilean dictatorship:
In the political plane-complete JEStVUCEI33'3f the institutions of representative
bourgeois democracy; elimination of civic liberties; cruel and bloody methods of
suppressing the democratic. and particularly the leftist. opposition; and concentra-
tion of all power in the hands of the military and civilian technobureaucracy and
the multinational corporations. In the aocio-economic plane-factore providing the
conditions for the formation of stats-monopoly capital in the country: accelerated
concentration of production and capital; redistribution of national income in

favor of the privileged strata by means of superexploitation of the working class
and pauperization of thousands of small and medium entrepreneurs; and a forced
influx of foreign investments. ”The Junta's aocio-economic policy in the interests
of big local and foreign capital results in exacerbating social and class contra-

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OII'HCIAL USE ONLY

dictions in the country. The streggle of workers is intensifying. and dissatis-
faction is also expressed by the forces that had originally supported the
Junta" (p 485).

The tine that has passed since the publication of this monograph confirms the
author's conclusions about the.deep crisis of military dictatorships in the region
and the possibility of their evolution under the influence of the mass struggle of
workers, as well as.under the influence of internal contradictions. in the di-
rection of gradual "liberalisation.” Indicative in this respect is the situation
in Brazil. whose ruling regime began in the early 1980s to introduce certain insti-
tions of bourgeois democracy. Discrete symptoms of "liberalization" are observed
in the policies of the Urugayan military regime. whose activities could concei-
vably have been more circumstantially analyzed in the book.

A fundamentally different policy is pursued by the military governments of Peru and
Panama, which acted as initiators of deep structural transformations. The author
links the emergence of this new regional phenomenon to both domestic political
causes (crisis of the system of bourgeois-landowner rule; inclusion in the officer
corps of persons of working class origin; special features of the professional train-
ing of the military; historical traditions) and the radical changes on the inter-
national arena: the change in the world ratio of forces in favor of socialism;

the achievements of the Cuban revolution; the collapse of the colonial system. The
most significant changes were accomplished by Peru‘s military government after it
had cone to power in 1968: it implemented a nueber of anti-oligarchic. anti-imperia-
list. and--in some cases--anti-capitalist reforms. However. as pointed out in the
book. the absence of a genuine alliance between patriotic officerdom and the popu-
lar masses became a root weakness of the liberation process in Peru. and it was

this that. together with various other factors (economic crisis. pressure by impe-
rialism. changes in the leadership of the revolution. etc.). prompted the military
regime in the second half of the 1970s to switch from revolutionary to bourgeoist-
reformist positions.

The book traces the--now overt now'covert--struggIE"aioig competing tendencies in

the armed forces. often underlain by the differences in the attitudes of the nilitary
toward basic national problems. Thus. he points out that the overturn of s.
Allende's government was preceded by "a veritable internal upheaval within the armed
forces themselves." as a result of which many progressive-ninded officers had been
purged and the key posts captured by reactionaries (pp 674-675). Characteristic
also is the analysis of the example of Bolivia in the l960s-l970a. There. rule

had successively been seized by military regimes with differing aocio-political
orientations: rightist-authoritarian. bourgeois-reformist; leftist-nationalistic;
and again rightist-authoritarian. It is precisely the factional struggle within the
army that has decisively influenced the country's situation. The book justly
stresses that the political behavior of the military is far from always determined
by their social origin: officers originating from the middle classes may adhere

to either democratic or reactionary opinions (pp 336-335). The political attitudes
of the military are. as ensues fro. the book. determined by a large number of
factors of which a major one is the effect of social contradictions and class
struggle within society on the army.

FOI¢0FFRJA1.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The book analyzes the policy of Latin American coquniet parties tovard the army.
0n the basis of nunerous facts and documents, the author reveals the stubborn
struggle of the com-mists for the democratization of the armed forces and

their rapprochement with the nation. The struggle for the army is a component part
of the struggle of the revolutionary forces for the creation of a united denocretic
front. The conmiste categorically reject the views of the ultra-leftists vho
clein that "the any in the Latin American countries is virtually the slain ens-y of
the revolutionary novement" (p 523). In their policy toward the military
question, as the author states. the continent 'e commist parties proceed fro-

V. I. Lenin's ideas on the practical impossibility of victory of the revolution

unless as least part of the army is attracted to the side of the revolutionary
forces."

The monograph by A. P. Shul'govskiy promotes a deeper understanding of the
political role of the any in modern Latin America. and it also provides a better
idea of the varied manifestations of this phenomenon in other regions of the world.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

1386
C80: 1807/91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

MWOFPNPLBSINWW INDIA
Hoscow SOV'ITSKAYA WPI‘IA in Russian ho 2. Her-Apr 82 pp 158-160

[Review by NJ. Guseva of e book "Bvolyutsiye Obahchestvennogo Strays u
Gornykh Nerodov Severo-Vostochnoy Indii” [Evolutim of the Social Bysta-
Anong Hountein Peoples of Northeastern India] by 8.A. Heretina. Hoscow. Banks.
1980. 259 pages]

[Excerpts] The monograph under review is the first generalised work in national
science on problees of social structure and pwlic life of the insufficiently
know people inhabiting areas in llortheestern India. There is practially no
work in our science devoted to ethnographic study of this region's population.
with the exception of sooe article by the seas author.

The work under review reflects the results of purposeful end conprehsnsive
study of a large group of extrenely diverse people carried out by 8.A.
Haretina over a 20~year period.

The life of people in Northeastern India has not only been studied insuffi-
ciently but. above ell. very irregularly elucidated in foreign literature:
several eonogrsphs have been devoted to sons groups. for exeaple to legs. but
only individual articles on the peoples of the Kati-Chin group and Dafla.

The connection of sons social processes end phenoesns with others is traced
in all chapters of the work. For exanple. the weakening of tribal links is
indicated in the chapter on tribal organisation. and this is further confirned
by the illustration of a family’s gradual release froa tribal bonds in the
chapter on family. The analysis of tribal group evolution is continued in
the seventh chapter. which is devoted to the forlation of estates and classes.

Material in the letter convincingly shows the principal difference between

forution of social estates and groups. which originate in the nidst of
society. first of all. on the basis of social stratification during a period
of private-ownership relations. and the process of class for-etion during a
period when comodity relationships are being developed. During the latter
period. property stratification prevails among mtain peoples of North-
eastern Indian and this leads to fornetion of a class society. a bourgeois
type society. In this chapter the author analyses the material cited in

the chapter on land property which shows that gradual («nation of private

”WWW!”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ImuhmncruI-ip takes place as commodity-noney relationships are developed in
mountain regions.

s.A. Maretina has made an attempt. the first one as we have'noted. to show
common traits in the development of all peoples of the Assam momtains as well
as features of specific individual people. All factual material cited in the
book is directed toward this task. which guides the selection of materials pre-
sented. Of course. this approach snakes it difficult to give an exhaustive

A multiproblem work is before us. The author wse able to show the complexity
of social structure of a large group ofpeople. a structure which is in a
period of transformation. The social structure is examined from a position
of contemporary science-~the community appears as a cysts. in which various
relationships are organically interwoven. The author convincingly shows the
pointlessneas of the argument about the relative importance of tribe and
community because both institutions are organic components of a single system
known as society.

Republic of Bangladesh. between whose northern border and the border of Nepal
there is only a narrow neck of India's land—~the only corridor of overland

Following India's liberation from colonial dependence. and particularly after
the 1960 Indian-Chinese conflict, the Chinese secret service started infil-
trating these regions and recruiting supporters of the Chinese hegemoniet
policy in border tribes. This secret service. which is being made more active
every year. has been forming bandit bands here supplying them with arms.

peoples from India. These separative tendencies are speculatively based on
two objective facts: that as regards their anthropological type these

people belong to southern Mongoloids. and that in the majority of cases their
languages belong to the Tibeto-Burman group.

Unfortunately. the monograph being reviewed almost has no material on the
political orientation of various organizations and parties which have been
formed during the past 20-25 years snong peoples of the areas being described-
these organizations are casually mentioned on the last pages. The role of

such parties as the "Tribal Union of Eastern India" ["Plemennoy eoyuz
Vostochnoy Indii”] has been totally underestimated. There is also no mention
of terrorist organizations whose activities are connected with the artificially
heated increase of nationalism and of the striving by imperialists and
hegemonists to destabilize the situation in this region and in the state of

FOI4OFFNJA1.USE(NVLY
l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY

in addition to the already expressed reasrlts. I would like to note the
well-known noseic of the account and the splintering of information and data
in sons places. which eonetine does not nerge into a single picture in a
reader's perception. There are also individual repetitions for which there
is no apparent need.

Along the unfortunate snll points. which could have been avoided. are
individual inaccuracies in for-sletions and definitions. For example. on
page 69 the discussion is about the velue of land, but fro- tba text it
because evident that the discourse is about the price of land.

It is also unfortunate that the book does not have an ethnic indexzvith
such a great umber of peoples being described its need is i-perative.

cormcm Izdetel'stvo ”Nauka”. "Sovetskays etnogratiya". 1982

9817
cso: 1800/595

MWWWLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

ORGANIZATION, ACTIVITIES 0? mm YOUTH ORGANIZATION DESCRIB-
Hoscov HOLODOY KOMHUNIST in Russian I0 3, liar 82 pp “-89
[Article by N. Nikolayev: "The Advanced Detachent of Afghan Youth")

[Text] A conference of Afghan youth was convened in Kabul during January 1976 under
secret conditions. A total of 21 individuals took part in it - pupils, students
and enployees. Its iaportance, however, was not nessured by the nunber of the
delegates -- the conference established the Denocrstic Organisation of Afghan Youth
(DOM). A new stage in the history of the country's youth novenent had begun.

The creation of DOMA was a natural result of Afghanistan-ks developnent during the
previous decade. Under the influence of the ideas and practices of real socialise
and the growth of national liberation novenents during the aid-Sixties, social
forces, which placed as their goal the struggle for the workers' interests. began
to take shape organizationally in Afghanistan. The People’s Denocratic Party of
Afghanistan (PDPA) originated in 1965.

The experience of the political struggle during the Sixties and Seventies and the
desire to expand its influence saong the broad layers of the population led the
PDPA leadership to a conclusion about the need for creating nasa demcrstic public
organizations of workers, especially of youth when the party regarded as an active
social force and an integral part of the general revolutionary process.

In contrast to the different purpose youth associations which existed earlier in
the country, DORA fron its very first days stood on the ideological platforn of
the PDPA and recognized its revolutionary progran. The draft of the organization's
first regulation said: "DOMA is a public organization vhich unites in its ranks
the progressive revolutionary youth free the workers, peasants, students, intelli-
gentsia, and other social groups of the population .... 0011A works under the
direction of the PDPA".

Under the difficult underground conditions, 0024A activly helped the party to ex-
pand and strengthen its influence anong the population and youth, to disseninste
its ideas, and to conduct neetings in support of the deaocratic refer-e in the
country.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0!(Nﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NULY

On 27 April 1978, a democratic revolution, which overthrew the king's power, took
place in Afghanistan. The PDPA became the ruling party. Different conditions
were created for the work of the largest public organizations -- women's, youth.
trade union, and cooperative.

However, disagreements between two groupings in PDPA -- the "Khal'k" and the
"Parchaa" -- and especially the criminal actions of Rh. Asia and his supporters,
exerted a serious negative influence on the further developmentof‘DOHA,a significant
portion of which consisted of young party members.

The activity of the Amin group led to democratic norms beginning to be grossly
violated in the youth organization. Brutal administration and intimidation methods
were used, and ultimatums were often imposed on the young people: Either join the
youth organization or be regarded as "disloyal". The policy of representatives

of the "Great Pathan Nation" representatives predominating in the leading organs

of the youth organization was sanctioned, work was virtually not performed among
the young workers and peasants, and artificial obstacles to the strengthening of
the youth organization's influence in the army were created.

Serious theoretical distortions, a pseudo-revolutionary farce and elements of
flirting with the youth were also tolerated. In his public speeches, Amin, being
the head of the party and the state, alloted theivangﬁardrole in the struggle to
"strengthen the dictatorship of the working class” to youth and demagogically
said that the foundations for a new society had already been laidm the country.

The new stage of the April revolution, which began after 27 December 1979 when the
patriotic forces of the PDPA and the people replaced the criminal regime of Amin,
created the conditions necessary for the further successful development of the
party, the state and public organizations. At the same time, a stubborn strug-
gle to normalize the climate in the youth organisation, to rally the youth around
the PDPA and to mobilize young men and women to solve the tasks of the April
revolution began.

* t *

During the new stage of the April revolution, the work of DOHA is being performed
unoer rather complicated conditions. of the four million young people who are
between the ages of 10 and 25, two-thirds are illiterate and 85 percent live in
rural areas. Only about 1.1 million children and juveniles between the ages of

' 7 and 19 —- this is approximately nine percent of the country's settled population -~
are studying in elementary and secondary schools.

Other problems, which are facing DOHA, have also been caused historically: the low
level of political training in the masses of youth. the acute shortage of cadre,
still insufficient experience in political and organisational work with youth, and
the absence of a firm system for interacting with state organs and public organi-
zations. The intrigues of international and domestic reaction are seriously com-
plicating the situation in the country.

Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1A1.1EﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these conditions, the Afghan-wide DOMA conference had enormous importance

for the successful work of the youth organization. It was held 25-26 September
1980. About 600 DOHA envoys representing the various social layers of the country‘s
youth, nationalities and regions, dicussed the urgent tasks of their organization
during the new stage of the national democraric revolution. The conference adopted
a regulation for DOMA and approved the symbols of the organization —- banner, badge.
the model of the membership card, and also the statute on the Pioneer Organization
of the Democratic Republic of Afghan. The "Appeal to the Youth of the world",

which was adopted during the conference has served to strenghten the authority of
DOHA and to develop its international ties. It called upon the youth of the planet
to unite their efforts in the struggle against imperialism and for peace, relaxa-
tion and disarmament; and the intrigues of the United States and China against

the peoples of the region were condemned. The program speech, which Babrak Kernel,
general secretary of the PDPA Central Committe and chairman of the Revolutionary
Council and prime minister of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan gave during

the conference, had a great deal of importance both for the country's younger
generation and for the party in the task of directing the youth organization.

The conference determined the main direction of DOHA's activity: strengthening the
unity of the youth organization, creating a solid DOHA ideological base by
studying progressive revolutionary theory, and eliminating illiteracy. The pri-
mary importance of mobilizing the younger generation for a merciless struggle
against counterrevolution; of strengthening DOHA's positions and authority in the
army and people's militia (Tsarandoye); and of instilling the high moral qualities,
which are inherent in true patriots and tutu-nationalism the youthwnpointed thDHA was
entrusted with providing effective help to the party and state on the economic

front and in the struggle against economic backwardnees and also with improving

its work in developing the Pioneer Organization and its help in indoctrinating

the country's rising generation.

Having a specific program of action, DOHA noticeably increased the effectiveness
of all its organizational and political activitg and its influence among the dif-
ferent layers of youth grew.

By the middle of 1981, the creation of DOMA's organizational structure was basically
completed,and provincial, city, rayon, district, and small rurual district com-
mittees had been formed. Primary organizations, which form the basis of DORA, are
operating in many factories and plants; in institutes, schools and lyceuns; in the
army and militia; and also in residences.

Despite the acute shortage of cadre, the still insufficient political and theoret-
ical training, and the absence of skills in practical work with the youth and the
necessary material base, DOHA committees are purposefully engaging in strengthening
the primary organizations and in improving their indoctrinational role. For this
purpose, work months in primary organizations, meetings with a single agenda,
demonstration meetings based on the best organizations, political information.
sessions, discussions, revolutionary work weeks, and cultural and sports measures
are being conducted and wall newspapers are being published. The growth in the
membership of DOHA was a concrete result of this work. By the middle of 1981,

it had reached about 65,000 members, that is, it had grown sir-sevenfold during

the one and half years of the new stage of the revolution.

10

FOR 0F11C1A1.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Virtually all categories of youth are represented in the organization: workers.
peasants, artisans, servicemen, pupils, and students. The expansion and strength-
ening of DOI‘IA's social base is basically taking place at the expense of yang
workers, artisans, and peasants. especially in the econoaicelly developed regions
of the country -- Kabul, the provinces of lekh. Dshusdshan, and Nengarkhar.

The working youth are coming out in support of PDPA policy and the governaent of
the Denocratic Repuolic of Afghanistn sore actively and consistently and are
defending the accoaplishnents of the April revolution resolutely. The speech of
H. Akhned, a young worker in the "Spinzar" Cotton Cleaning Factory in the province
of Kunduz, during a nesting of the DOMA priaary organisation is indicative in

this respect: "In Afghanistan. the working class is not very nunsroua; it is short
of organisational ability and literacy. We know, however, that the April revolu-
tion lurked the beginning of a new developmt for our country. He firmly
believe in a bright future and we will construct and defend it with our strong
hands".

The influence of bum is also gradually growing sung the girls. In a country
where a womn has been deprived of eleaentary civil rights for centuries and where
the attitude to her has until now been determined a great deal by Islamic dogmas,
this has special significance. The involve-eat of young wonen in the youth organ-
ization and the developnent of their social activity skills are being organised
with a consideration for the county's national and historical distinctive features.
In DOHA couittees. woesn's sections are being created or people responsible for
working with the feaale youth are being selected. Separately conducted neetings
of young women. needlework circles and exhibits. and various for-s of working with
children are being put into practice.

however, a significant part of the young Afghan women -- even in the cities -- are
still being subjected to the strong influence of religiously-minded parents and
traditions which have taken shape over hundreds of years.

Students nake up the lost nuaerous part of was - about 60 percent. They are sore
educated and it is easier to unite then organizationally. It is no accident that
a large part of the country's primary youth organizations are being formed on the
basis of schools and lyceuns. However, on the other hand, there is a significant
layer of today’s students who are children of the rather well off fanilies of ner-
chants, employees. and petty and nediua bourgeoisie. This requires fron Dona
comittees a special approach in the work with this category of youth.

t Q *

Under the incessant intrigues of isperialisn and internatbnalreaction and the rebel-
lious actions of donestic counterrevolution. none is trying to provide the saximn
possible aid to the party in defending the achievements of the April revolution.

In the aajority of the country's provinces. young patriots are joining the detach-
nents of the defenders of the revolution upon the call of the party and are creating
youth brigades of a social order free the ranks of the volunteers. In one rank
with the nenbers of the party, young sen and worsen -- many of when are only 15-17
years old -- are protecting the peaceful work of the citizens with a weapon in

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their hands, guarding the public order and various installations (educational in-
stitutions, Pioneer camps. DOHA committee buildings, etc.). and providing a great
deal of help to state organs in the struggle against counterrevolution.

The young defenders of the revolution, the members of DOM. are demonstrating
steadfastness and courage and are displaying true angles of selflessness and
heroin.

The news about the exploit of 16-year-old Perils. a student from Karat. flew through-
out the country. Pazila arrived at the head of a youth detachment in a village.
where the Duaheani often visited, to conduct discussions with the population and

to unmask the false rumors about the people's power. For this. the bandits decided
to make short work of her; someone fired from around a corner and cut short her
life... . Today. hundredsof Afhanistan's young nan and wonen are, however, being
indoctrinated using the selfless act of Perils.

DOHA is performing a great deal of work in instilling in young people a new atti-
tude toward service in the any, which is defending the interests of the people.
and to strengthening the people's militia and the special organs for the struggle
against counterrevolution. The contacts between civilian and army nous organiza-
tions are being expanded.

The first sports health can), in which youth between the ages of 17 and 20 not only
rest and harden themselves but also master the basics of military affairs and ac-
quire skills in social work. has been opened in the country. A large detachment of
young volunteers has been sent for service in the organs of the Ministry of In-
ternal Affairs. Thus was the active sponsorship of DOHA over the people's militia
begun. Even more importance was attached to this sector of DOHA activity after

the Second DOHA Central Cosmittee Plenum which was held on 30’ June 1981 and which
examined questions on the patriotic and international indoctrination of the youth.

In Afghanistan, where up to the present tine 90 percent of the population do not
know how to read and write and where religion has possessed an all-embracing in-
fluence for centuries, a special role is being allotted to the struggle against
illiteracy. In his speech during the Afghan-wide DOM conference, Comrade B. Karmal
pointed out that the goal of the party. DOM, other public organizations, and the
state apparat is'to transform Afghanistan into a country of universal literacy
within 10 years. 3. Kaml said that this is a very difficult task and that the
members of DOMA should begin it with youthful eagerness and enthusian.

In solving this problem, DOHA members are helping state organs everywhere to ar-
range the work of the courses to eliminate illiteracy. cmducting classes in them
on a voluntary basis, explaining in families the need for education. and protecting
the courses from the attacks of counterrevolutionary elements. The Dushani burn
and destroy schools in savage anger, kill and mtilate teachers. and do not spare
even the pupils. For example, in one of the districts of Parvan Province. the
bandits broke the arms and legs of four children only because they went to take
examinations. however, the enemy's efforts are in vain. More than 23,000 courses
to eliminate illiteracy are already operating actively in the country. A total of
60 percent of the seven-year old children have entered elementary schools.

a a ' e

12

FOR OFFICIAI USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Clearly understanding the inortsnce and necessity of raising the political aware-
nese level of the youth, the noun Central Conittee is searching for more effec-
tive forms for this work. It has worked up reconendations on how to create po-
litical enlightenment circles in prinary organisations and has approved the subject
natter of their classes - a subject natter which reveals the basis of PDPA policy
and the goals, tasks and content of DOHA activity. The need to consider during
this the specific conditions of the country and the distinctive features and

training level of the different youth social groups is pointed out in the recon-
nendations.

The less political work of DOMA is varied in its neans and nethods. Political dis-
cuaaions, agitation presentations, and thenatic concerts and aestings are conduc-
ted, often using mobile novie houses and agitation vehicles; and leaflets, posters
and wall newspapers are being published. Special agitation and propaganda de-
tachnents, which are equiped with novie and radio equip-ant, popular literature,
newspapers, and medicine, travel to the villages and settle-eats.

One of the first of these detachnsnts was foraed in the su-er of 1981. It worked
in the provinces of Kahul and Parvan and organised a series of concerts, filn
showings and neetinga with the elders of the villages. During these, the elders
were told about the goals of the PDPA and m and the nature of the reforms which
are taking place in the country. The detachment also provided nedical assistance
to the population. Its activity strengthened the trust of the population in the
national authority. Such detsclnents are now being created in all the country's
provinces.

The popularity of M3383 Dmvw (BANNER or route). the first youth newspaper
in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and an organ of the DOMA Central Con-
nittse, is growing. On its pages, it deals widely with the life of DOHA and

The Pioneer organiration and publishes the nest iaportant docunents of 00m, the
speeches of the organization's leaders and activists, and articles and essays
which tell about the selfless actions of the young defenders of the revolution.
The newspaper is beconing an even sore active propagandist of PDPA policy and

of the activity of DOM in indoctrinating youth.

however, the low level of literacy, especially along the working and rural youth),
the still strong influence of centuries-old traditions, and the inadequate training
of the noun cadre and alttiv are creating a nunher of difficulties in the ideo-
logical, political and propaganda work of m. The ideological intrigues of the
enenies of the April revolution, who are trying to distort and blacksn in every
way possible PDPA policy, to cream the illusion of its hopelessness along young
people, and to contrast it to the interests of the Afghan people speculating on

the religious feelings of believers, play no snail role in this.

The arsenal of our enemy's nethods are varied: fron the use of leaflets and pan-
phlets to direct threats. sabotage and terrorist acts. It happens that the in-
trigues of the comterrevolutionaries bring definite results. However, as the
sccoaplishnents of the revolution grow stronger, the tactic of deceit. provoeation
and terror will more and sore frequently cone to grief.

* t i

13

POI! OFITCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instilling skills in collective work and public activity in the youth has become

a fundamentally new direction in the work of DOMA. More and lore young nen and
women are participating in mass subbotniks (work given freely to the state on days
off), raids in the struggle against profitaering, the preparation of schools for
the school year, and revolutionary work weeks during which the collectives of in-
dustrial enterprises work without pay during their free time on the initiative of
DOMA organizations. Youth are making a considerable contribution to the repair

of bridges, irrigation ditches, schools, hospitals, and mosques which have been
destroyed by the counterrevolutionaries.

Shock detachments, which are sent to the most important national economic installe-
tions, are being formed from the ranks of the young volunteers. The first such
detachment, which worked in the Ksrksr coal nine in the province of haghlan not only
set an exanple of a new attitude toward work but also exerted a considerable in-
fluence on the local workers and population. At first, the detachment was greeted
cautiously and even hostile1y. However, when the detachment nenbers repaired the
nine adninistration building, which had been destroyed by bandits, in three days
(although based on preliminary estimates about two weeks should have been spent on
this work), organized courses to eliminate illiteracy for the workers, organized

a watch on the nine's territory. introduced order into the supplying of the workers
with food itena, and conducted readings and a discussion of articles published in
the youth newspaper, the authority of the detachment and the youth organisation
grew considerably.

In striving to develop the creative capabilities of young men and wonen, DOHA con-
nittees have noticeably improved their mass cultural and sports work and are con-
tinuously expanding cooperation with the creative unions and organizations. A con-
test of young poets, whose best poens were then published in a collection, was con-
ducted with the youth commission of the Union of Writers. The opening of the Chil-
dren‘s and Youth Theatre was an important event in the country's cultural life.
The sports contests for DOHA prizes are acquiring more and more popularity.

These practical works tell about the growth of DOHA's revolutionary initiative and
its public, political and work activity.

After the decision to create an Afghan Pioneer organisation (POA) was nade on 25
September 1980 during the Afghan-wide DOHA conference, DOHA actively joined in the
work of indoctrinating children and teen-agers and expanded its sponsorship over
the Pioneer organization. A year later, the ranks of the POA numbered 21,000 Pio-
neers.

The opening in Kabul of the first republic Palace of the Pioneers, which threw open
its doors on 3 Pebruary 1981. was a great and happy holiday for Afghan children.
Subsequently, Pioneer houses were opened in the cities of Masar-e Sharif, Jelalabad
and the province of Helnand.

During the new stage of the revolution, work was begun for the first time in the
country's history on Pioneer canps. In then, 1100 children from the country's ll
provinces have rested and acquired habits of collectivism and organisation. It is
important to point out that elements of what is new in indoctrinational work among
children have been combined with national customs and are based on respect for the
people's culture and traditions.

14

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Pioneers of Kabul and Maser-e Sharif proposed an intiative to help the fanilies
of those who died for the cause of the revolution. A m Central Co-Iittee
Plenu- supported this important initiative and announced s cqaign for the coun-
try's DNA nenbers and Pioneers under the slogan "Help the Family of u Soldier --
help the Revolution".

A clear demonstration of the party's concern and attention for the problens of in-
doctrinating Pioneers was the decision of the PNA Central Couittea Politbureau
to create the PBchllc asgasine (PM), an organ of the DOHA Central (bait-
tee and the POA Central Soviet.

Despite considerable difficulties. the Pioneer novenent is earning acre and nore
recognition in the country and is introducing fresh breath into public life.

In the DOHA regulation. it is pointed out that it ”indoctrinates youth in a spirit
of the brotherhood and equality of all the peoples who inhabit our beloved and
united honelnd....” DOHA is actively cooperating with 60 youth unions in the
socialist, capitalist and developiw countries and is caning out in support of
regional and international progressive youth organisations. It is a nenber of the
world federation of Denocrstic youth and is represented in the Secretariat of the
International Union of Students.

Especially warn and friendly relations link DOM with the Kmsonol and the youth
unions of the socialist countries. DOHA nekes wide use of the erperience of the
Leninist Roz-owl. Concert youth tens fron the 088! are recieved very warnly in
Afghanistan. and the "Soviet Youth" exhibition ands a large iqression. Soviet-
Afghan friendship roons have been created in my Dom province and city co-ittees.

t i t

At the beginning of 1980, D. losin. a yomg PDPA nenber. was appointed secretary
of the norm co-ittee in the province of Daghln. Born of a poor peasant fanily.
he underwent a grin childhood and youth and experienced the burdens of underground
work. loein sharply percieved the social evil and injustice. heading a provincial
youth organization. he cane out sharply against the shortcomings and aliases of
local bureaucrats, criticized displays of party disagree-ants. contended that only
work for the good of the revolution could nova it forward. and constantly decon-
strated this by all his actions. carrying the youth with bill. Even the persecu-
tions of the Anin secret police did not break hin. When Iosin was offered work in
a provincial PDPA conittee he replied: Since the party had entrusted hin with

indoctrinating youth. he is obliged to perforn this ieportant co-ission with honor
to the end. .

It is these steadfast and unselfish people,-.~ho are devoted to their work. who are
contributing to the active growth and strengthening of m and to the inroving

of its influence on youth. 0n the whole. the youth organisation's successes are
undoubtly being determined by the ever increasing level of the business and polittal
qualities of its leaders and cadre workers and by the inrovenent in leadership
methods.

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In its activity to indoctrinate youth. was is striving to unite its efforts with
the state organs and public organizations of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan.
Joint norm Central Conittee decrees with the Ministries of Defense, internal Af-
fairs, Bducat ion and Higher and Vocational Education have been signed and are being
consistently inplenented during the new stage of the revolution. The Council of
Ministers of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan is providing a great deal of
help to DOHA. DOMA co-itteea are cooperating ever sore widely with the creative
organizations, trade unions, the Denocratic Organization of Afghan apnea and the
different state depart-eats.

Today, DOHA is emerging as an equal nenber in the National Patriotic Front (NP?) ~-
the highest forn for the association of the public and political forces of the
workers and of all the layers in Afghanistan’xe population. hesbership in the NP?
neans the even more effective participation of none in controlling affairs of state
and in raising the prestige of the organization.

The growth of DOHA's public and political activity and of its authority is to a de-
cisive degree the result of the concern and attention of the l'eople'e Denocratic
Party of Afghanistan. The level of party leadership of the youth organization has
increased considerably during the new stage of the April revolution. The PDPA
Central Couittee has adopted a nueber of special decrees ained at the activity of
DOHA. is continuously providing it practical help, end is directing local party
organizations toward this.

In the difficult struggle to construct a new society, the Denocratic Organization
of Afghan Youth is proving itself ever nore actively in the various spheres of the
country's public and political life and is becosing a reliable assistant for the
party.

COPYRIGHT: "Melody homuniat", 1982

8802
680: 1807/ 910

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Immmm

30“ 08 mm OPPOSITION ‘l‘O, SOVII'I' SUPPOI‘I' M MILITARY arm

Hoecov PROBLM VOYMOY M231“! in Ionian 1981 (eiped to preee 25 Bep 81)
pp 1-2, 379-300

[Table of contente. brief deecription and euthore' collective of book edited
by A. D. hikonov]

[Bxcerpte] Title Page:

0888 Academy of Sciencee. Order of the Labor Red Banner lnetitute of the
world Bconoq and International lelatione. Scientific mu for the Study

of Probleme of Peace and Meat-ant. Title: P303131! mm m:
(Problem of Military Detente).

Publiaher: Irdatel'etvo "lauka".
Place and year of publication: macaw. 1981.

Signed to Preee Date: 25 Septeéer 1981
“mi”! of Copiee Publiehedx 6.500
ﬁnder of Pagee: 3100

Brief Deecription:

The objective prerequieitee. goale end baeic directione of international
military detente. ee well ea the difficultiee and obetaclee placed in in
path by the aureeeive circlee a! inerialiea aid their accoqlioee, are
analyzed in the monograph. Special attention in devoted to explaining the
coneietent couree of the Soviet lhion for the praeervation and developnent
of the proceee of detente. for the etrengthening of detente by meane of
political detente in the military area, and for enacting peace and inter-
national eecnrity.

Authore' Collective:

Introduction--Doctor of llietoricel Sciencee o. I. lyhov
Chapter Innoctor of nietorical Sciencee a. D. Iikonov

Chapter II—Doctor of llietoricel sciencee D. Ii. Proektor
Chapter III--Doctor of Bietorical Sciencee I. A. loloekav
Candidate of lietoricel Sciencee P. D. ‘Iarebayav

l7

MWWMY
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

Chapter

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IV—-Uoctor of Historical Sciences A. D. Nikonov
V--Doctor of Historical Sciences A. D. Nikonov
VI--Candidate of Historical Sciences 3. M. Hhaloshe
VII-Candidate of Historical Sciences Yu. A. Hostko
VIII-~Candidate of Military Sciences M. S. Shnelev
Candidate of Econolic Sciences 2. V. Litvin

IX-A. R. Astaf'yev

Chapters X. x11--Candidste of Historical Sciences P. D. Tarabayev

Chapter

XI-Candidate of Economic Sciences M. I. Sladkevich
Candidate of Military Sciences V. I. Maharevskiy

Scientific assistants: T. I. Dudnikovsya and Ye. V. Isedilinsya
Responsible editor: Doctor of Historical Sciences A. D. Mikonov

Table of Contents

Introducttoneeeeessseeseeeseeesesesseeeeeeeeesseeeesesesoeeeeooessvesooa

Chapter

1.
2.

3O

3'

Chapter

1.

3.

1. Military Detente: Prerequisites, Goals and Paths............

Prerequisites for international detente.........................
Interdependence of political detente with detente in
th. niltt‘ry ‘t..OOOOOOOIOOOCOCOOOOOOOODOD0.0...OOIOOOOOOOOOO...

Main directions of detente in the nilitary area.................

11. International Security and Military Detente................

Essence and content of international security...................
Military detente as a factor in international security..........

Problees of international security in western policy............
Military power in the systen of international security..........
Structure of international security.............................

111. Problems of Non-Use of Force and the Threat of
Force in International Relations..........................

Inparialist policy "iron a position of strength"................
Liquidation of centers of tension and of ar-ed conflicts-

an important direction in the realization of the principle

of the non-use of force in international relations..............
The policy of the USSR and other socialist countries

relating to the non-use of force in international relations.....

IV. Problems of Nuclear Detente................................

The nuclear arms rsce--s threat to hunanity.....................
The problee of complete and general prohibition of

“mle‘r .m teat...OOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOCOQQCOOOOOOOOOO...
Problems of strengthening nuclear nonproliferation..............

18

FOR<0FFNJA1.USE(NVLY

11

12

17
27

60
60

52

$6
61

66
73

73

86
100
101

111
118
Oiepter
1.
2.
3O

Gunter

1.

2.
3.

Chen ter
1 .

2.
3.

Gunter

l.
3.

Chepter
l .

3.

Chepter

1.
2.

FOIOFFICMLUSEONLY

V. The Problen oi uniting end Reducing Stretegic Ar... .. .. ..

Principles end prerequieitee of the SALT proceee...............

SAL: Ieeoeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeoeoeeeoeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeteeeeeeo

SALT IIeeeweeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeetooeeeeee

VI. Inerieliet Hilitery-Politicel lloce end )iilitery

n.t.at.eeeeeeeeeeone...woteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeooeeeeeolooeeee

‘lhe role of ieperieliee'e Iilitery-politicel bloce in
etrengthening the era rece end creeting obeteclee to
“11“” d.t.nt.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOO0.00......00....
Detente'e influence on inerieliee'e bloc policy........ .......
Heekening block controntetion-oen inportent direction

of ultt‘w d.“nte0000000000.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00.00.09.000
VII. Problem of Hilitery Detente in Burope...................

Military detente in Europeo-e pernenent teek of the
“V10t 031011.. tor.1p ”linOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO

The Vienne negotietione: hopee end blind elleye. ... . .. .. .. .. .. .
lurope egein tecee e choice: e new or- rece or

lilittf’ d.tcnt. .nd d1..’.-.nteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeoeeeeeeoe

VIII. Problene oi Hilitery Detente end Collective
“curt” on th. “t“ thtCOOIOOOOOVOOOOOOOO0.00.90

he “lit‘mwlitic‘l .1tth 1“ ““OOOOOOOOO‘COOOOOOOOOOOO

Collective eecurity-upeth to leeting peeco in Anion .. .........
weehington'e end leijing'e policy-othe min obetecle

on th. ”th to “11:.” “mu 1“ Mt.OOOOOOOOOCUCOOUOOOOOO0..
IXe “11“" ut.nt. m ch. “'1‘ u.“...000.000009000000...

New role end new problene of the world oceen...................
the epreed oi the erne rece onto the world oceen end

th. thr..t of ”m1“: “rQIOIOOOOIIOOOOOOOOOC0000.......0000...
Queetione oi liniting eilitery uee of eeee end oceene..........

X. Prohibition of new We of Heepone of thee
thtlonﬁﬂ utm‘ rat 0‘ “11““, "tat... ee eeeeee ee

The neture, urgency end inortence oi the problen'e

.olut‘oneeeeeoeeeeeeeeoeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeweeeeeeeeoeOeeeeeeeoeee

leeic difficultiee end proepecte for the problen'e

.olut‘oneeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeeeeoeeoeeeeeoeoeoeoe

l9

FOIOFFICIALIJSEONLY

136
137

149
197

174

175
198

202
209
210
216
227

234

234
263

250
260
260
268
280
296

297
306
MOMMUSEONLY

m.pc‘r no ”able. of Liuttn‘ mnntm “COCOOOOOCOOUCOOOCQCC

1. Contonpornry out. and dovalopnon: of communal om........
2. the or. erode—n coutituont port o! the conventional

am taco and of tqortnlion'o globol ottotegy.................
3. uniting conventional vapour-o vital took in tho
.‘mw. to: ”.“OOIOOII0.00.0.0.0.00.00.90.00...00'0000'00000

Chapter XII. unitary Dctonto and tho Bolutlon of Mty'o
Glob“ Probl.-OOOOOD0.00.00.00.00.DDOOIOOOOOIODO0.0IOOOO

1. Tho moot inortnnt ooctooconodc aspects of the on. roco......
2. mutary donate-path to tho oolutlon of global problm......

Short bibliography of works rolntlng to problo- o! dotonto pub-
1.13th 1n th. 0883 fro. 1978 to m “we of 19810 O. O I O. .0 0'. I O. 9 O O...

COPYRIGHT: lzdotol'otvo ”Noah". 1981
080: 1807/105

20

MWLUSEONLY

321
321
331
337

3“

365
359

373
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm: IOIAL

[Editorial upon] loud. son-rm MO I PIAVO in Main. lo 6,
Jun 1982. atria on pp 136-139 a 2000-110“ uttch and "We“!

and State Arbitrage” by In. A. thosudon. ‘11:. dutch apart. on the ﬁrst
international amount ou ”We Lot and State Mina." bald by ch.
0881! Instant. of auto and Law at the and of 1981. Pmtamu included
”scholar- nnd pruned workouts" (to. Mmu, Mus-y, natal. lac
Gunny, Poland. Czcchoolmku. and tho mm.

covalent: Izdatel'om ”lam". ”Monkey. Wm 1 pm". 1982

080: 1800/ 761

2].

"WWW?
slum

SOVIET HISTORIANS VISIT VIETKAll—In Rove-oer 1981 the co-vorkere of the Institute Of
lustory of the 13883. 11883 Acade-y of Sciencee mirector Ptofeeeor 8.8. Hiram;
Deputy main-n of the scientific Council on the caplea prohlen "Iietory of the
Great October Socialist Revolution" Yul. lorahlev; and Scientific Secretary of

the Institute's Co-ieeion for International Contacte IJ. May). in their capacity
as guests of the Co-ittee for Social Sciences, Socialiet Republic of Vietnel

[CSS SRV] toured the Institute of liietory in hanoi and the Institute of Social
Sciences in Ho Chi ninh City for the tirat tine. the Soviet hietoriane were
velconed by the Claim of the 088 m Ignyen QM Ton. the coworkere of that
co-ittee showed trenendons interest in faciliarieing thee-elves with the work of
the Institute of History of the 0881!. the co-ente by Iguyen Qhan rose as well as
by other Vietnamese colleague pointed out the great value attached to ecientific
contacts between historians of both comtriee. [Dy NJ. May] [Excerpt] [lbecov
VOPROSY 1510311 in Rnuian No 4, Apr 82 p 150] IMO“: Itdetel'etvo "Pravda",

”Voproey ietorii", 1982‘] 1386

080: 1807/91

22

non calm-us: mu
OBKOH SECRETARY OF AVOIDANCE 0? 'ormcuu' (20381"st
Moscow mLODOY WRIST in Russian lo 3, Mar 82 pp 6-13

[Article by H. Voropayev, first secretary of the CPS]! Chelyabinskiy obkoe: "The
Constuctive Energy of Conviction"] .

[Bxcerptg/ Oncea group of young engineers and workers from Chelyabinsk was in Nexi-
co. Everthing interested the Oral lads: the ancient culture of the Aztecs, the
monumental painting of Siqueiros and the turbulent Sunday corrida. However,

the neeting with students of the university in hsxico was especially reaembered.
Whether it occured accidentally or whether some unseen "director's hand" was at work,
those whose views represented s mixture of Marxian and nso-Priedisn and Trotskyite
and Maoist slogans, cans to the talks with the Chelyabinsk people. Outwardly,
however, they appeared as true revolutionaries and -- in any event -- considered
themselves as such: They brandished portraits of Che Guevara and some carried
small volumes of Lenin's works with them.

Nevertheless, the young netdlurgists and nachine builders understood the political
positions of their opponents rather quickly md conducted the discussion in a
dignified, well reasoned and skillful manner. Afterwards, they frmkly said that
only here, in a different country. having encountered the bearers of foreign ide-
ological notions face to face, did they truly see in proper prospective the social
science classes, the WI seainars on scientific mist, and the uninist
examinations, that is, all the forms of Harriet-minis: education which they

had undergone in school, in the V112 and in the enterprise.

This episode not only once again underscores the well known truth: A knowledge
of Marxian helps to rebuff hostile views and notions. Something else is also
seen here: The mastery of Haaist-Lsninist theory is truly effective and solid
when' it because a recognized inner requirenent for a young person. I emphasize:
not a school duty (the passing of examinations, the receiving of a grade, the
presence at classes, etc.) hut a requir-snt. Sometimes, an individual searches
for and finds answers to the questions, which are disturbing hill. with the

help of the theory of scientific conunin. In this case, the knowledge of
coamnist theory ceases to be book knowledge and is transformed into a deep per-
sonal conviction. This was V. I. Lenin's path to Marxism. N. K. Krupskaya
writes in her recollections about ll'ich: "he did not approach liars as a book-
lover. Be approached Marx as an individual searching for answers to agonizing

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. .. - .....e_ we... sullen

and urgent questions". This the way the older generation of Soviet' Columnists,
who -- speaking the words of a poet -- opened up each volume of Marx just as we
open the shutters in our own homes, approached Marxian.

The youth. who are being shaped under the conditions of a developed socialist
society are a different matter. Experienced mentors: school teachers, V02 instruc-
tors, the directors of party and Komsomol enlightenment schools, radio and tele-
vision politicrl commentators, and press workers, are helping the young men and
women to penetrate into the laboratory of Marxist-Leninist thought. However,

the danger of a facile attitude toward social and economic knowledge is concealed
here. Without having let it pass through himself, without having achieved it
through much suffering, and without having beat it in the crucible of doubts and
research, some young person will regard social and political theory as the to-
tality of school subjects -— and nothing nore. He has studied. passed his examin-
ations and received a grade. Perhaps, the main results of the discussion in
Mexico, which I recalled at the beginning, is the conclusion which the lads made:
No, it is not for an examination that a knowledge of Marxian is needed. Every
young individual should come to this conclusion. Re are placing this goal before
the organizers of the rising generation's Marxist-Leninist education.

Recently, much has been said and written about problen-solving instruction in the
social sciences. Its essence seems to me to lie in the fact that its study becomes
for each pupil and student an instrument for recognizing the complicated problems
of reality. Unfortunately, it seems completely sufficient to many instructors to
"nastieste" the general truths and force the students to memorize them and re-
gurgitate then on an examination. The damage from such instruction is evident.

Sociological research, which has been performed among the oblaet senior class
students, has shown in particular that many young men and women prefer not to ask
so called "sharp" questions, which touch upon international and domestic life,

of their teachers because they are not confident that the teacher will answer
them frankly. Half of those surveyed point out that the teachers try to move
away fron "sharp" questions, and every third pupil considers that the teachers
answer them unconvincingly.

Of course, this data must be understood with a correction for youthful maximumism,
a lack of life experience and the inclination toward premature generalisation.
However, it is impossible not to admit that a number of instructors, not only

in secondary but also in higher educational institutions, are indeed inclined --
sometimes from the very best motives -- to shy away from an analysis of socialiemﬂs
real contradictions, embellish reality, and replace the analysis of specific
problems with an abstract statement of the training material.

It has alreay'become an axiom that knowledge, which has not been thrust on one
but which has been mined on one. own. is the most solid and lies at the basis of
ideological and political convictions. Both secondary and higher schools have
available today every opportunity for developing the creative activity of youth.
Even the scientific society of youth can serve as an exenple. A scientific soci-
ety for youth has existed for 17 years in Chelyabinsk. A total of 3,500 pupils
are engaged in it today. We are proud of the fact that the scientfic society of

Chelyabinsk senior class students is one of the first in the country and that its

24

FORIOFFRJAI.USEZONIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizers -- the Palace of Pioneers and Pupils ineni I. K. Krupskaya and the
Chelyabinskiy State Pedagogical Institute -- have become laninist Konsonol prise
laureates. Among its former pupils, it is possible today to seat a famous sci-
entist, a prominent lathe operator, a teacher, a doctor, an agronodst. and an of-
ficer in the Soviet arny.

Nevertheless, we see the nain Ierit of this association of pupils not in the high
professional orientation (although this too is very inportant) but in the rearing
of the teenagers' citizen maturity. During school vacations. the winners in the
contests of creative works gather in the "Yomg Kurchatovite" can (which is lo-
cated in the picturesque surroundings of the city of Site - the hose of I. V.
Kurchatov) and there, the difference between "physicists" and "lyric poets" is
obliterated: Both the one and the other participate with identical enthhsiasn
in the "political battles”. the festival of political: songs. a dranatised trial
of nodern imperialism. discussions concerning the social problees of the youth
novenent, etc.

This nay seen a gene to sone individuds. True, there is so-ething of a gene in

it. however, the discussion concerns serious natters: the developing of a class
view of the world and the laying of the foundations for co-nnist convictions.

All this is passionate and enotional. how often these emotions are unfortunately -
lacking in the standard history and social science classes and in the seninars

on social subjects in V02! It is no accident that the students of the scientific
society of pupils, when they arrive in institutes, are the first to join in the
work of the student scientific society and becone perment participants in the
all-union contest of student works in the social sciences. the history of the
Konsomol and the international youth novement.

The Harxist-Leniniat education of youth is also, as is known. the cless indoctrin-
stion of the rising generation. School lust prepare one for life. This seems

an absolutely correct truth. However, if the nathenatics teacher sees his Iain
goal to be the preparation of future nathenaticians; the literature teacher -
future philologists: and the physics teacher -- future physicists. then these
teachers -- I dare to say -- understand nothing of pedagogics.

I an far fron the thought of fighting for the foreation of citizen positions at
the expense of specialized knowledge. lgnoranuses are not needed by our society.
however, a bourgeois school teaches how to read and write intelligently. have
not too nany egotista who know the art of self-love. cultural Philistines and
individualists who have mastered foreign languages recently appeared here? In
this sense, the old formula should he read in a new way: "The school should
prepare one for a socialist way of life!"-.

It seens that the Marxist-Leninist education. which is received in school class-
rooms and W2 halls. should he accoqanied without fail by significant enlivening
of the non-acadenic social and political indoctrination for-s. Political hours.
political clubs, "Young Marxist" circles, Leninist lessons. trips to places of
con-bat fame, and the creation of school Isuseuns -- all this integrally adds to
lectures and textbooks and forms a class approach to the phenosena being studied.

25

FOIOMCIALIRONLY
- ya. 1-. sage-e.- some. scenes.

Here, for example, is how the Konsonol members in School No 50 in Chelyabinsk
rated Leninist lessons: “They help us to look at ourselves in a new way. After
then, you try to read those works which are not studiedin school. During the lesson,
you feel that all of the people in the country are persons holding the sane views
as you".

Without a doubt, life itself gives a rating for his knowledge of Marxist-Leninist
theory to an individual. Not a person's words but his deeds characterise his ide-
ological level and citizen's naturity. Let us recall V. I. Lenin's words that
"The constraint youth union has conbined its education, its teaching and its indoc-
trination with the labor of the workers and peasants so that it will not lock it-
self up in its schools and will not be limited only to a reading of co-unist books
and panhlets" (Vol 61, pp 316-317).

Do today's Koneonol nesbers -- the pupils end etudente,have an opportunity to learn
connunisn in practice and to participate in the real trensfornation of socidty?

Of course they do. Student production brigades, public and political practices,
construction detachments, work where one lives -- all this provides an opportunity
for each Konsonol senber to feel: "Hy work is flowing into the work of ny re-
public".

when a system of public and political practices for students was introduced in the
Chelyabinskiy Polytechnicsl Institute ineni the Leninist Konsouol for the first
time in the country at the end of the Sixties, sany greeted it with sietrust. They
cited the overworking of the students, the back-breakingnese -- for thee - of

the lecture work anong the population etc. Life has shown the need for this for-
of conunist indoctrination of a future specialist. Today, thousands of students
are conducting public and political practices in the vuz of Chelyabinskaya Oblast
alone. They are giving lectures, creating agitation brigades, and organising
children's clubs in residences and sports sections for children ad teenagers.
Thus. the "Ray" Pedagogical Detachaeat, which was created on the initiative of
the pedagogical institute students, esbrsces 30.000 teenagers in its influence,
organizing the free tine of the lads.

* h t

It is understandable that it is inpossible to treat all the questions, which are
connected with the Herrist-Leninist education of the youth, in one article. This
work requires continous improvement. Much renaine to be reviewed here. to be
changed, and to be given up.

Everything st ill has not been done for the coqlete and tinely supplying of propa-
gandistsand students with training progress and aids. An instructional sethods
library, which would contain practical advice on preparing for classes, conducting
discussions, using the practical assign-ant netlwd, etc. , is very necessary for

a propagandist who is working in a youth hall. It would be good to have collec-
tions of legical assignments and typical exasplee of prohlen situations for
studies in the basic courses.

And once again. Uhen talking about indoctrinational work. we often yield to the
magic of numerical reports. In the neentise, sociological research, which has
been conducted, testifies in particular that far fron all pupils are perforning

26
FOR OI'TICIAI. USE ONLY
assign-eats of a public md political nature. that only one-third of the 10th-
clone atudenta are participating in the preparation and conduct of Konaonol
meetings and political information oeeaione, and that every fourth urban eenior
cleoa etudent is not taking part in the our work quarter. Inotancee of in-
norel conduct on the part of your; people. of a exceaoive pension for trenda in
weatern faahiona in a certain part of the youth. etc., mat cauae ua anxiety.

The 26th 6980 Congreaa outlined a apecific progra- tor the (oration o! the new
individual. An important role in ita i-ple-entetion belonze to the youth'e Harriet-
Leniniat education which has been called upon to teach you: nan and wonen -
speaking in the worda of V. l. Lenin -- "to act at co-Inian really requiree".

In other words, the CPS" Central Co-ittee report to the 26th party congreea el-
phaaiaed, we are talking about achievinsinfact a unity of the party'e ideological,
theoretical. political. indoctrinational. orgniaational, and econonic work.

This in our goal. There is no doubt that it will he achieved.

COPYRIGHT: "liolodoy konlniet". 1982 -

8802
080: 1800/6510

21

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

P8031.“ IN SOCIAL SCIENCE assures. INSTRUCTION OUTLINE!)
Baku WIS? ammzam in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 53-61
[Article by 1'. Isuylorva: "llprove the work of Social Science Departments”)

[Excerpts] In the light of the party's high demands on social scientists.
the shortcoeings. defects and failures in work of social scince depart-ants
of var. in the republic have bacone evu eore intolerahle. Above all this
applies to the level of studies and their quality. which in a nuﬁer of cases
leave much to be desired. Lectures. which are poor in content and prinitive
in fora. fail to take into account the dynaaic nature of socioeconoaic pro-
cesses occurring in our society. the aggravation of the ideological struggle
in the international arena and the increased educational and cultural level
of the young people. Topical questions of contenporary life are not.always
raised and discussed during lectures. Seainers and tutorials and actually
existing difficulties end contradictions of our develop-ant are ignored at
tines. Unfortunuely there are still instructors who do not have enough skill
to show the historical advantages of socialiu end our successes end achieve-
ments in building a new life and to expose the total hypocrisy of slanderous
bourgeois propaganda. Sons social science instructors do not engage in ’
self-inproveeent. limit lectural eaterial to a textbook framework and do not
possess enough lecturing skill.

Sowetines we judge the activity of a departnsnt and its workers on the basis
of sons quantitative indicators. particularly as regards the newer of
instructors having an academic degree. the percentage of progress. the
quantity of published work. prepared papers and so forth. It has bean
proves long ago through experience that high-sounding titles and ranks do
not always guarantee a high level of studies and that high parentage of
progress is sonetines achieved as a result of en instructor's luiucy and
liberalisn. There are also instances when an instructor atteqts to "take
up" for the low level of his acadenic qualification and pedagogical skill by

making excessive demands on students. both ways are of great here to the
cause of education and training of young people.

Sose instructors still persist in att-pts to assign students as esny couple:
scientific infornstion as possible. which undoubtedly ukes the process of

mastering and subsequently reproducing it difficult. This harnful and
fallecious practice. which does not conforn to the goals of intmsifying the

28

MOMMWEONLY
FOR OFHOAL USE ONLY

touching and educational process. linits the cognitive independence of

students and is utterly at variance with creative study of Marxian-Leninisn.
which presupposes independent work on prieary sources and independent consider-
ation and conrehension of one or another question of theory and practice.
Hence the i-ediate task of social scientists is to pronote nazinun develop-
ment of habits anong students of thoughtful study of problena and Marxist-
Leninist science. the party's policy and questions of co-Inist construction.

Scientific level of instruction and creative atnosphere of the entire
educational process depend to a considerable degree on the extent and condition
of scientific research work in social scimce departnents. The resolution

of the CPSU Central Cousittee and the USSR Comcil of Ministers "0n Raising

the Efficiency of Scientific Research Dork in higher Educational Institutions"
and the decisions of the July (1979) plenun of the Azerbaijan CPCC have

provided a great incentive for inroving organization of scientific research
activities in VUZ's.

Instructors of social science departnsnts of "12's in the republic have joined
in developing sons important national econonic problems. a part of which has
been included in the coordination plan of basic scientific research of the
USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized
Education.

Depart-ants of CPSU history are emanining probleu connected with the party's
increased leading role in co-nnist construction and are studying the histor-

ical experience of CPSU's struggle for inplensntation of Leninist principles
of ideological struggle. In the center of scientists' attention are criticisn

of bourgeois falsificatione of the CPSU's nationalities policy and socialist
construction in Azerbaijan. The research results of historians are edwdied
in doctoral and candidate theses. nonogrephs. brochures and articles which
reflect the activities of the CPS!) and the Azerbaijan DP duing the 9th and
10th rive-Year Plans.

In philosophy departnents the attention of scientists is concentrated in
exanining the patterns of the present stage of Soviet society's developnent.
fame of their unifeatation and nechanisn of their action. Sociological

problens of the scientific-technical revolution and current problens of
Harxist-Leninist ethics and aesthetics are an object of interest for

philosophers .

Professors and instructors of political economy departnents are working on the
eagles: problen of "Bcononic Regularity of Developed Socialisn."

Departments of scientific co-snisn are examining the scientific col-unin's
questions of theory and socioecononic problens of developed socialien and
are studying different aspects of the socialist way of life. These are the
basic. the nein directions of scientific research work of social scientists
in WZ's. in accordance with which 11 doctoral and 35 candidate theses were
defended during the years of the 10th Pivs-Year Plan.

29

l-‘OlOFﬂClALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 26th CPSU Congress has set the task of using scientific potential of
vuz's more fully. This requith as well as the lost inortant theoretical
positions and cmclusions. which at present characterise the content of our
party's ideological and theoretical life. make it incudasnt to interpret in

a new way the tasks of social science depart-ants es the nest important link
in the structure of our scientific and theoretical subdivisions. There are
now 56 doctors of sciences and professors and sore than 350 candidates of
sciences working in WZ's of the republic. Quality of education and training
of young people and the level of scientific research work in “12's can be
substantially raised by efficiently using this considerable scientific
potential. The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the 30th Azerbaijan
CP Congress have been a powerful incentive for creative searches by scientists
of the republic and have expanded the possibilities of researching funda-
nentally inportsnt problems of social developmt and. first of all. questions
of nature socialien and ways of its developing into co-nnisa. It is charac-
teristic that creative efforts of social scientists in the republic are being
concentrated even nore today on the topical questions posed by life. At
present sons depertnents are planning and are already fulfilling complex
interdepartmental research. Thus for the 1981-85 period sciatific activities
of all social science departnents of the Aslﬂlha [expansion unknown] ineni

D. Buniateade are concentrated around the problea of "The Socialist Ray of
Life." whose elaboration in the socioeconomic. philosophic and historic Plan
is dictated by tasks ensuing fron the decisions of the 26th Party Congress.

The teaching and educational process in higher school and scientific research
activities of departments are inseparable fron studmts' scientific work.
which is an organic conposite part of the entire educational process in a vuz.
Fron tinid steps in an effort to accustoa students to scientific work of a
social science department. transition is now being ends to enlisting its nost
capable elumus in fulfilling departmental research. All-union student work
contests on problens of social sciences. Konsoeol history and international
youth sovenent have becone an effective neane for developing skills of
scientific research work and active sociopolitical activities anong students.
These contests. which involve alaost all student youths of the republic.
convincingly testify to students having a sound knowledge of history of the
revolutionary novenent and our notherland'a rise to the peaks of social
progress and to the deep. enduring interest of young son and woe-n in Harriet-
Leninist theory. Twenty-three students of the republic's m's were winners
in all-union contests during the 10th Five-Year Plan. They were awarded first.
second and third degree prizes and honorary certificates of the Roneonol
Central Cocaine and the USSR Ministry of Higher and Secondary Specialised
Education.

At the sane tine. great opportunities and the creative potential of our social
scientists are still insufficiently used for deep and coepreheneive research
into our life's new phenonena and processes and for generalisation of the
many-sided. rich experience of the Azerbaijan CP accumlated in the struggle
for strengthening all spheres of the republic's life at the neat advanced
positions of developed socialise.

An important reserve for raising the efficiency of scientific research work
and of social scientists' activities in ma as a whole is in expanding the

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

geography of their scientific contacts. Scintific publications of our social
scientists in all-union editions and their participation in the work of
international conferences. sywosiuas and congresses in the GDR. Bulgaria.
Sweden. Den-ark. Yugoslavia and other comtries. as experience proves. con-
siderably enrich activities of departmts and pronote inrovensnt of their
ideological. scientific and educational aspects.

Organization of scientific research work does not nest current denands in all
depart-eats. Research subjects in sons of then have not been exaained for
years and have been nechanically carried over from one year to another Ind
fron five-year plan to five-year plan. As a result. "dull” publications.
which are low in ideological and theoretical level and which poorly illustrate
the grandiose changes in the republic's socioeconolic. political and cultural
life. have been appearing in the press.

Subjects of scientific research that are not dictated by needs of science and
national econony but by the notorious "dissertability" are assigned to grad-
uate students by sons departnents. Many graduate students cannot cope with
defense of theses within the instruction period. The defense of theses is
sonetines for-slistic; their passing is groundlessly forced and responses are
superficial. lacking a well-reasoned evaluation of the novelty and practical
significance of results obtained by the author.

Improved selection. placing and training of personnel in VUZ's is one of the
most important conditions for raising the ideological and theoretical level

in teaching social sciences. A great and positive role in this respect was
played by the resolute measures adopted by the Azerbaijan 01’ cc during the
past several years to eradicate serious shortconings in selecting and placing
teaching personnel. W2 collectives have done nuch to inrove the teaching
staff. Persons lacking the necessary level of professional training and
qualifications have been debarred fron teaching. Ilproved work with personnel
has been pronoted by the implementation of the tasks advanced at the republic
conference of V02 workers (Hay 1980).

A systen for raising professional skill and pedagogical culture of W2 social
scientists and various form of theoretical and methodical training of

pedagogical personnel. which we have established. have justified theaselves.
During the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan. 617 instructors and chiefs of

social science departments have been sent to institutes for improving quali-
fications in the cities of Moscow. Leningrad. Kiev. Minsk. Rostov. Tashkent.

Novosibirsk and Sverdlovsk .

At present the existing deficiency in training social sciences personnel is
being gradually elininated by annually sending a large group of youths to
study in the country's leading WZ's in specialities such as crsu history.
political econony. philosophy and scientific co-unisn. We have also done
much during the past few years in training scientific and pedagogical social
science personnel through postgraduate studentship. During the 9th ad 10th
Five-Year Plans. 109 people conpleted postgraduate work.

31

POIOFFICIALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But unfortunately not all educational institutions are inplementing personnel
selection and placenent in a purposeful nannsr in accordance with instruction-
at provisions and norms. Even today the M's are experiencing a shortage of
highly qualified specialists in social sciences. Only slightly nore than
half of corresponding departments are headed by doctors of sciences. The
institute of senior scientific workers and scientific work on probation at
leading departnsnts of the country's VUZ's are not being used efficiently
enough in training highly qualified specialists. New and more couple: tasks
posed by life densnd that questions of further inprovenent in training social
science personnel become a central link in the work of social science depart-
ments. These questions as well as activities of social science departnsnts
as a whole are under constant and close attention of the republic's hinvu:
[Ministry of higher Education]. 0n the basis of systelntic discussion of
work conducted by vuz social scientists. the rum: collegiun has worked out
decisions containing practical recousndetions for improving work style and
setth of social science departeents and for replenishing then with highly
qualified specialists trained in the country's leading “12's.

The entire sunny-sided activity of VUZ social scientists is directed in the
final analysis at forming of col-mist outlook anong youths. their high
consciOusness and readiness and skill to build co-Inism. Although ideo-
logical and political training of future specialists is a task of the entire
staff of professors and instructors. u deternining role in this is played by
social science departments. Together with party and public organisations
of “12's they are inplenenting long-rang coupler ideological training plans.
calculated for the entire instruction period. defining its concrete fares
and sethods and are directing the activities of special and general theoret-
ical departnents in strengthening the overall world-view orientation of the
entire teaching and educational process.

COPYRIGHT: ”Komnist Azaerbaydshana". 1982

9817
C50: 1800/599

32

P0! OFFICIAL IBE ONLY
“WMMY

NATIONAL

toms DETAILS (I! am MIMI?!” ammo;
Hoacow SOMSKAYA BTNOGBAIIYA in haaian lo 2. tier-Apr 82 pp 111-115

[Article by A. A. Suaokolov: "The 26th CPSU Congreea and ‘l'aaha in the Study
of Nationelitiea Relationa in the USSh"]

[Text] .‘rhe 26th CPSU Congreaa haa devoted great attention to problene
connected with the developnent of nationa and nationelitiea relationa in
the USSR.1 10 diecuaa the taaha enauing fro. the congreaa' deciaione.
ethnoaociologiata and epecialiata of other eocial aciencea who are working
on related problena net on 25-30 May 1981 in the city of Iahu. The eeaeion
wee orgenieed by the Council for Sociological Reeearch of the Aserbeijan
GP cc and the Bthnic Sociology Section of the Soviet Sociological Aaaocie-
tion with cooperation of the Scientific Council for lationalitiea Problena
of the Preaidim of the USSR Aced-y of Sciancea headed by Acadanician Yu.
V. Bronley.

The work of the aeaeion haa been deacribed by central and republic neana of
naaa infatuation. G. A. Aliyev, cendidate nenber of the CPS!) Central
Co-ittee Politburo end firat aecretary of the Azerbaijan 01’ cc. received
leading ecientiate. participanta in the aeaeion.

The attention ahown in the work of the eeaaion by the Azerbaijan 6? cc
hne raiaed thia acientific forun'a authority. 6. A. Gaeanov, aecretary of
the Azerbaijan 01’ cc. delivered the opening addreea at the aeaeion. lie
dwelt on the aignificance of acientific underatanding of problana of
nationalitiea relatione and on behelf of the firat eecretary of the
Azerbaijan C? CC conveyed wiahea for auccaaafnl work to participanta in
the aeaaion.

The firat neeting of the eeaaion wae devoted to theoretical and nethodo-
logical problene in etudying nationalitiea relationa.

A report ”The 26th CPSU Congreaa on Iationalitiae Iaiatione in the USSR

and Take in the Study of National and International Proceaaee" waa
delivered by A. P. Daahdanirov, chief of the Propagenda and Agitation
Departnent of the Azerbaijan Cf cc. The 26th CPS“ Congreae. he noted,

hae aet the teal: with regard to further drawing acientific and theoretical
develop-euro cloaer to prectical taalna of aocial control. The non: inportant

33

“WNW?
IOIICINHCIAI.UUILO$HJ!

task of researchers. he said, is foraseeing social consequences of the
internationalization process, which are manifested in the structure of
nationalities relations and the mode of life, in changing forms of inter-
personal contact and in naterial and spiritual requirements. In dwelling

on the structure of nationalities relations, A. P. nashdamirov stressed

that under conditions of developed socialism. contacts between workers of
various republics and various nationalities within the republics are becoming
an ever active factor in the develop-ant of economy and culture. Taking

into account historical peculiarities of a nation's development makes it

possible to find a way for solving common international tasks under specific
conditions of life of republics and peoples.

In a report "Some Theoretical Probleaa in the Study of Bthnos,” Yu. V.
Bronley (Moscow), first of all, touched upon the conceptual questions in

the relationship between social and ethnic in national and dwelt on the
relationship of the conception of "nation" and "ethnoa." The speaker drew
attention to the fact that many specific questions being researched by
ethnosociologista have so far failed to find a sufficiently broad theoretical
understanding. At the sane time, many theoretical developments by philose
ophers and ethnographers are cut off from real research practice.

An increased striving to overcome this gap has been noticeable during the
debate on basic reports. Thus. H. V. Iordan (Moscow) and N. R. Halikove
(Baku) emphasized that many trends in the development of national life can

be understood by proceeding from the principle of ethnos' integrity as a
system.

The speeches made during the debate on basic reports have indicated a sig-
nificantly expanded range of the subjects researched. Although this
increased the informative value of the conference. it sometimes made con-
ducting a single line of discussion difficult.

N. A. Tomilov (Omsk) has dwelt on questions of nethodology and source
control [istochnikovedeniye] of historical ethnosociology-direction. Dis-
cussion of the need to develop the latter has already been going on for a
long time in scientific circles.

Traditionally problems at the conference covered basic directions of ethno-
sociological research: ethnosocial structure and denographic problems.
national psychology and interpersonal national relations, language and
culture and methods and problems of source control of ethnosociological
research. Reports on special problems of ethnosociology were delivered

by Yu. V. Arutyunyan. L. A. Gordon. H. N. Guboglo, A. P. Dashdamirov.

L. H. Drobizheva, A. F. Kocharli and V. I. Perevedentsev.

The increased role of the national aspect in contemporary society during

the past 10-year period has been noted in most speeches. V. I. Perol
(Tallinn) stressed that the trend toward thorough study of national specifics
of social processes and intra-national relations in Soviet society is con-
nected with the realisation of the fact that developed socialism is e

34

IDIIOIIKJAI.UBIGMNL¥
MWMWLY

"necessary, natural and historically long period in the asking of co-unist
formation."2 and, therefore, erasing national distinctions in the sphere
of social relations is also a lengthy process. I. K. Apine (Riga) and K. 8.
Khallik (Tallinn) expressed their view that increased social activity in
coabination with increased aultinationality of cities does not necessarily
lead to erasure of ethnic distinctions:' inwsoae cases these factors can
pronote intensification of national consciousness. An atceapt to theoreti-
cally analyze the nechani. of interaction of cm and national features
in the Soviet way of life was aede by V. G. Babakov Oioscow). A report by
A. P. Kochsrli (new) contained inforaation on basic directions in con-
temporary philosophic and sociological research in the Azerbaijan 883.

The decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress devoted a significant place to
regional aspects in distributing productive forces and the problems arising
in this connection with labor nobility of indigenous population uof sane
union and autonoaous republics. To a certain degree these problene have
been touched upon in all reports and in sons they occupied a central place.

A report by Yu. V. Arutyunyan (Hoscow) "Btlnsosociology: Problels and
Directions of Research” was devoted aainly to an analysis of the role of
ethnic factors in social develop-ant and to the significance of social
processes for ethnic changes. The speaker particularly noted that differ-
ences in the settlement structure of nations and their social and profess
sional composition to a considerable degree determine preservation of one
or another eleaent of traditional culture and influence trends of develop-
aent of national consciousness. The influence of social on ethnic say give
rise to a umber of probleas. Thus introduction of universal secondary
education and the increased social expectations of young people, with
preservation of public need for unskilled labor. which is especially strong
in republics having a high share of agricultural production, requires
certain social regulation with due regard for national aspects. In turn
ethnic traditions influence social changes.

In a report by L. A. Gordon (Hescow) "International Features in the Develop-
aent of the Uorking Class," it was shown that the share of the working class

in population has been increasing in all republics and its nultinationality
has been growing. The differences between republics at present are nanifested
not so nuch in the share of the working class as in the share of representa-
tives of the basic indigenous nationality in its composition. These differ-
ences are especially noticeable when the social-and professional coapoeition
of different national groups of the working class is coepared. To a consid-
erable degree this is connected with labor traditions of the population of
various regions.

Bthnodenogrsphic problens, which have been sharply raised at the 26th CPS!)
Congress, are closely linked to questions of social structure of nations.
Therefore it was no coincidence that a report by V. I. Perevedentsev "Ethnic
Aspects of Deaographic Processes" has evoked a very lively interest. After
describing the demographic situation in the country. the speaker noted that
the level of natural growth will soon inevitably decline in Central Asian

35

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

republics, and that this has already happened in Azerbaijan. Arnenia and none
other republics. However, in the opinion of V. I. Perevedentsev. this
process requires social regulation to naintain optinun reproduction condi-
tions. Efficient use of labor resources is not connected with noving then

to central regions but with developing productives forces locally. for

this purpose it is necessary to differentiate the policy with regard to
nigration by regions, facilitating the adaptation of rural youths in cities
of republics with increased level of natural growth. In the opinion of the
speaker, such nessures nust include: inprovenent of Russian language teaching

in secondary schools; organisation of ”city" skills training; establishnent
of snall industrial enterprises in villages.

Many speakers supported the reporting speaker's basic positions and revealed
other aspects of the ethnodenographic situation in the country. lowever,

the debate on the reports as a whole has indicated that researchers in the
republics have failed to devote proper attention to labor nobility of the
indigenous population. Only one report was devoted to this question. Rh. V.
Dsutsev (0rdzhonikidze), in subscribing to the opinion of the speakers. noted
that location of industrial enterprises in labor-surplus regions creates
conditions for gradual adaptation of rural inhabitants of indigeneous nation-
slities to conditions of industrial production and will nake it possible in
the future to increase the interregional nigratory novenent of population of
labor-surplus republics. In this it is important to take into consideration
not only local natural resources but also the peculiarities of traditional
occupations and donestic structure of the population.

K. P. Katushov (Blista) devoted his report to the role of the working class
in the internationalisation processes of the node of life.

Sone socioethnic problens connected with the increasing nunbers of elderly
persons were exanined by V. I.Koslov (Moscow). He noted in particular the
need to study their role in passing on positive and negative ethnic tradi-
tions and also the social status of the elderly anong various peoples.

One of the scat inportant and at the sane tine least developed spheres of
science are ethnic features of personal psychology. Therefore, the interest
expressed in the report by A. P. Dashdanirov "Certain Methodological Problens
in the Study of National Psychology," in which the structure of ethnopsycho-
logical phenonena was analyzed and basic ways for studying then in a posi-
tive nanner were outlined, was readily understood. A. ?. Dashdanirov
recognized the objective existence of ethnos's psychological peculiarities
and located their roots in historical, socioecononic and sonetines natural
conditions in the fornation of ethnos. In the opinion of the speaker, it

is expedient to conduct the study of ethnos's culture and consciousness

only as ethnodifferentiating factors and with consideration of their ethno-
integrating role. Researching the nschanisn of consolidation of national
psychology's peculiarities is therefore an urgent task. The report also
exsnined the relationship of conceptions such as "psychic nold of a nation,"
"national character," "national awareness" and ”national self-consciousness."

36

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE¢DNLY
IIIICNNHC1A1.UBI{MULY

A report by L. M. Drobizheva (Moscow), devoted to optimising conditions for
developing friendly interpersonal national relations in the USSR. has singled
out insufficiently studied problems in ethnosociology. Among them are inter-
action of interethnic relations and ethnic self-consciousness; influence of
interethnic relations on ethnocultural processes and ethnic self-conscious-
ness; and the interrelationship of various forms of the manifestation of
interethnic relations, particularly of relations in the production and family
spheres. In developing this topic in his address, I. R. Loov (Groznyy),
based on the eaterials of socioeetric tests conducted in multinational pro-
duction collectives, showed that even the most favorable conditions of intra-
national intercourse in the production sphere at times do not influence a
tendancy toward intra-national contacts between families. Kh. A. Ibragimov
(Hakhachkals) described one of the first national experiments in studying
"mutual" ethnic stereotypes of those ethnoaes in contact with each other.

Bthnopsychological problems are closely connected with other sections of
ethnosociological research. Thus 6. V. Starovoytova (Leningrad). using
research in Abkhazia as an example, showed that depending on ethnic tradi-
tions, people of extreme old age find themselves in a sociopsychological
climate appears in which (conferring social prestige and involvement in
family and public life): it is this precisely which influences the length
of their active life to a considerable degree. It has been proven through
research that individual psychological features have little effect in this.
A. I. Tishin (Prunse), I. B. Dzhafarov and T. L. Paradov (Baku) and B. N.
Harkazov (Ulan-Ude) dwelt on individual aspects of ethnopsychological
problems.

In connection with the study of ethnopsychological features, a question
arises about aechanisms of socialization which promote preservation of

these features. A report by I. S. Rona (Leningrad) "The Role of Family
Unbringing in the Reproduction Process of Bthnos as a Group" was devoted to
the possibilities of researching this problem. The speaker noted that
exploring this topic requires the examination of two basic problems: the
image of a child in one or another culture and ethnic features of socializa-
tion and upbringing. The speaker described the basic methods and goals in
studying these problems within the frasework of research organised by the
Ethnography Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

As indicated by many speeches, great attention is devoted to language
processes during research of ethnocultural changes. H. N. Guboglo (HoscOw)
devoted his report to problems of bilingualism as the most important factor
in the development and interaction of ethnoses. In the opinion of the
speaker not only knowledge of a language of intra-national intercourse but
its use in various spheres of social life must also become an object of
social regulation. This proposal elicited a discussion in which views both
for and against the possibility and expediency of such regulations were
expressed. But on the whole the speeches on language problees were of an
informative character. Thus A. A. Shevchenko (Kiev), L. s. Khristolyubova
(Izhevsk) and D. G. Bragina (Yakutsk) described the results of specific
sociological studies of bilingualism in their regions.

37

teammates“
peoples and ethnic groups inhabiting Azerbaijan are used by the republic's
scans of mass infornation. Reports on changes in the language structure
and its dictionary reserve under the influence of language interaction were
made by I. H. Granovskaya and R. A. Bsdclov (Baku).

nationality fanilies. Thus R. A. Achylova (Prunes) expressed an opinion
that not only nixed-nationality but one-nationality fsnilies as well can

from generation to generation were described in speeches by S. I. Ksraksyevs
(Prunze) and M. Ya. Ustinova (Moscow). However. basic attention in this

8. R. Logashova (Moscow) and G. v. Starovoytova in their speeches dwelt on
such an important question as the influence of confessional traditions on
contemporary ethnic processes.

Reports on some results in studying ethnocultursl processes in individual

regions were presented by V. N. Belyavins (Minsk), R. V. Danilenko (Kishinev)
and Ye. I. Klenentyev (Petrozavodsk).
POIOFF‘ICIALUSEONLY

Unification of tools [unifikatsiys instruentariya) was a central proble-

at a "round table" nesting devoted to netth of ethnosociological research.
At a preceding conference of ethnosociologiats3 this problea was only raised.
but at the present session (speeches by V. A. Dstinov, Yu. V. Arutyunyan,

L. G. Gaft, and A. A. Susoholov—all of Moscow) specific ways for solving

it were discussed. As Yu. V. Bronley stressed in his final renarks, it is
inpossible to coordinate prograns without standardizing nethods—a very
inportsnt organizational task. A specific proposal was nade during the
round table speeches to publish new systenatic develop-ents and to periodi-
cally publish a bulletin of the Bthnosociological Section of the Soviet
Sociological Association, containing infornstion on such- publications and

on basic directions of research in regional research centers. In sane
speeches it was noted that an insufficient level of coordination considerably

reduces research effectiveness and lead to duplication of sons work and
deterioration of its quality.

Problems of source control of ethnosociological research were broadly dis-
cussed at the round table. I. A. Mardosa (Vilnyus) reported on the experi-
ence in using content analysis to study the repertoire of the Lithuanian
SSR's amateur nusicsl activities on the requests presented at republic
cor-petitions. In the aforeaentioned speech by G. V. Starovoytova, aaterials
of passport offices, financial reporting of nosques and other dent-eatery
sources have been used in an original nanner.

Only one speech was devoted to statistical lethods in ethnosociologicsl
research. The experience in developing a typology of ethnic types for an
all-union research of bilingual processes with the aid of cluster analysis
methods [netody klasternogo analiza] was described by Is. 2. Garipov (Kazan).

The success of the session was facilitated to a great degree by extensive
work conducted by the organizational conittee in which associates of the
Council for Sociological Research of the Azerbaijan (2? CC and the Institute
of Philosophy of the Azerbaijan 88R Academy of Sciences actively participated.

Significant achievements of ethnosociology were denonstrated at the session.
But at the same time certain difficulties were revealed in developing this
ieportant scientific direction. connected, first of all, with insufficient
coordination of research. In sole speeches and in Yu. V. Bronley's cone
eluding remarks. a view was expressed regarding the expediency of convening
a conference to concentrate on one of the lost topical problels.

FOOTNOTES

1. Materialy XXVI S'yezda KPSS [Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow.
Politizdat. 1981. pp 510-57 and other.

2. Materials on the 26th CPSU Congress. p 78.
39

MWWONLY
3. Sovetoluyn Btnognfiya [Soviet Ethnography], 1980. no 2, p 152.

COPYRIGHT: Izdacol'ntvo ”Rank", "Sovetaluya etnocnftya". 1982

9817
(:80: 1800/ 593

‘0
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

macaw or cuss mucous, pm mum. sun-1m

Moscow VOPIOSY 1810311 in Russian lo lo, Apr 82 pp 118-120

[Review by N. V. Blinov of a book "Borba 2a Yadinstvo labochego Klassa Rossii
(Deyatelnost V. I. lenins i lolshevikov Po Splocheniyu Prolet'ariata)" [Struggle
for Unity of the Working Class of Russia (Activities of V. I. Lenin and Bol-
sheviks in Rallying the Proletariat)] by A. V. Uahahov, Moscow. Hysl, 1981, 207

oases]

{Excerpts} Questions of the ideological and organisational union of Russia's
working class are analysed in detail by A. V. Ushekov. Although objective his-
torical and sociopolitical conditions put the proletariat into a role of a
hegemnic power in the struggle against autocracy, fulfill-eat of this role
depended on a range of subjective chem-stances. the author has rightfully
devoted a considerable part of the book to their function and effect. The ex-
snple of struggle for the party of the working class by Lenin and revolutionary
Harrists free the aid-nineties of the 19th century to the end of the first Rus-
sian revolution. the disclosure of the character and content of the workers'
novesent during that period with stress, in analysing the two processes, on the
develop-est of ideological and organisational unity and the unity of the ranks
of revolutionaries end workers enabled the author to take a new approach to
events and facts, mat of which have already been dealt with in the literature.
The monograph not only shows interaction of objective and subjective factors,
which have deternined conditions of the proletariat's class and political orgsn-
isation. but also presents a concrete history of accmulation of elesents of
unity in the ideological and class basis of the proletarian revolutionary nove-
nent.

The process of forution of unity in the party and workers' covenant, a diffi-
cult one in itself, proceeded anidst the entagoniss of various political forces.
Bourgeois politicians and petty bourgeois revolutionaries strove to bring vari-
ous sections of the working class under their influence; the goveruent strove
to spread "police socialise" along workers, and opportunists launched contin-
uous attacks against the party. Hithout avoiding difficult aspects of the
probles, which is not always possible in a condensed account, A. V. Ushekov has
on the one hand concentrated his attention on the theoretical, organisational
and political formation of Bolshevisn as the sain noving force in organising
the workers' sovenent; on the other hand he has concentrated on the cosposition

ll

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or the workers' aovenent and the ferns and level of its organisation. This
approach required showing the reader which channels, ferns and netth were
used to politically educate the vanguard and rally the workers nassss around it
and at the ease tine which sections and production detacl'nents of workers at
what level of social develop-ant participated in the class struggle and in de-
veloping solidarity and unity of action and organisation on the eve and during
the years of the 1905-07 Revolution.

The book contains generalized data (a considerable part of which results free
extensive research by the author) on participation in the struggle and various
kinds of organizations by all elesents of the working class (including laborers.
agricultural workers and others). Fran the standpoint of unity of proletariat's
activities, the work also examines the "left bloc" tactics pursued by Bolshe-
viks during the 1905-07 revolution. The extent of the intonation and its
analytical generalization nade it possible to present a convincing picture of
class unity and political training of the Russian proletariat by Bolsheviks
during one of the nest inportant stages of awareness of their historic nission.

During the party's fox-nation, Lenin stressed that "the only source of strangth
for the downtrodden, oppressed and work-weary hired slaves of our civilisation
is their union, their organisation, their solidarity.“ The book traces by
stages the growing strength of the party and the working class through develop-
aent of solidarity and organisation. The author reasons that the open class
struggle of workers, beginning with strikes md ending with an arsed uprising,
was the principal scans in developing their solidarity and unity and strength-
ening their organisation. Pros this can be drawn evidence of another important
(from the standpoint of historical experience of struggle of Russia's proletar-
iat) truth: the power of influence of an organised vanguard over a sees as-
ceeds its own relative share in that sees Iany tines.

Class unity of actions of the proletariat in a antinational country would have
been inconceivable without subjecting its national interests to social demands,
without international cohesion into a unified party and unified professional
organizations of workers of various nationalities. The book shows that interna-
tional unity of workers in Russia has passed through several stages in its for-
nation at whose source was Lenin's and Bolsheviks' consistent line toward inter-
national building of a party of the proletariat, toward liberating workers from
the fetters of bourgeois nationalisa.

A. V. Ushakov's nonograph is an interesting and necessary research. It success-
fully shows interaction of the two most important consonants of the revolution-
sry process: the influence of class struggle on organisation of the proletariat
and the influence of organisation on the develop-est of class struggle. The
synthesis of historical knowledge offered by the author on questions of fornation
of sociopolitical unity of Russia's proletariat is a step forward in elaboration
of. an iaportant problan iron the standpoint of historiography of the working
class and its party as well as free the standpoint of international significance
of the experience of revolutionary struggle in Russia.

*V. I. Lenin. Conplete works, Vol 7, p 315

COPYRIGm': Isdstel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

9817
cso: moo/s90 .3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
MWLUSBONLY

“TIM

KISBII'BV MTIwALITIBS common ammo

Kuhinev IZVBSTIYA ”Balm WAVE“)! 888: 83”“ oasacnsrvmm “I!
in Russian 80 l. Ja-Peb-Har-Apr 82 p: [Inside front cover]

[Article by A. Dabiy: "The Dialectics of the International ad the hational in
the Developnent of Iodern Philosophy and Social Thought (in Light of the Decisions
of the 26th CPSU Congress)"]

[Text] ”The Dialecttcs of the International and the National in the Develop-eat
of Iodern Philosophy and Social Thought .(in Light of the Decisions of the 26th
CPSU Congress)" - this use the subject of the session of the USSR Acadany of
Sciences' Scientific Council on the history of social thought, which use held

in Kishinev in hove-her 1981. .

Philosophers iron the 3.8m. the Ukrainian 883. the Holdavian 88!, the Latvian 83!.
and the Azerbaija SS! participated in its work.

The profound report of the proninent Soviet philosopher ad public figure, 1!. r.
Iovchnk, entitled "Sons P‘undanental Questions in lssoarching the history of

Russia 18th-l9th Century Philosophy in Light of the Present" evoked a great

deal of interest in the participants. In it. the task of noro deeply ad specially
developing the history of Russia philosophy for a well-reasoned critique of the
frequent attenpts in bourgeois countries to distort the true history of the Russian
people's develop-at was posed.

The reports entitled ”The Develop-ant of Econonic Thought in Light. of the Decisions
of the 26th CPSD Congress” by Doctor of leononic Sciences V. V. Oreshhin (3co-
nonics Institute of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences). "the Develop-ant of Philo-
sophical Thought in Moldavia During the Years of Soviet Power" by Doctor of Philo-
sophical Sciences A. I. Babiy (Moldavian 88! Made-y of Sciences). "The Rational-
ity Question in the Political Opinions of 19th Century Russia Revolutionary
Denocrats " by Doctor of Jurisprudence to. A. Stripilev (Institute of Coveth
and Lev of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences), ad "The Dialectica of the Objective

and Subjective Factors in the Internationalization of Public Life" by Candidate

of Philosophical Sciences D. R. Hanedov (the Pedagogical Institute in the city

of halos) and the interesting scientific reports of candidates of philosophical
_ sciences z. B. Lapin' (The Latvian 888 Acadely of Sciences), C. Is. Dobyne (‘rhe
Moldavian SSR Acadeny of Sciences), v. a. Snelykh (the Medical Institute in the

C3

I‘OIOIFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

city of Kishinev), 1.. 1?. Hokryak (the Pinancial and Econonic Institute in the
city of Ternopol'), and V. c. Shtyulti (the Kiahinsvskiy State University). which
were devoted to isportant questions in the history of philosophical thought in
Latvia and Holdavia and the international training of foreign students in Soviet
V02, were listened to with a great deal of attention.

A vast circle of problems in the history of philosophical. econonic. and legal
though -- which need deep scientific develop-sat -- was touched upon in the lec-
tures and scientific reports which were presented. and the task of intensifying
the struggle against bourgeois ideology and revieionian use posed.

COPYRIGHT: Not given

8802
080: 1800/ 632

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
thmmmnm

[Editorm Report] Hoocau W 0030mm 1 "AVG in Russian, lo 6,
Jun. 1982, carries on pm. 5-1]. a SSOO-vord article tttlgd "luv “ethnology
and Soviet Copyright Lu" by I. P. Guru”, 0 mutant to tho Scientiﬁc-
Ormiution Mutant of tho Pram of th. 08!! Mad-y of Semen.
The urticlc want. that Sadat copyright 1a would rnfhct the cormt
«at. of storm. and rotricnl cyst..- and arm that the "introduction"

of a work into an nloctrouic storm synt- should be rewind .- use in
the «on of copyright 11v.

comm: Izatol'ntvo "limb", "Sovotukoyo germs-m 1 pave". 1982

(:80: 1800/79

‘5

mammal!“
t“ “has.“ 095 was

”TIMI.

NATIONAL!“ VOLUME ms PRIZE-dbecov 8W0 Lama in man. No 6.
June 1982, carries on pp 19-20 e MOO-word interview with Nikoley A.
Dollezhel'. deputy chair-en of the All-union "Zneniye" Society. Anna
other cot-lento. Dollezhel' reported that LP. neetem bed been mrded e
"Zneniye" Society prize for hie book "The Bond of Tine" (MAZ' m).

vhich glorified the mm people end the Bunion put. [Mitoriel hport]
mountain Iedetel'etvo "Zaeniye". 1982]

BVOLUI'IOII 0P COAT 0P MUS-dine“ SWO mu in Milan lo 6, Jun. 1982,
carries on pp 31-33 a Zboo-vord erticle titled "The!~ wt of Ar- ot the
USSR" by I. Okmyev. The article deecribee the origin. and develop-eat of

the coat of at. of the USSR and thou oi the national republice. [Editoriel
Report] [wPYRIGIn'z Itdetel'etvo "Zuniye", 1982]

080: 1&0/ 751 m

46

FOR OFFICIAL 083 “Io!