FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY

JPRS L/10888

27 July 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(Fouo' 27/32)

Fans FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

“MIMUSEONLY
NOTE

JPIS publications contain information primarily iron foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itens are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND Socmmemt Armas

(F000 27/82)

Contents

NATIONAL

Guide to Russian Personal Names Ia Reieeued

(N. A. Petrovakiy; SLOVAR' wssxnm 1.10“?“
m. 1980) IOOIOOOO.I.0.......0.0000000QOCOICOOOOOOOOQ0

Drobieehve Value on Nature. Consequences of National
Identities in Soviet Society
(OBSHCEIISTVENNYYE NAUKI V sssn: SERIYA I. PROBLEM!
NAUCHNOGO KOHIIUNIZHA. No 3. Hay—Jun 82)

Soviet Bay of Life Exhibit at Ethnographic Museu- .
(mitori‘l upoxt) 0.0.90.9.0.9...OODOOOOIOOOOOOOOOODIOO

Increased Worker Participation in Henngeuent Seen
(Yu. A. Kraein; VOPROSY FILOSOPII. No 6. Apr 82) .......

New Book on Transfer-scion of Kazakh Countryside
(OBSBCRBSTVENNYYB WI V 8881!: SERIYA I. PROBLM
MUCHNOGO KOWIZHA. No 3. Hay-Jun 82)

-a- [III-USSR-35

POI OFFICIAL US". ON“!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

GUIDE TO RUSSIAN PERSONAL ME IS ”ISSUE
Moscow SLOVAR' RISSKIRH LEW}! mm in Russian 1980 pp 10- 12, lé-Zl

Abstract. editor's note and author's preface from book "Dictionary of Russian
ersonal Names” by RA. Petrovshiy, second edition. stereotype reprint.
Izdatel'stvo "Russkiy yazyk, 38b pageg7

[ExcerptsT This dictionary contains about 2,600 Russian personal nrmes. Included

with them are patronynic forms, derived diminutives and forms of endeament, as
well as information on the origin of the name.

The dictionary is addressed to those who are interested in the history, develop-
ment and use of personal nanes. It will also be of use to specialists in philology
and to people who are studying Russian as a non-native or foreign language.

Editor's Note

The publication of this second edition of the dictionary results from the interest
expressed by our readers in issues related to the use of Russian personal nines.
their origin, correct spelling, formation of diminutive and patronymic forms, etc.

Inasmuch as this edition appears after the author's death, the dictionary, as
well as the author's preface to it, are printed without any changes.

The dictionary was created on the basis of a large card index of Russian personal
names, which ILA. Petrovakiy collected over a period of about 20 years. By virtue
of the scope of the material, the dictionary goes beyond the practical indices

of personal nues. The dictionary presents names which have largely gone out

of use, as well as names which are coal-only used today among Russians: old

Russian names, Christian first 11an. names created during the Soviet era and
names borrowed from various languues.

within the area of Russian personal names there are still quite a few controversial,

unresolved questions. for example, in the qualification of some nanes, in the
various forms of a name, etc.

To a certain degree the dictionary reflects the individual views of the author

concerning the system of present-day Russian personal names (in particular, he
has devoted a great deal of space to rare and archaic names, and he has defined

MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

certain modern passport forms as colloqrial. etc.). For this reason the present
dictionary cannot be viewed as a reference book which establishes norms or makes
rccomendations to be followed.

Author's Preface to the First Edition

To the unforgettable memory of my parents. Aleksandr.
Vladimirovich Petrov and Anna Nikolayevna Petrova, I
dedicate my work.

what should a new-born child be called? This question concerns many parents.
In prerevolutionary times the question of a name was resolved simply. The
registration of new—born children was carried out only by the church, where the
rite of christening took place. Thus. no child went unchristened. even if his
parents were non-believers.

what kind of names were given then? In the Russian Orthodox Clutch there were
(and are today) special books or church calendars. For every day of every

month the calendar contained the names of the saints which the church honored on
that day. Before the christening service the priest suggested a choice of
several names which were mentioned in the church calendar for the baby's birthday.
And there the matter usually ended.

why were there so many IVAN's in old Russia? For the simple reason that the name
was (mm) is mentioned 170 times (1) in the complete church calendar. i.e..
almost every other day.

It is true that sometimes the priest made concessions and at the request of the
parents gave the child a different name. one which was not mentioned in the clutch
calendar on the given day. This is why a name which was rarely mentioned

in the church calendar was sometimes encountered quite frequently in real

life. for example, the Slavic names VERA (Faith). mama (Hope) and LYUMV'
(Love) were given to children frequently despite the fact that VERA is mentioned

in the calendar only two times in the year and 1mm and LW' only one time
cache

But. in any case, a child could only be given a name which was found in the calendar.
No "free-thinking" was allowed.

After the Great October Socialist Revolution parents were in a different position.
Departments for the recording of acts of civil status (ZAGS's) began to carry

out the registration of new-horns. and parents could now choose any name: an

old (formerly church) name. a borrowed' name (Polish, German, etc.) or, finally.
they could -ven make up a new name.

Given a free choice of names. parents sometimes gave their children strange. unusual
rnmes. He knew about 3.000 new or borrowed names which. with the rare exception.
will never become established on Russian soil. They include such names as

DUB (Oak). seam (Birch). GVOZDIKA (Carnation). SIREN' (Lilac). Nearly all

the elements of Mdelev's periodic table are included here: RADIY (Radium).
VANADIY (Vanadium). VOL'FRAH (Wolfram), lRIDIY.(Iridium). arm-awn (Ruthenium)

MOWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

etc.), as well as the minerals GRANIT (Granite) and RUBIN (Ruby). The following
categories were used as personal names: geographical designations (ALTAY, GIHALIY,
KAZBBK, MAT, VOLGA, ONEGA, AHUR, KAUR, etc.” all the names of the months,
beginning with January and ending with December; mathematical terms and technical
names such as MEDIAN (Median), RADIAN (Radian), GIPOTBIUZA (Hypotenuse), ALGERINA

(Albegra), TRAK'I'OR (Tractor), MINA (Turbine), DREZINA (Trolley), 0123,. (319881),
KMAYN (Combine), etc.

h'any names were formed from revolutionary slogans, names of institutions, etc.

For example IIKI (Btecutive Co-ittee of the Commist Internationale), 803m

(Born to be a Leninist), RDiIZAR (Horld Revolution Has Begun), REVVDIA (Revolutionary
Have), REVDIT (Revolutionary Child), LORIIERIK (Lenin. October Revolution, Indus-
trialization, Collectivization, Electrification, Radio Installation and Col-lamina),
LORIEXS (Lenin, October Revolution, Industrialization, Electrification, Collectivi-
zation, Socialism).

And there is no need to talk about such unﬂeasant sounding names as ISAS (Central
Pharmaceutical Warehouse), CLASP (Main Alcohol Administration), RAYTIYA (Regional
Typography) and similar names.

The influx of foreign names has grow: stronger in post-revolutionary times. Names
borrowed from various nationalities are encountered: ROBERT, RMUAL'D, RUDOL'P,
RICHARD, ZHOZEPINA, EDUARD, ERIK, ZHANNA, etc.

Names made of two and even several words are appearing BELAYA NOCH' (Hhite Right),
ARTIlLERIYSKAYA AKADDiIYA (Artillery Academy). SERP I HOLOT (Hammer and Sickle),
ZHAN-POL'ﬂARAT (Jean Paul Marat), DOGNAT-PEREG'RAT (from the slogan of the 1930's
"Catch up and Overtake America"). In his article "Zovut zovutkoy" L.V. Uspenskiy
cites examples of girl's names such as VELIKIY RAMHIY (Great HorkerX!) and TSVET
VISHNEVOGO DmEVA V “AYE (Blossom of the Cherry Tree in May).

There is another type of name, which the author calls, perhaps not too successfully,
"parental." The parents MIIUlAIL and OL'GA have a son HIm.’ and a daughter HIOLDUA,

while VLADIMIR and MTRINA have three daughters: VLADIKATRA, .VLEM and van, etc.

Finally, there are names taken from words read backwards: NINE.‘ from Lenin and
AVKSMA from Moskva (Moscow).

Some parents became carried away with foreign names and forgot that these names
often sound discordant when combined with a Russian patronymic and family name.

Some examples are GARRI SEHENOVICH POPOV, DIANA KRIVONOGOVA, ROBERT (WWII,
RED ALD<SEYEVICH.

Sometimes the "revolutionary" names also are put into a similar type of unfortunate
combination, for example, REVOLYUTSIYA KUZ'HINICRNA. Some parents love to give
their daughters the diminutive rather than the full form of a name. They may
register the following names at ZACS: LYUSYA, IRA, INA, RITA, NATA, etc. When

the bearers of these names are still children, this does not sound too bad. But

son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

soon Nata has finished the W2 and become a teacher, ABA has become a physician
and RI‘l‘A an engineer. And how ridiculous it will sound to have a teacher called
NA‘l'A PETRGVRA or a famous surgeon LENA RWWA. or even better, Professor
LYUSYA KONDRAT‘YEVNA [ORDAKOVM

But the fate, after all, of a majority of these names is the same: the bearer
of such a name grows up and considers changing it.

we must not fail to mention the so-called fashion in names. It seems that even the
prettiest names lose their charm if they are encountered has frequently. A teacher,
5.x. Uvarova, from the village of Korostovo in Ryazanskaya Oblast, writes that
"out of 23 girls who completed the seven-year school in 1955, there were 17

NmA's! In the last two years baby girls in this village have been named

either TANYA or NADYA. The exceptions are rare." At various times the following
boys' names have been very fashionable: VALERIY. GMADIY, IGOR', GLEB. VSEVOLOD,
and VADni. And this is not only in the villages. The same thing is discussed

in the papers of Leningrad and other cities.

Is there a necessity to follow blindly the example of others when there is such
a wealth of Russian names?

One would like to caution parents in their desire to give a child an unusual
name. This leads to the appetance of bizarre names unusual for a Russian person
and. as a rule, it does not subsequently bring joy to the child. It is difficult
to recomend names, as the choice of a name is determined by the taste of the
parents. But old Russian names such as pm, ALI-18m, MSTANTIN, IVAN.
HARIYA. etc. deserve attention first of all. Although we borrowed these names
from the Greeks in the distant past, they have existed on Russian soil for nearly
1,000 years and they have been Russified, giving rise to a large number of
derivative forms.

In addition to the so-called canonical names, quite a few old Russian and
Slavic names have come into use in our country. They include, for example,
BORIHIR, BORISLAV, HSTISLAV, PERESVET. SVENZAR. SVYATOSLAV, DOBROSLAVA, MILO-
SLAVA, VSHILA, LYUBMIR, etc.

Finally, certain new names which are successful formulations have also taken
hold and can be recomended. These are the well-known names MILL-2N, VLADILENA.
NINE-1' and others.

The history of Russian names and their etymology has interested philological
scholars, both Russian and foreign, for any years. “any individual works and
articles about names have been written and printed in various periodical
publications. An especially large amoimt of attention has been devoted to the
etymology of Russian names of Slavic origin and of purely Russian names.

Hith regard to the origin of the latter, the pages of philological journals in
the 19th century contained discussions which frequently took on a political
coloration. But even now one cannot consider ill the questions raised here to
be solved, and it can be said that Russian names are an open field of activity
for philologists.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Several dictionaries of Russian personal names eadst in Russian literature. The
“Slavyanskiy imenoslov, ili sobraniye slavyanskikh lichnykh imen v alfavitnom
poryadke" (The Slavic List of Names or Collection of Slavic Personal Names in
Alphabetical Order), compiled by a priest, M. Ya. Horoshkin (St. Petersburg, 1867),
and ”Slovar' drevnarusskikh lichnykh sobstvennykh imen" (Dictionary of Ancient
Russian Personal Names) by M.N. Tupikov (Saint Petersburg, 1903), have not lost
their academic significance today.

In our times .two small dictionaries of Russian first names by I..V. Uspenskiy
have appeared: "Kak vashe imya?"(ﬂhat is Your Name?) Leningrad. 1939, and
"'Chto oznachayc". vashe imya?'(Hhat Does Your Name Hear?) Leningrad, 1940 . The
number of names which they contain is not large.

In the Wrame the 'RIkrainsko—russkiy i russko-ukrainskiy slovar ' sobstvennykh

imcn lyudey" (The Ukrainian-Russian and Russian-Ukraininan Dictionary of

People's Personal Names. Kiev, 1952) was published: it was compiled along the lines
of a dictionary-index. The second edition of this dictionary, which came out in

1961, ”Slovnik vlasnikh imam lyudey" (Dictionary of People's Personal Names), contains
about 1,400 names. A book by A. Ugryumov, ”Russkiye imena" (Russian Names) came

out quite recently: it contains a short dictionary of Russian first names. Also
published recently in the USSR Acadany of Sciences scientific—popular series is

the work of A.V. Superanskaya "Kak vas zovut? Gde vy zhivete?" (What Is Your Name?

"here Do You Live?). Moscow, 1966.

This dictionary, which is offered for the attention of the reader, consists of
a collection of first names encountered in Russian families. These names differ
in their origin.

Several strata can be found in the system of present-day Russian names:

1. 01d Christian names. which came to ancient. Russia with the adoption of
Christianity: these are names canonized by the church. These names differ in

their origins: Latin, Creek, ancient Hebrew, Arabic. They comprise the foundation
of present-day Russian names.

Before the adoption of Christianity the Russians had names which were given to

a person on the basis of some feature, either external or internal, characteristic

of that person: the names came from the names of animals or plants, or they reflected
the order in which new members of the family appeared and the person's relation

to then. For example, KOSOY (Cross-Eyed), RYAN! (Peck-marked), BEL (white-haired),
HAL (Short). BUYAN (Brawler), MOLCRAN (Silent). LYUBIH (Beloved), ZEDAN (One Who
Waits), VOLK ("0] r), ZAYATS (Hare). PERVUSHA (First-Born), TRET'YAK (Third-Born),

etc. There were also names of a different type, princely names which arose on
pan-Slavic or Russian soil: YAROSLAV, VSEVOLOD. VLADIMIR. BUDIMIR, etc.

Him the adoption of Christianity and the appearance of new Christian names,

111-: old names gradually became nicknames and eventually were crowded out by

rho m-w names (in the 17th century): today they are recalled only in last names
(VOLKOV, ZAYTSEV, etc.). Since the appearance ofthe Christian first names in
the language, significant changes have taken place in the set of these names
as they settled into use: some names went out of use completely, others

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. To show those old names which have survived to our times only in the fame of
patronynics or have only individual live bearers. These nanes. selected with
care by the author on the basis of data frm the card index, which establishes
the living bearers, can serve as interesting material for the philologist engaged
in onomastics. They show how the set of names used by Russian families changes
from century to century.

link betveen the various tons of a name in the present-day Russian language.
and it eliminates confusion in the understanding of nanes. For example, the
dictionary shows that some of the old camnical tunes are to this day living,

forms has b en crowded out by their colloquial alternatives. These colloguial
alternatives have become present-day certificate mes: ALEXSEY instead of
MRS". SERGE? instead of SERGIY. The history of the name and the present-day
relationship of the various forms of that name in the language are provided
directly in the dictionary article. At the same tine great significance is
attributed to the order of distribution of torus and the features which
characterize then.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
10. To establish the basic information about a name: the forms of the patronymic,
the derivatives, the etymology; and to determine the frequency of use of a name
and its distribution.

5. To provide the cotter: orthographical version of the name, and the correct stress
for all of its forms.

The names which are cited in the dictionary should not be viewed as From“
list of Russian names. The goal of the dictionary is broader. Anyone choosing

a name for his or her child or who is simply interested in names may obtain from
the dictionary detailed information about the name which he needs: whether it

is new or old, rare or comon, Russian in origin or borrowed, and finally whether
it is the certificate (passport) form of the name.

This dictionary must be a "test” dictionary of Russian personal names. It is

a "test” primarily because the dictionary does not contain all the material
collected by the author. In addition, the publication of the dictionary must
approve the principles for the presentation of material which are realized in the
dictionary, principles which stem from an understanding of the system of
present-day Russian names.

The compiler proposes to revise the dictionary and for this reason he earnestly
requests his readers to express their opinion regarding the shortcomings of

the dictionary. The compiler will be grateful to readers who are linguists

for any information they can supply on the etymology of names, as many names
remain without etymological data. and with sane names the etymology is too :hort
and requires supplementing.

0n the Construction of the Dictionary

By the headings "certificate," ”colloquial,” ”popular," ”everyday speech,”and
"old" with reference to a name the compiler understands the following:

Certificate name is the name as it would appear on a passport. This is the
official form of the name. In addition to this form, there are frequently other
versions of the same name which are used in conversational speech, in everyday
lites

Popular form of a name—this is a form derived from the certificate form; it

is formed in the sphere of living, popular, conversational speech. These forms

have been in the language for many, many years and frequently acquire a certificate
nature. For example, YDIEIYAN from the certificate mum. Sound changes which
take place in the orighal form when the popular form is formed are quite significant
and encompass, as a rule, not only individual syllables of the name, but frequently
change the entire sound of the name. For example, AVDOT'YA (from mm).
AKSIN'YA (from Kseniya). There exists an enormous number of diminutive formations
with varied derivative bases and suffixes.

Colloquial form of the name is -a form derived from the certificate name: it is

formed in colloquial speech. These forms may also beconle certificate nmes. The
changes which take place in the formation of this form are comparatively small:

NIOFHCIALUSEONLY
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the loss of an ending, the substitution of individual sounds. The general
tendency is toward a simplification: of the name for convenience of pmnmciation
and speed when calling a person. For example, mm (from mam). KATRINA
(from mmmn, LIZAVFI'A (from YEIZAVETA). GAVBIL (from GAVRIIL).

Everyday (simple speech) form of the name is a form derived from the certificate
name; it is a fora which arose in a lowered level of speech, in simple speech and
dialects. The sound of the name is changed substantially. For sample. 14mm
(Galaktion). VASILEY (from VASILIY), YBVDBiIY (tron mun). etc.

Old form of the name is the old canonical form, the original fornnn with regard to
the present-day certificate form of the same name. For example, "3816!!!!

is the old canonical YEVSTIGNEY, morn is the old canonical mom, IAKOV
is the old canonical YAKOV, mm is the old canonical IVAN and ILIYA is the

old canonical IV“.

In the history of personal names we observe a process which we also come across

in our present era: the process of forming various alternate versions of the same
name. The system of present-day names is not something frozen. As in language

in general. there are constant changes in the system of personal nanes. New
certificate forms are formed as colloquial, popular and other forms become certified.
The relationships of forms change; old forms leave. colloquial forms become
certificate forms, changes in the relationship of colloquial and everyday speech
forlns change, etc.

For example, the present-day certificate fora YEVSIIGNEY came from the old canonical
name YEVSIGNIY, which had already been crowded out first. while Roman? came
from the old KODRAT.

In this way the formation of new names takcs place not only as a result of borrowing
from other languages, but also through the process of developing our own system of
names. The naaes themselves and their diverse forms are a continuously loci-as
source for the formation of new names.

Formational Routes of Popular. Colloquial and Breryday (Simple Speech) Forms

The forms of certificate names which we define as popular. coIVIOquialor everyday
(simple speech) are formed in various ways. The most comnon ways are:

1. changes in the initial sounds of the name (ASTEIY from YEVSI'Al-‘IY, AVDO'T'YA
from MINA. ARENA from IRINA)

2. omission of the initial stem vowel (NASTAS'YA from ANASTASIYA, KATRINA from
mmma, sum ftal ISM):

3. addition of a vowel or (less frequently) a consonant at the beginning of a
name (MSIN'YA from KSBWIYA, 1208114 from zosnun, LIPAT from IPATIY):

lo. the appearance of inserted sounds in the stem of the name ( IVAN from IOANN,
SILANTIY from SM):

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“I OFFICIALUSEONLY

S. the substitution of certain sounds for others (mm from m. In“!
from KHRLSMF, KRISTIN'YA from K331515113“);

6. the assimilation of vowel sounds in the stem of the name (PMEYA from PMS“)
WI'YA from “EMMY”:

7. the substitution of consonants (WEI? from PORFIRIY, mm. from man);

8. the softening or palatalization of hard consonants (MAMA from MAMA,
run from FLOR);

9. depalatalization of soft consonants (DAVYD from DAVID, HARM fmm MARTIN,
31:50? from $150!):

10. the dropping of the ending in names ending in ”iy" (IGNAT from IGNATIY).

It should be kept in mind that the boundaries between colloquial and everyday
(simple speech) forms, like the boundaries between the categories of "colloquial"
and everyday (”simple speech") in language in general. are often unclear and
changing.

Homonym Names

Among Russian first names there are some which sound alike but which differ in

their origin) they are a type of name homonyms._ For example, the archaic
canonical name VIL comes from the Greek Belos, the supreme god of the Assyro-

Babylonians. There is another name VII. (in the dictionary it is given the
marking "new"), which comes from the initial letters of the name V.I. Lain.

The borrowed name am, from the Latin Rams, oar, and the new name am, from the
combination of words ”revolyutsiya mirovaya" (world revolution).

It is difficult to say whether the formation of a new name takes place inde-
pendently of the old name or whether we are dealing with a reinterpretation

of an old name in our times, but nonetheless, two identically sounding names

of different origins tum up in the language. They are'supplied with differing
dictionary articles of the type for homonyms in our work.

Another case of homonyms in the sphere of personal names is the coincidence

in the sound of the official certificate name and the derived form of a diffeeent
certificate names. For example, the name cm, which comes from the Latin
germanus, cousin, and cm. the c0110quial form of the name cmmm.

Concerning Patronymics
The patronymic forms are given for all masculine names (including all the derived
forms of a masculine name, except the everyday or simple speech form. The collo-

quial forms, i. e.. the forms which manned .in conversational speech are given
after the certificate forms.

”MANNY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The three-part name. consisting of a first name, patronyunic and family name. is
a characteristic of the Russian language. This three-part formula arose in
Russia during the time of Petr I. with time it was extended to the Ukraine, and
Belorussia, and at the present time it is penetrating into other republics in
our country. The approximate time that patronylics arose was the period of

the llth to 12th centuries. The patronylic is a sign of courtesy and of a defer-
ential attitude toward a person. In everyday speech there is a custom

of calling a person by his patronymic alone without his first nae as a mark

of profound respect for him (HIKHAMVICH, ANDREYl-NICH or HKHAEYCH. ANDREICH).

Patronymics are formed: 1. by means of the suffix "-ovich, -ovna" from all
masculine first names based on a hard consonant and and a zero ending in
the nominative case in the singular (PETR-PETROVICH, PmOVNA);

2. by means of the suffix ”-evich, -evna" from first names based on a soft
consonant and a zero ending in the nominative singular (KESAR'dU-ZSAREVICH,
KESAREVNA; IGOR‘uIGOREVTCﬂ, IGOREVNA) and from names with stems ending in
"i" and ”e" (ceoacIY—caonclmmn, tsunami);

3. by means of the suffix "-ich. dictum” from names with a stem ending itna'
hard consonant and the ending ”a" in the nominative singular (SAVVA-SAWICB)

and from names with a stem ending in stressed "i" (mmmaummnca.
Immncuua);

a. the complex suffix "-inichna” is used with the feminine forms of patronymics
from certain names ending in ”-1106": (LUKAnLlKICH, LIKINICHNA; IL'YA-JL'ICH,
E'TNTCHNA)t

S. in the colloquial forms of patronymics from masculine first names, the
suffixes "-ovich, -evich,” are replaced by the suffixes "-ych, -ich" (Aux-
smnnovrcuunmmmmx Aksm'mmnnmm'm‘

6. certain colloquial feminine forms of patronymics are the result of tightening
up the full forms (ALESEYEVNAnALr-XSEVNA; mm «Will-WM):

7. for names of Slavic origin (SWATOSLAV, YAROSLAV) the certificate forms end
in “-ovich, -ovna" and in "-ich, ~n£‘(SVYATOSLAVOVICII SWATOSLAVOVNA and
SVYATOSLAVICH, SVYA‘I‘OSLAVNA).

Derived Diminutive Forms

There is one more category of forms which is characteristic of names and which
is reflected in the dictionary-derived diminutive forms (in contrast with the
full forms which were discussed above).

The derived diminutive form of a name is formed from the stem of a certificate
nae or from its popular, colloquial, everyday (simple speech) versions by
”"truncating the name or by means of various affixes.

This form. in contrast to the full first name, which is official in nature.
is used to call the person in everyday life, in the family circle, among friends

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and comrades. Every name has derived diminutive forms. The .number of these ferns
differs with different names. There are a large nunber of these forms for

very common names, on the one hand, and for names which have been used for a

very long time, on the other hand. Some names, such as HARIYA and IVAN, etc.
have more than 100 derivatives.

The formation of derived diminutive forms, which at first glance seems not to

follow any pattern, is infect subject to strict rules. It takes place largely scoop
ding to definite models, and definite structural types of stuns and affixes take

part in it. Affixes are joined to the producing stem. Hithin the limits of a

name, significant changes take place in the producing stem: these changes
frequently sake the stem unrecognizable. For example, this form may consist of t

a) the entire nmne, to which suffixes are joined: AVDEYuAVDEYKA, AVDEYIBHKM

1)) two, three or more of the initial letters of the name: AGNIYA, warns-«ca;
ALI-XSEY--ALEXHA3 HARIYA-m, MARISYA: MW'ANDRYIBM!

c) one beginning letter ofthe name: IVAN-4511A, ISHKM HARIYA—MIBYA, MIRA:

d) sounds taken from the middle of the full names mna—avnor'n—avnmnn

DUSYA; Y'EVDWIYA- ~YEVDWYA--DUNYAI vasnn—vasm—sm; ANAS'HSIYA-JI'ASYA
ASYA: ammanmrosvanrosm ALMAM, ALEXSANDRAv-SANYA;

e) final syllables of the name: HARGARITAHRITA, RI'NBYA-JNSYA; SVLTLANA-W;
AKILmA--AKULINA--LINA-INA3 mmnwma, mum, MA:

f) a syllable from the full first name repeated twice: NIKOLAY-m: BORIS-
303A: VLADIHIB--VOVA3 TAMARA. NATAL'YA-WTATA. etc.

a) frequently a productive stem is created as a result of dropping sounds:
KONSTANTm-«OSTYA, KOTYA: AVGUSTAuGUSTYA; YEATERIM-ACATRYA: SEEM-$11M;
STAN ISLAV--STIVA.

Sometimes the derived diminutive forms are pure'._' in the nature of a suffix;
sounds lacking in the original name appear in the producing stem. For examples
ALIEKSANDRn-SHURA by passing thrush swab-sasmmnsnm;

The derived forms of the first step are joined to affectionate, pejorative and other
suffixes, the same ones that for- nouns possessing subjective judgement. For
cxanmle, VALYA-WAL'KA-WAme—VALE'KA. Compare ruka (hand)--ruchka (little

hand or handle) and two other diminutive forms ruchen'ka and ruchechka, etc.

The body of the dictionary provides only the first stage of the derivatives from
every series. The full list of diminutive forms is contained in the index of
diminutive forms which forms an appendix to the dictionary. This is dic-

Iatcd by space considerations and, in addition, by the fact that from each of these
forms cited in the article, all the following forms‘are regularly formed by

means of the same suffixes. for example, NADYA, NAD’IA, mm'u, mom,
NADYIKHA, NADYUSHA, NADIK, NADK, etc.

11

POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The derivatives are not given in the arthle according to alphabetical order;
instead, they are listed according to the degree of their formation from the full
first name. The form derived from the full first name is given first, followed
by the forms derived from its parts.

Derivatives are provided for certificate names and for versions of the original

name which have become certificate names. Dininutives forned from alternate
versions are provided in the nain article, but they are not repeated in the reference
article. As a rule. a snail nuber of derived forms is given for old nanes.

Etymology

The dictionary provides etymological intonation for a najority of certificate
naes contained in the dictionary.

The question of the etymlosy of Russian personal names is a large and complex

issue. requiring independent scientific research. As a rule, etymological
dictionaries do not contain personal names; the principles of the etymologization

of first names have not been developed. Etymological : infatuation for individual
names can be attracted from investigations devoted especially to “.98, from various

articles. This material nust be collected literally fragnent by fragnent and

for the most part the information does not make it possible to decide conclusively
what the etynology of any given word is. For this purpose it is essential to
have a special etymological dictionary of names. In the dictionaries of

names which were published earlier or which were published quite recently, etymology
either is not nantioned at all or is replaced by an interpretation of the name,
i.e., by an actual translation of the name into Russian. In this way there takes
place a semantic enricment of words, which have long since lost connections

with the roots from which they cane at one tine, words which have lost untever
significance they had. In fact. if a nan: is used frequently, this is not

because it cane from "elevated" (in the sense of their significance) words. but
rather because the name itself sounds good. is euphonioua and combines easily
with a variety of patronymics. In principle the interpretation of mass

by interpreting into Russian the original (borrowed from a another lamuage)
fern of the name does not differ from what was provided by the church calendars.

In this dictionary an attenpt was made to provide etymological information for

the names. Because this is a dictionary of Russian names, not an etymological
dictionary, and etymology is not its main purpose. the information provided is
very brief. without references to sources. Rention is made of the language from
which the name is borrowed and the naming which it has in the source language

or the word to which it is related by meaning or sound. The etymology for names of
Greek, Lati. and ancient Russian origin was provided in accordance with the spe-
cific instructions for each nane given by two specialists in these languagesa-Pro-
fessor Ml. Popov and Professor 3.14. Grands.

Etymological infatuation is provided only for certificate names. In cases where
the etymology is unclear, it is not given at all.

5333 1800/718

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

RAT IONA].

DROBIZBHVI‘. VOLLIIE 0N NATURE. WBBQUBICES OF NATIONAL IDMITIBS IN SOVIET 80am

Moscow onsacres'rvmn NAUKI V 8888: SERRA 1. PM NAUCUOO‘.) mum in
Mssian No 3, hey-Jun 82 (signed to press 27 Apr 82, pp 156-161

[Review by A. F. ‘rsyrkun of book 'mukhowsya obshchnost' narodov 8883" [the Spiritual
Co-unity of the Peoples of the [583] by Le“. Drobieheva, hoscow. lsdatel'stvo
”Hysl'". 1981, 263 pages. bibliography pp 265-259]

[text] The mnograph is devoted to a study of the nature. patterns and trends

in the develop-ht of interpersonal national relationships against the background
of the social and cultural processes in the life of the nationalities that fore
the spiritual commnity of the Soviet people. It is based -’n results fron
sociological studies done by the USSR Academ of Sciences Institute of Ethnography
under the program "Optinization of Sociocultural Conditions in the Development
and Rapprochenent of the Nations in the man."

The book consists of an introduction and six chaptere--"lhthodology and hthods
in Research." "leninist Nationalities Policy--a Policy of Strengthening the
Friendship of the Peoples." ”Social Bases for the Development of Inter-Nation
lnezhnatsional'nyye] Relations." "mlture and Inter-Nation Relations." "Effect

of Ethnographic Contact Mediums on Inter-Nation Relations." "Individual Features
in the Inter-Nation enmity"--and a conclusion in which the content of the work
is summarised.

LN. Drobizheva writes that, vhile it affects the development of the nations and
nationalities. technical progress does not nullify national differences. To some
extent the acceleration of econonic and cultural developnent is creating a basis
for growth in the variety of cultural expression by each nation and in its national
achievement. The unity of the ideology and norel and ethical standards and values
and of the aspirations of all Soviet people is coebined at this stage of historical
development with great national diversity in the life of our country's peoples.

And so long as the national features of people that are of social significance
remain. so too do the questions of social intercourse between them and finding
optimal conditions to promote friendly relations.

Sociological research conducted by studying public opinion and state-ants by people
representing the min nationalities in a nutter of the country's republics has
established the quite obvious, predominantly friendly nature of inter-nation
intercourse. It can be said that in our country the ideology of friendship of the
peoples is coltined with the social-psychological reality of friendly relations

13

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between individuals of different nation: lity. me proportion of individuals showing
negative attitudes both in production and in everyday inter-nation intercourse

was less than 10 percent in all the nationalities polled. Nationalism as an
ideology. as a eyeten of views and behavior. does not exist anong the broad

aassee. As a rule the isolated instances of s noncomicating [nekontaktnyy]
nature encmntered in solo people do not fore part of a syndrou of negative
relationships to other peoples. This. of course. does not bean that all the
problem of inter-nation intercourse have already been resolved.

The general sociopolitical situation within the country exerts the most substantial
effect on ell spheres of interpersonal national intercourse. A specific study

of inter-nation relations within the systen of social. cultural. historical and
psychological factors has Inde it possible to conclude that people's attitudes
toward their dealings in various spheres—professional activity. family. circle

of friends-depend to a different degree on each of the above factors.

The most extensive kind of inter-nation intercourse in the production and business
sphere. Here. attitudes are found to the greatest extent by the social situation
and depend upon the satisfaction of social and professional interests. These
interests the-selves differ within social and professional grOups. In son

groups, for exaaple, in the intelligentsia, satisfaction with social growth and

the conditions for creative work are linked more closely with national considerations.
while in others. for crawls. in young educated workers. satisfactions with nature

of labor is are closely associated with these factors. and in poorly qualified
workers. the factor is wages.

The historical past is reflected in this sphere of intercourse primrily in the
features by which the present social conditions of people in contact with different
nationalities are evaluated. In particular. it has becou clear that people of

any nationality for when a higher teqo 0' social nobility has been characteristic
in recent years show the greatest satisfaction with social growth and an inclination
for inter-nation intercourse.

Cultural factors. including the level of cultural develop-eat. and historical
traditions are more closely linked with inter-nation relations in the nonproduction
sphere. within the family and circle of friends.

under present conditions. the author goes on to say, two dominant sources of
national exclusivity are observed. One of then is associated with a narrowness
of the cultural cowass, lack of knowledge abOut other peoples, lack of experience
in beneficial intercourse, and the preservation of outdated traditions. his
supports the prejudices along sons poorly educated and poorly qualified workers.
prinrily mung old people living in a single-nation rural environ-ant.

‘lhe other scarce is hidden in specific social situations that result in psychological
dissatisfaction in individuals being carried over into the national content. These
kinds of situational prejudices way be encountered in all parts of the population:
but are sore typical for the sore educated strata. Their cultural comes is
adequate but their social needs are always greater. and therefore sons kind of
dissatisfaction is net with more frequently.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even for these population groups. and even note for educated people. some cultural
educational ﬁssures (the ice-day courses. lectures. exchanges of theater groups
and so forth» do not deeply convince individuals of the imarnissibility of
unifestations of chauvinist- and nationalisn. 'l‘hese nanifestaions are associated
with individuale' morality. and aorality, and hunanisa, cannot be forced into
people. They depend on the environment that passes on the traditions, and on
ideals. And so, the field of cultural influence is considerably broader than
educational measures.

developmnt of society (for ample. the relationship between the specific kinds
of labor sought and offered. the professional orientation of yOung people, solving
the housing construction problem and inroving municipal services). This does

A study of the effect of the ethical environment on inter-nation contacts. the
author writes. has clarified ideas shoot its significance. The gmerai conclusion
reached by many researchers that there is a unified. positive effect exerted by

the multinational composition of both production collectives and of cot-unity
collectives, has been sanded. It has been established that they exert a positive
effect when there is already positive experience of prolonged contacts within the
collective (that is. Hhen there is nothing unusual in individuals' standards of
behavior and so forth) and in situations when contacts are beneficial. Accordingly.
young mltinational collectives and regions where there is an active inflow of

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It has beco- clear that the effect of direct contacts on individuals' attitudes
toward inter-nation intercoarae differs in different spheres. Contacts ninly
affect attitudes in fanily matters. where contacts are infor-l and friendly.
Orientation on production inter-nation intercourse depends little on personal
contacts but is connected with the specific social situation: satisfaction with
work, working conditions, professional prestige. 'lhe "level of mtlinationality”
in the environs-at is also of psychological significance. he very sen phuonsna
can be perceived differently by individuals depending on whether they are in
1111on or a Iejority.

in conclusion the author distinguishes e nudper of problems that require further
special work: the interconnection between the growth of national consciousness,
national pride and inter-nation relations; the role of the fanily and circle of
friends. schools and literary heroes in the for-tun of the ethical principles
of inter-nation intercourse; the features of ettitutdes toward interdnation
intercourse amng individuals of nations that have been consolidated and are in
the stage of the nost active inter-nation integration.

002mm: mos AN 885‘. 1982

9642
680: 1800/80!»

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

SOVIET HAY 0? 1.1?! mm AT W16 W53!!!

[Editorial Report] Hosea somsnu mm in Russian No 3. thy-June 1982.
carries on pp 88-95 a 6500-votd article titled "The Display of Particular Aspects
of the Soviet Way of Life in the State Huaeun of Ethnography of the Peoples of
the USSR" by V. H. Grusnan and B. s. Yaglinskaya. This illustrated article dis-
cusses current exhibits at the Museum and pointedly notes the strength of tradi-
tional ethnic elements even in Iodern settings.

COPYRIGHT: ltdatel'stvo "ﬂanks”, ”Sovetskaya etnografiya", 1982

cso: 1800/870

17

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:0I1IC1A1.IEHE(HULY

ﬂATIONAL

IRCREASBD HORKBR PARTICIPATION IN HANAGEHBNT 3388
Moscow VOPIOSY PILOSOPII in Russian No 6, Apr 82 pp 3-lb

[Article by Yu. A. Kraain: "Workers' Participation in Management and Pro-
fessionalism"]

[Text] The active and conscious participation by all of the members of society
and each one of them in the management of public affairs is without question
the central problem of the development of democracy. This conclusion follows
from the very etymological meaning of the term "democracy" which signifies
people's power; that is, the kind of arrangement of society in which the
people itself manages all affairs in all of the spheres of public life.

The degree of democracy in any society is measured by the scope and the depth
of the participation by the popular masses in its management. however, the
real possibilities and limits for this participation are determined, in their
turn. by the character of the social system. For this reason, the question
of participation in management requires a concrete historical approach which
is connected with an analysis of the social and economic content of the phase
of historical development being lived through by a society.

With this approach it turns out that the prospects for democracy in the contem-
porary world are inseparable from the progress of socialism. A consistently
carried out democracy requires a socialist organisation of society which liberates
the aasses from all forms of social and national oppression that fetters their
initiative and energy. Only socialism. in the process of its continual develop-
ment and perfection, creates the conditions for full popular power by spreading
democracy to the sphere of economic and social relations ard establishing
socialist equality. In this way a real socio—economic base is created for

the actual universal participation by all of the members of society and by

each individual in the management of public affairs.

A fundamental solution of the problem of workers' participation in management
requires the socialist transformation of society. The dynamics of the develop-
ment of socialism in the Soviet Union graphically demonstrates the acute need
for the ever greater participation by the masses in management as a condition
for the normal functioning and development of the entire system of social
relations. "A concern for our common work," L. I. Breshnev said at the 26th

18

FOIiDIIIJAl.UBIIIiUY
FillilﬁﬂClALllSEiM‘LY

CPSU Congress. "for the development of production. the comparison of opinions,
frank and principled criticism and self-criticism, and an increase in the
public political activity of each citizen--this is the essence of Soviet demo—
cracy. a working and real democracy."1

The necessary objective preconditions for the actual participation by the

broad masses of workers in the management of the economic. socio—political,

and ideological and spiritual processes ripen on the soil of real socialism.

But the preconditions in and of themselves do not yet give a ready solution

to the problem. It is gained in the practice of the construction and perfeCtion
of socialist society. in addition. the ever fuller development of socialist
democracy is marked by complexity and is connected with real contradictions
whose resolution demands great intellectual and practical efforts.

One of the dialectical contradictions in this sphere is the contradiction
between democracy and professionalism in the management of the affairs of
society. including in state management. 0n the one hand, socialist democracy
means that all of the workers. regardless of their abilities and position

in society, can and should participate in the management of social processes.
On the other hand. in our day a competent solution of the problems of domestic
and foreign policy increasingly demand a professional approach and special
training, and require great knowledge, ability, and practical experience--

in a word. that which is usually designated by the term "professionalism."

From the nature of socialism which is inconceivable without the conscious
participation in the construction of the new society by the enormous majority
of the people follows the objective possibility and necessity for involving
practically all of the citizens in the system of the management of production
and of the social, political. and spiritual processes of social development.
Under socialism, in V. I. Lenin's words, "for the first time in the history

of civilised societies the mass of the population is elevated to an independent
participation not only in voting and elections, but also in daily management."2
At the same time, however, with the increased intensity of social relations

and the greater complexity of their dynamic interdependence at various levels
the management of society also becomes more complex and becomes the subject

of a special branch of science--the theory of the management of social pro-
cesses.

Certain bourgeois futurologists assert that scientific and technological pro-
gross and the "revolution" in the means of communications and information
connected with it is by itself solving the problem of the competence of ordinary
citizens to develop political decisions and thereby is laying a road to the
establishment of direct democracy. Thus. the well-known American futurologist
0. Tofflcr assures us that "technical problems are no longer an obstacle to

the expansion of direct democracy. The enormous successes in communications

are opening up unprecedented possibilities for the direct involvement of
citizens in the process of political decision making. Modern computers. satel-
lites. telephones. and cable television systems have for the first time in
history made it possible for citizens to participate directly in the development
of political oecisions."3

19

IIIICHHNCIAI.UUI:0bﬂM¥
FOIilﬂﬂ€1A1.USE(NVLY

Things are far from as simple as 0. Toffler depicts them to be. of course,

as a result of the rapid development of the means of communications in our

day the amount of and the rapidity of the dissemination of information has
increased many times over compared even to the recent past. This really does
expand the technical possibilities for simple citizens to know about the events
occurring in the world. However. the use of the technical possibilities being
created depends to a decisive degree upon social conditions. He know that

the so-called "information explosion" is used by the state monopolistic elite
of the imperialist countries to manipulate the consciousness of substantial
strata of the population. Behind the abundance anJ external diversity of

the information which is supplied there stands. as a rule, such a careful
selection of it as to prevent the politically uninitiated citisen from under-
standing the course of events and their true meaning and direction of develop-
ment. and inconspicuously impose tendentious opinions on him.

But the main thing is that information, even the most exhaustive and objective
information, by itself does not yet provide an answer to the question as to

what kind of decision has to be taken. and how the various social affairs

and processes have to be managed. A competent participation in the management
of society presupposes a profound knowledge both of the general laws of social
life and of the specific nature of the sphere which is the object of manage-
ment. in our day a substantial differentiation of managerial labor is occurring
and each of its branches requires highly qualified specialists. it is obvious
that this kind of specialization of managerial functions makes difficult the
participation of ordinary citizens who have not received professional training.
Such is the real contradiction of social life which vividly manifests itself

in the development of contemporary bourgeois society where the increased demo-
cratic aspirations of the masses to par.icipste in management come up against
the anti-democratic system of state monopoly domination. Pursuing its class
goals. the ruling elite tries tr monopolize managerial labor and managerial
science. and not to permit the workers real participation in the management

of social processes. It is this which is the chief reason for the acuteness

and insolubility in bourgeois society of the contradiction between professional-
ism and democracy in the management of social life.

This contradiction is misused by various kinds of bourgeois technocratic con-
ceptions in accordance with which mankind has entered an age in which the
management of society is allegedly becoming the exclusive affairs of specia-
lists. with the masses allugedly unable to participate in management because

of lack of competence. It is said that the scientific and technological rec
volution is creating rigid parameters for the management of social processes.
All managerial decisions and actions, it is said. are wholly determined by

the logic of these processes which is accessible to the understanding only

of specialists. The remaining citizens are prescribed an unconditional sub-
ordination to the rational decisions of the "managerial elite." Bourgeois
technocratism is not groundless; it reflects certain real tendencies of capita-
list development during the scientific and techrological revolution, particularly
the increased proportion of managers in the state monopolistic elite which
personifies the interests and dominion of big capital.

20

F0I10IIICIAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
F!Il(lﬂﬂ(JAl.USIZ(NVLY

The so-called theory of "meritocracy" which justifies a managerial monopoly

for the gifted elite proceeds from similar premises. "Heritocracy," writes

the American sociologist D. Bell, "is the lot of those who merit honor. These
are the people who have become the best in their field according to the opinion
of their equals. . . . There is no reason not to apply the principle of merito-
cracy to business and management."“ By regarding giftedness outside of concrete
social conditions, the theory of "meritocracy" turns into an analogy of the
system of state monopolistic domination, since it accepts the criteria for

the selection of the ruling elite which have been developed by it. The best

in the field of management "according to the opinion of their equals" are

those who most effectively serve this system. And thousands of obstacles

keep the masses out of deciding really important issues. For this reason,
talent and ability of which there is no end in the popular masses remain "a
thing in themselves," since talents can only be discovered through the practi-
cal experience of real participation in the management of social affairs.

However. technocratic conceptions are in fundamental contradiction to the
entire spirit of the present revolutionary epoch,its basic content, and the
chief tendencies of contemporary historical development which engenders in
the masses an insupcrable aspiration for democracy and for conscious partici-
pation in the management of society and in the making of the most important
decisions. Under capitalism these aspirations come up against the narrow
class framework of bourgeois democracy and, therefore, the real participation
of the masses in the management of social life can only be realized under
socialism.

It would nevertheless be incorrect to categorically assert that socialist
society is completely guaranteed against the appearance of technocratic ten-
dencies. They can occur and be found, in particular, in various manifestations
of bureaucratism which are alien to the nature of socialism. Socialist society
is not ensured against them, and in order to successfully overcome them it

is very important, on the basis of the experience that has been gained by

the socialist countries. to have a theoretical understanding and practical
solution of the real problem of the combination of socialist democracy and
high professionalism in the management of social processes.

Socialism as an integral socio-economic system is an extremely complex type

of social organization. The scientific and technological revolution is in-
creasinglg turning the socialist process of production into a "scientific
process." The structure of the economy of socialism is growing more complex,
and this means that the same is true for the entire mechanism of the manage-
ment not only of the economy, but also of other spheres of social life. Social-
Ism as a system can develop only on a conscious and planned basis, that is,

it requires a scientifically substantiated approach. All of this, combined,
means that the management of such a complex social organism as socialist society
cannot manage without qualified specialists who have professionally mastered

the methods and experience of managing the various spheres and branches of
social life.

21

IIIIIIHWCJAI.IEIE(MULY
FOIiofFKJA1.USE(NNLY

This problem was very clearly put by V. I. Lenin hmsediately after the victory
of the Great October Socialist Revolution. The construction of socialism
without specialists is impossible-othis is the meaning of the Leninist position.
For Soviet Russia which was the first to lay a road to socialism and, in addi-
tion, as is known, was not among the most economically and culturally developed
countries. this question in the initial stage of the establishment of socialist
society arose as a question of the use of bourgeois specialists in the complex
matter of the management of the economic, military. state. and cultural con-
struction of the new society.

The solution of this problem was connected with enormous difficulties. It

was necessary to find ways and means of bringing into socialist construction
bourgeois specialists many of whom did not hide their hostile attitude toward
the new system and, in the best case. were occupying a wait-and-see position.
Despite the colossal economic adversities through which the country was living
and which demanded the strictest economizing in everything, V. l. Lenin believed
that the bourgeois specialists should be overpaid in order to use their pro-
fessional knowledge and experience for the construction of socialism. At

the same time, the socialist society which was being born at accelerated rates
was training qualified cadres of specialists of the new formation from among
the working class and other strata of workers on a wide scale and with great
enthusiasm.

Both of these tasks—~the attraction of old specialists and the training of

new ones--were successfully accomplished during the course of socialist con-
struction in the Soviet Union. They invariably arose with various modifications
and were accomplished by various means in the other socialist countries during
the process of the transition from capitalism to socialism. The historical
experience of accomplishing these tasks retains its inestimable importance
today. especially for the developing countries which have elected the path

of a socialist orientation and socialist development under the circumstances

of economic and cultural backwardness.

If the transition to socialism, as historical practice shows, is impossible
without the participation of professional specialists in the management of
social affairs, the life of a developed and, especially. mature socialist
society and its development and perfection are inconceivable without a pro-
fessional approach to its management which is based on scientific principles.
And this requires highly qualified specialists who have a perfect mastery

of the science of management, its methodology, and the means of its practical
application to the accomplishment of the diverse concrete tasks of managing
economic, social. political. and spiritual-ideological processes.

In our day the science and practice of management are making extremely high
demands upon those who intend in fact to participate in the management of
these processes. What are these demands?

First, a comprehensive and profound knowledge of the object of management,
its specific nature. and the laws of its functioning and development. Even

22

IN)!‘O'IICIAI.[EIE(IVLY
FOR 0f11ClAL.USEiM§LY

participation in the management of a small industrial enterprise obliges one
today to assimilate a very solid amount of knowledge, beginning with purely
technical matters and ending with a study of the principles of social psychology
and pedagogics. This applies to a much greater extent to such, for example,
highly complex processes which do not lend themselves to an accurate calcula-
tion in all of their parameters as spiritual-ideological activity. In addi-
tion, in order to acquire the necessary knowledge not only as study required,
but also the practical mastery of the object of management.

Secondly. it is necessary to have a thorough knowledge not only of the object
of management itself, but also to correctly evaluate its place in the single
national system of management (for example, the place of an enterprise,
association, or branch in our single economic complex), and to see the direct
or mediated connections between the object and the other links of the manage-
ment system at various levels. In other words, workers' participation in
management in a socialist society cannot be built on the basis of the formation
of autonomous managerial units, but requires the coordination of managerial
decisions and actions in the various spheres of social life and at the various
levels of the complex hierarchy of the management of society.

Thirdly, the great dynamism of socialist social relation presupposes an ability
to react flexibly and rapidly to rapid changes, and the creative ability to

go beyond the framework of the long ago developed customary stereotypes of
management, preserving at the same time stability and continuity in managerial
work. That which was completely correct yesterday, requires definite amend-
ments and corrections today. Marxist managerial science itself, and especially
its application to practice requires a constant adaptation to changing conditions.

Fourthly, participation in the management of social relations and processes
under socialism requires the ability to compare possible alternative decisions.
Management at the contemporary level is unthinkable without a more or less

full calculation of the numerous decision variants in order to select the

most optimal one which corresponds to the requirements of science and, at

the same time. takes account of the interests and needs both of society as

a whole and of its diverse social classes, strata, organisations, and groups.

Fifthly, there is an ever more sharply felt need for the subject of management
to possess modern managerial methods which, in addition, are progressing very
rapidly. This is connected, in particular, with the use in the management

of social processes of electronic calculators and automated management systems.

Prom everything that has been said, the conclusion suggests itself that the
demands upon those who participate in management today are so great that,

along with a high level of culture and education, they also presuppose sub-
stantial professional training. it is this conclusion which is usually used

as the chief argument of bourgeois ideologists-—the supporters of technocratic
conceptions for validating the erroneous thesis that allegedly only specialists
who possess a high level of intellectual and practical training are able to
manage society and its affairs. This argument is frequently cited by bourgeois

23

INDI‘OUIICIAI.IEIIIIVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ideologists also to justify the political practice of not allowing represen—
tatives of the working class and other strata of workers into the parliaments
and governing institutions of the capitalist countries.

Meanwhile, there does not at all exist some kind of fatal incompatability
for the fate of democracy between the professionalism of managerial activity
and the universal participation of the masses in the management of social
processes. The contradiction which arises on this basis is resolved in the
process of the development of socialist society and its transformation into
a communist society.

What then are the basic directions of the solution under socialism of the
problem of the relationship between professionalism and the participation
in management of all of the members of society?

its fundamental long-term solution follows the line of an increasingly full
institution of relationships of social equality. Under socialism such social
transformations have been accomplished and are being accomplished which unite
and bring together the different classes and social strata and groups of society,
unite them around the working class, and strengthen the social and political
unity of society. Step by step socialist society moves toward overcoming

basic class differences and creating the preconditions for the establishment

of social homogeneity and complete social equality. The achievement of these
goals will make it possible to radically resolve the contradiction between
professionalism and the full participation in management of all of the members
of society. Full social equality presupposes the equalization of the social
importance of all types of labor. The aura of "exceptionality" will be removed
from types of activity which are connected with the performance of top mana-
gerial functions. Every person will occupy the kind of place in the social
division of labor which is most in accord with his givens and inclinations

and his aspirations and abilities. Of course, this kind of situation is
achievable only at that stage of the communist social and economic formation
when labor turns into a prime vital need. essential differences between in-
tellectual and physical labor are wiped out. and the communist principle of
"from each according to his abilities and to each according to his needs”

is established. This will inevitably broaden the interests, horizons, culture,
and education of the members of society and will permit them not only to parti-
cipate in a professional way in the management of their sphere of activity,

but also to competently judge the affairs of all of society and the most diffi-
cult problems of the theory and practice of social management. In other words,
everybodv will be a professional in his own sphere of social activity and

will manage it, while at the same time actively participating in the manage-
ment of the affairs of all of society and in coordinating the various spheres
of activity through the complex and widespread mechanism of communist social
self-management which operates on the basis of the principles of democratic
centralism.

Such is the future. However, the concrete ways of solving the problem of the
relationship between socialist democracy and high professionalism is of the

26

FOIIOI11C1A1.UBE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

greatest practical interest already today. And from this point of view it

is very important to understand what is provided by the international experience
of real socialism, the experience of the mature social society in the USSR in
the solution of this complex problem, and what kind of prospects for develop-
ment in this field it marks out.

Socialism as an advanced social system which affirms the principles of a com-
munist civilization creates the broadest possibilities for a combination of
the active participation of the working masses in management and a high level
of professionalism in managerial labor.

First of all, in a socialist society the managerial workers. among them the
employees of the state managerial apparatus, including its highest spheres.
do not form some kind of isolated strata which is separated by social parti-
tions from the rest of society, from the classes and social groups which make
it up. With regard to their composition, interests, and to their positions
and views the workers of the managerial sphere are organically connected with
the whole of society. and are products of the basic classes of socialist
society. above all of the working class whose level of cultural and political

development under socialism is constantly growing, strengthening its leading
role in society.

Unity of society and its top managerial cadres is ensured under socialism

by the very system of the selection and promotion of the leading cadres of
state and public organizations and of their Marxist-Leninist education and
political tempering. In Soviet society these tasks are a part of the content
of the cadre policy of the CPSU which, with its help. exercises its leadership
of society. The party, of course, tries to promote the most capable people

to key managerial posts. These are people who have come out of the people.
who are organically connected with it. and who live with its interests.

The promotion to managerial work of talented organisers and political leaders
from the depths of the people raises the question of their basic professional
training in a very pointed way. " . . . in order to manage," V. l. Lenin
emphasised, "one has to be competent. one has to have a full and precise
knowledge of all of the conditions of production, to know the technology of

this produczion at its contemporary height, and to have a certain scientific
education." Socialism creates favorable conditions for the broad professional
training of the leading cadres of state, economic. and public organisations.
These conditions are ensured by the development of higher education, profes-

sional cadre training and retraining, and the development of a system of genuine
people's studies.

In addition. every new level in the development of socialist society makes
greater demands upon the training of leading cadres. "The present-day economic
leader," it is noted in the Summary Report of the CC CPSU to the 26th Party
Congress. "has to have a deep understanding of the scientific and technical
principles of production and of its organizations and economics, to be a master
of the methods of fighting for high labor productivity and output quality,

25

FOI‘OIINCIAI.IEEE(M‘LY
INDR‘OIWNCIAL [EHE(M§LY

and to combine professional competence with a broad ideological political
horizon and the ability to work with people. As never before, it is important
for him to have efficiency, the ability to see the future, energy and persis-
tence, and socialist enterprisingness. And many thousands of production com-
manders who have been educated by the party can serve as an example of skillful
economic management. These are, using the words of Vladimir ll'ich Lenin,
genuine organisers, people with sober minds and practical wit."7

As socialism develops, and as it moves to its increasingly mature stages,

the democratic procedure of selecting managerial cadres becomes deeper and
more developed: Their electiveness and replacability becomes more widely
instituted, a stricter accountability on their part to the agencies of peoples'
power--the soviets-—is ensured. and the certification of economic workers

is practiced, which serves as a means of objectively evaluating their work

and increasing their responsibility to the people. This kind of democratic
procedure is an important antidote against bureaucratic formations and dis-
tortions which are alien to the nature of socialism.

All of this accords with the ideas of V. I. Lenin who noted: "The masses

have to have the right to choose their responsible leaders. The masses have

to have the right to replace them, and the masses have to have the right to
know and to check on every tiny step of their work. The masses have to have
the right to advance all working members of the masses to executive function."8
Lenin's ideas are fixed in the Constitution of the developed socialist society
which stipulates: "an ever broader participation by the citizens in the manage-
ment of the affairs of the state of society, an improvement of the state appar-
atus. increased activity by public organisations, a strengthening of peoples'
control. a strengthening of the legal basis of state and public life, an ex-
pansion of publicity, and a constant consideration of public opinion."9

The ever broader participation by the masses in the management of the life

of socialist society is determined by the very nature of its economic basis,
by the socialist ownership of property. It unites the numerous labor collec-
tives of all of the elements of social production, distribution, exchange,
and consumption into a single economic complex. and into a single national
system of the mutual exchanage of activity. It is clear that the realisation
of property relations under socialism requires centralised state management.
and the unification of the interests and needs. and the knowledge and experience
of all workers and of the whole of society into a single state plan. And.

at the same time, it is precisely for this reason that the realisation of
property relations under socialism is impossible without the active partici-
pation o all of the workers in the use of the means of production as its
co-owners.

This means that the participation of the masses in the management of production
under socialism is an objective economic need of the normal functioning and
development of socialist property and of the entire system of production re-
lations which is based on it. As early as 1931 V. V. Kuybyshev said: "There
is frequently the kind of talk which says that the participation of the working

26

I‘HICIHHKIA1.USE(HVLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

masses in planning is only for agitation. The masses. it is said, have to

be dragged into this work, but this is only agitation and it helps to mobilise
forces. But the working masses are unable to take real part, creative part

in the creation of the plan. 'How is a worker from a machine tool with a
”narrow horizon' going to work on general planning and what could he bring

to general planning?‘ However, "life has shown that participating and planning,
worker planners can ane should produce splendid results at a large number

of sectors of the economy. The counter-plan which arose at the initiative

of Leningrad workers has recently grown into a powerful movement. . . . We
have quite a few examples in which only the energetic work of worker planners
on the counter-plan has made it possible for us to fulfill and sometimes over-
fulfill planning assignments."lo

One-man management at the key objects of social management which follows from
the principle of democratic cnetralism and accords with the demands of the
present level of the development of production and the other spheres of social
life not only does not decrease. but increases the participation of the broad
masses in the management of social processes. Under socialism one-man manage-
ment does not exclude. but presupposes the enlistment of the masses in deciding
upon the most important social questions. Lenin pointed this out during the
first years of Soviet power. "The more resolutely." he wrote. "we must now
stand for mercilessly firm power. for the dictatorship of individual people

in specific work processes which at specific moments are purely executive
functions. the more diverse must be the forms and methods of control from
below in order to paralyze any shadow of the possibility of the distortion

of Soviet powerl in order to repeatedly and tirelessly tear up the roots of
bureaucratism." 1

The success of the professionally trained specialist who is at the apex of

the managerial pyramid in some sphere of social life depends to an enormous
extent upon the participation in management of the entire collective which

is employed at this sector. The specialist directs the public activity which
comprises the basic content of the collective's work. But the labor collec-
tive lives a many-sided life and performs diverse functions: economic. social.
political. spiritual. and moral. These functions reveal themselves in a by

no means simple way and not only in the labor process. They manifest themselves
through the system of the public and personal interrelationship of all of

the members of the collective and concern the interests both of the entire
collective and of each individual member. This is the stimulus and objective
basis of the act of joint participation in management, in the development

and adoption of decisions. and in their execution by all of the members of

any labor collective of socialist society.

Under the conditions of the scientific and technological revolution and of
the growing interdependence of the spheres and factors of social development
the importance of even partial decisions increases. and the responsibility
for their adoption grows. No matter how competent and qualified a leader
may be. he is simply unable to embrace all of the aspects of an issue which
requires a decision. unable alone to weigh all of its possible consequences.

27

FOITOIIIChAl.U88i0Nl~
F!”l(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(MﬂLY

For this reason. the scientific and technological revolution and the greater
complexity of the managerial process which is connected with it not only does
not limit the circle of people taking active pert in the development of a
decision and in its execution, but insistently demands the involvement in
managerial activity of as many members of a labor collective as is possible.
It is this which is the conclusion of the practice of developed socialist
society. txpansion of the participation of worker collectives in production
management and in the management of other public affairs is the aim of the
decisions of the 25th and 26th CPSU Congresses, the new USSR Constitution,
the laws on the authority of the oblast and kray soviets and on peoples' control,
and other legislative acts.

Original experience in involving labor collectives in managerial activities

has been gained in the fraternal socialist countries. In line with realising
the decisions of the 12th Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party, in the
People's Republic of Bulgaria the role of collective bodies in production
management at enterprises, in agro-industrial complexes, and in economic organi-
zations and teams is growing. These bodies are turning into elective ones.

"in the future, in keeping with the law, only one representative of an economic
organisation or enterprise will enter the collectiys body as a representative

of the state. All of the others will be elected." In the CDR a wide practice
is made of reports by enterprise directors to workers' collectives. in ﬂungary
there is positive experience in trade union participation in regulating the
relationships between the administration and production collectives.13

An ever wider and more comprehensive participation by the workers in the manage-
ment of the affairs of society is also ensured under socialism by the develop-
ment of the system of peoples' control rt all levels. "A necessary component
part of Soviet democracy," it is noted in the Summary Report of the CC CPSU

to the 26th Party Congress, "is all-embracing peoples' control over the work

of managerial agencies and officials. Not a single violation, and not a single
instance of abuse, wastefulness, or lack of discipline must escape the careful
view of the peoples' controllers. To act more energetically and to act more
aggressively.-this is the orientation that the Central Committee of the CPSU
gives them."1‘

Peoples' control is carried out above all through special state organizations-
committees which have their own place in the political organization of society.
Throughout the country approximately lo million controllers participate in
their work. This is an entire army of workers, representatives of the various
strata of the population who are organically connected with the strata and
who expr-ss their interests. This army defends the people's interests. lt
wages a struggle against various kinds of abuses by authority. The system

of peoples' control also embraces the work of various public organisations
which have the constitutional right (and are making ever wider use of it) of
exercising various forms of control over the work of agencies of state power
and state institutions, of making suggestions on improving this work, and
influencing the selection of cadres. Peoples' control is also exercised through

20

FOI10FFKJA1.USE(H¥LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the system of public opinion whose channels of expression are the organs of

mass information. Through them. and also through other channels. public opinion
Influences managerial decisions and actions. criticizes various shortcomings

in the work of state agencies and other organizations, and participates in

the management of the economic. socio-political, and spiritual processes of

the life of Soviet society.

Power in developed socialist society is exercised by the people itself both
directly and. on its instructions and in its interests, through representatives
chosen by it in the agencies of Soviet power. The total number of peoples'
deputies is 10.3 million. On the whole. however, more than 30 million people-
that is, every fifth or sixth adult citizen of the USSR—-participates in

the work of the soviets and the committees which are formed by it. This creates
reliable guarantees against the formation of a technocratic elite which is
capable of monopolizing management. Priority in the solution of all political
and managerial problems belongs to the basic elements of the socialist politi-
cal system, above all. the soviets and the communist party. The managerial
apparatus acts in order to attain goals which are advanced by the party and

to carry out the decisions of representative bodies, and this apparatus is
under constant public control.

Certain bourgeois and revisionist critics of real socialism see a limitation
upon democracy in the faCt that the CPSU is the leading and directing force

of Soviet society and the nucleus of the political system of developed social-
ism. Heanwhile. the growth of the leading role of the party in socialist
society is not a limitation, but, on the contrary, a powerful political lever
for the development of the broadest democracy. Social management is always
politics. Both the management of society as a whole and of its individual
spheres has its own goals and its own strategy. It is importan. to clarify

who determines the politics, program. and strategy of management. In socialist
society this function is carried out by the vanguard of the working class-the
communist party. This ensures the primacy of the political approach to the
solution of all economic. social, and cultural problems. Calculation is in
first place: How will various managerial decisions and their realization
influence the relationships of the various classes and social groups of society.
it is from this political point of view that the immediate practical. technical.
and economic results of a decision are evaluated. Within the managerial system
of developed socialism the decisive role belongs to the CPSU which embodies

in its policies a broad political approach that is a guarantee against the
narrowness of technocratic decisions. Of course, the progress of socialist
society and the increased complexity of the managerial system is constantly
making increased demands upon the party itself and upon its members and orga-
nizations in the field of ideological political and organizational work.

The party itself develops along with the development of socialist society.
accumulating its new features and qualities. and interpreting and generalizing
the experience of forward movement. it is the party as an embodiment of the
advanced consciousness and advanced goals of society, as the political vanguard
of the people which is the chief obstacle to the emergence and development

of various kinds of bureaucratic growths in the different elements of socialist
society and in the agencies of state management. It is the party which pursues

29

IfllClﬂﬂClAl.tﬁll(l'LY
INNICIWHCJAI.05810NLN

a considered and scientifically substantiated policy of a careful consideration
and coordination of the needs, interests, and spiritual requirements of all

of the social and professional strata of society, and which acts as a political
regulator and director ensuring the normal coordinated functioning of the
political system of socialism, and as a guarantor of the real realisation

of the democratic right of each and all to participate in the management of

the affairs of society.

The scope and depth of the real participation of the workers in the management
of society under socialism depends to a large extent upon the level of the
development of the political culture of the masses. Socialism creates the
widest possibilities for the participation of all citisens in the management
of society and the state. However, these possibilities in a socialist society
also do not always turn into a reality. This circumstance was noted by V.

l. Lenin when he characterised the participation of the masses in the Soviets
after the revolution. The system of Soviets had already at that time provided
great possibilities for the participation of ordinary citisens in managerial
work. however, in fact, this was frequently hindered by the low cultural
level of the masses. "To date," Lenin said, "we have not achieved the state
in which the working masses could participate in management-besides the lav,
there is also the cultural level which cannot be subordinated to any law.

This low cultural level creates the situation in which the Soviets, which
according to their program are agencies of management through the workers,
are, in fact, agencies of management for the workers through the advanced
strata of the proletariat. . . ."‘5

Compared to the time when these words were said socialism has made great forward
strides. The cultural and educational levels of the population have greatly
increased, as have the needs and abilities of the masses to participate in
politics. but, at the same time, the requirements upon management have in-
creased. It has become a complex and dynamic system based on a complex of
sciences. For this reason, the realisation of the possibilities of socialist
democracy demands a further rise in the level of the political culture of

the masses. This culture includes political knowledge, a knowledge of rights
and duties and of the norms of the functioning of society, the mastery of

the principles, measures, and skills of management, and also the aspiration,
habit, and inner need to participate in the management of the affairs of
society. "He want," L. l. breshnev said in connection with the adoption of

the new USSR Constitution, "the citisens of the USSR to have a good knowledge
of their rights and freedoms and the ways and methods of realising them, that
they know how to employ these rights and freedoms in the interests of the
construction of communism, and for them to clearly understand their unbreakable
connection with the conscientious fulfillment of their civic duties. To assist
this. and to help in the development of a high political culture in each citi-
sen it is an important task of party, state, and public organgsations which

are responsible for the communist education of the workers."1

A high level of political culture is one of the necessary and most important
preconditions for the gradual formation in the depths of socialism of the

30

POI‘OFFNJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY

principles of communist social self-management. Only high political culture
permits the individual or the labor collective to rise above group, communal,
and local interests to a consciousness of the interests and goals of the whole
of society.

it is clear that the mechanism of communist social self-management the conditions
for which are gradually being formnd and developed in the bosom of socialist
democracy is a single integral social mechanism which embraces the entire

system of social relations on a national scale. This single mechanism--especially
its top and middle elements-cannot function on the basis solely of corporative
interests. The interests of each collective in socialist society play an
exceptionally important role in the development of the initiative of the masses.
But they absolutely have to be coordinated on the level of the interests of
society as a whole. Socialism requires a thorough disclosure of the creative
potential of each collective and, at the same time, an organic merging of

this potential with the constructive and goal-directed energy of all of society.
The interests and goals of the whole of society which functions and develops

in a planned way as a single social complex have to be put at the head of

the cmmmunist system of self-management.

The development of socialism is constantly creating a need for an expansion

and deepening of socialist democracy. "Socialism," it is stated in the documents
of the 25th CPSU Congress, “is impossible without the constant development

of democracy. He understand the perfecting of our socialist democracy. above
all, as the constant ensuring of an ever wider participation by the workers

in the management of all of the affairs of society. as the further development
of the democratic principles of our statehood, and as the creation of condi-
tions for the comprehensive flourishing of the individual."17 This CPSU policy
proceeds from the fact that the realisation of the participation of the working
masses in management is a multi-level problem which is connected with the
perfecting of the political system of socialism, with the formation of the
political culture of the masses, and with the comprehensive development of

the individuality of the worker of socialist society.

The progress in all of these directions during the process of the constant
development of developed socialist society into a communist society is creating
the preconditions for complete people's power and for the active participa-
tion by every member of society in managerial work while retaining the latter's
high professional level.

POOTNOTES
I. "Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress," Moscow, 1981, p 65
2. V. l. Lenin, "Complete Horks." Vol 33, p l16
3. 018 WELT, 31 Hay 1980

a. "The New Bgalitarianism: Questions and challenges," Port Washington (New
York), l979, p Sl

31

FOI'OIFNJAI.USE(IVLY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE¢HVLY

5. K. Marx and P. Engels, "Works," Vol 46. Part 2, p 208
6. V. 1. Lenin. "Co-plate Horks." Vol 60. p 215

7. "Haterials of the 26th CPS” Congress," pp 126-121

6. V. I. Lenin. op. cit., Vol 36, p 157

9. "The Constitution (Basic Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,"
Moscow, 1977, Article 9

to. v. v. Kuybyshev. "Selected works." uoscov. 1953. ﬁp 270-211
11. V. I. Lenin. op. cit.. p 206

12. RABOTIICMBSKO DBLO, 15 January 1982

13. noun“ um I sorsuum, no 1, 1981, pp 63-66

16. "materials of the 26th CPSU Congress," 9 65

15. V. I. Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 38. p 170

16. L. I. Bresnhev. "Following Lenin's Course. Speeches and Articles," Vol 6.
Moscow. 1976, p 5B5

17. "Materials of the 25th CPS" Congress." Moscow. 1976, pp 85—86
COPYRIGRT: lsdatel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda", "Voprosy filosofii", 1982

2959
C80: 1800/639

32

FOIiOIUKJAl.USIIIILY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEH BOOK W TRANSFORMATION 0! mm COUNTRYSIDE

Moscow onsacnrsrvnmrs Ham V 8883: SERIYA 1. 9mm mm mm in
Motion No 3. hay-Jun 82 (signed to press 27 Apr 82) pp 134-160

[Review by L.V. Yasnaya of book "Sovrensnnoye selo: blagosostoyaniye i ltul'tura”
[The Present-Day Village: Hell-Being and culture) by LR. hedyehav and 1'. Koh‘ulov,
Aloe-Ate. Rayner. 1981. 121. pages]

[acerpt] Under the conditions of scientific and technical progress the etmcmre
of personnel in the use professions in agriculture is changing, a new type of

is increasing. At the sovkhonea and kolkhoses of Kazakhstan the nuter of vehicle
operators is constantly increasing and their qualitative nkeup is being iqroved.
‘lhus. in I978‘tractor drivers 1st class asde up 27.9 percent. 2nd class 27.3
percent, and 3d class “.8 percent against corresponding figures of 13.2. 22.3
and 66.5 percent in 1966 (N80 75).

the training of workers in broad-qualification professions requires an opti-l
level of education. the experience of recent years shows that secondary education
is the min basis for the continuum rise in the cultural-technical level of the
entire population.

The general education school has now becone one fore of direct training of qualified
cadres for agriculture. however, there are serious shortcomings in the organintion
of production training in the Kazakh 353. bus, reorganisation of the schools

is not always coabined with creation of the necessary literal-technical base and
the availability of teaching staff. In a nuﬁer of schools production training

is being replaced by narrow professionalisn that does not take into account the
requirenents of agriculture. A questionnaire poll conducted by the authors anong
school graduates showed that 5 percent of pollees are working in specialties
acquired during their years of training, and in so:- schools the figure is even
lower. 0n the whole. the introduction of mandatory professional training for
schoolchildren has not yielded the expected effect. .

In this connection. great iqortance attaches to studies of the interests and
aspirations of young people, and of factors influencing professional leanings.

The nethods of professional orientations should etee froe specific conditions and
requiremts in any given profession;

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC'AAL USE ONLY

the basic for- for training qualified cadres in the countryside are the rural
vocational and technical schools lsrru'sj, on-the-job training in production and
the secondary specialised and higher training establish-ante. (he-half of all
vehicle operators. who usually have two or three cotined specialties. are trained
at the arm's. In recent years not only has the under of sm's increased but
the quality of cadre training has inroved substantially. During the period 1971-
1978. some 188 saw. in the republic trained more than 537,500 qualified workers

(page 8 7) .

the Quality of cadre training depends largely on the nksup of teachers. As at

1 January 1979 there were 2,835 teachers and 3.117 predation-training meters

in the republic's sm's, representing a shortage of 230 teachers and 250 meters.
50. 67.1 percent of teachers had higher education and 32 had preliminary, incoqlete
higher and secondary speciabiaed education; corresponding figures for nsters were
0.6 and 72 percent (P380 88).

In this connection. training directly on the fares acquires special significance.

On most of the far- in lasekhsten. however. the quality of cadre training falls
far below the level of the techncial equipmt available. One inortant factor

in increased cadre qualifications is length of service. Practice shows that vehicle
operators with seniority of more then 9 years use equip-ant 20 to 30 percent nore
productively than those with seniority of up to 3 years (page 92).

A considerable percentage of upper echelon managers have cleeted higser and
secondary specialised education. but my of the middle echelon nnagere do not
have specialised education.

At this tic 39 secondary agricultural training establishments. including 26
tekhnikuns and 15 sovkhoz-tekhnikuns. are operating in Kazakhstan. training
specialists in 20 specialties. However. the authors write. it is impossible to

solve fully the probles of cadre training for the countryside without scientifically
substantiated and long-tern planning.

(input 6 is entitled "Socioeconomic Development in the Countryside During the

Period of Developed Socialism.” In recent years the inco- of the rural population.
and particularly of the kolkho: peasantry. has been growing at faster rates than

the incoae of the urban population. Thus. during the period 1970-1978. wages for
workers and employees in the country increased by a factor of 1.3 while wages for
kolkho: farmers increased by a factor of 1.5. In the Kazakh 8811. during the period
1965-1978, while the total increse in the average monthly wages for workers and o
teoyees rose 63.3 percent, ages for kolkhor fernrs increased 86 percent (page 98).
At the present stage subsidiary private ferning is of considerable significance

in the incoems of rural workers. In 1978 total incomes for kolkhos farners incluud
25.2 perce t as incose froa private subsidiary farming, while anong industrial
workers the figure was 0.8 percent (page 103). According to f iguree fro. the

Kazakh 883 Central Statistical Adsinietration. 66.7 percent of the kolkhor

faresrs' de-nd for net is being set through private farming. with this figure
standing at 58.6 percent for sovkhoe workers; the corresponding figures for eilk

and dairy products are 86.6 and 81.6 percent, and for potatoes, 91.3 and 85.6

percent (page 106).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the present stage the main lever in regulating the dimensions of private
subsidiary inning in the growth in kolkhor and sovlthor production. Private
subsidiary farning will contract. be rapid growth rates for kolkbor fsmers'
wages. the authors write, will lead to a situation in which the structure of the
family budget among the rural population will approach the structure of that in
the cities increasingly rapidly.

New prospects are now being opened up for the skillful corbination of social
production and consumer dennd. when examining the connect problem of demnd,

the authors write, it is essential to proceed not only from actual demand seen

at a given historical moment but also from the possibility of exerting a certain
influence on the part of society on the individual's de-uds and on the for-tion
of these dalmnds in line with the rise in the people's material and cultural
standard of living. The authors cite the contraction in the ratio of expenditures
on food and the corresponding rise in expenditures on industrial goods and cultural
and everyday services. Note is also made of the increased contributions from the
public to the savings banks of the Kazakh SSE, which rose from [£770,000 in 1965

to RI.7 million in 1978 (page 108). In recent years there has been a sharp increase
in the provision of durable cultural and everyday items for the rural population.

One isportant indicator for growth in real income is the change in the dynamics

of retail trade turnover. In 1978 retail trade turnover in the Rankin 83!! increased
59 percent compared with 1970. and in rural localities of the republic it rose

from 112.5 billion in 1970 to 10.9 billion in 1978 (page 110). Here, there has

been considerable rapprochement between urban and rural per capita trade turnover,
but it is still considerably higher in the cities than in the countryside.

In the rapprochemt between the living standards among the urban and rural
populations paramount significance attaches to ilprovements in the housing and
everyday conditions of rural workers. Per capita living areas at kolkhonee and
sovkhones in the republic increased 3.9!. square meters during the period 1960-
1977 while the figure for urban localities was 2.19 square meters (page 113, .
however. housing and mnicipal conditions in rural localities still lag behind
those in urban areas. The network. of small settlements that has developed
historically does not accord with the production conditions of sovkhoaee and
kolkhozes and is hampering today's capital construction. Accordingly, within the
republic the numaer of major populated points built according to standard designs
is increasing.

During the years of the building of socialism the provision of amnites has been
transformed into an independent public sphere. in Kazakhstan it has been developed
over the past 10-15 years. Despite the considerable improvement in the provision

of amenities the Kazakh SSR occupies ninth place among the union republics. ‘me
provision of amenities has been developed unevenly among the oblasts of the republic.

At the present stage the problem of inroving and perfecting everyday and housing
and municipal services for the rural population in the republic has been brought
to the forefront.

COPYRIGHT: mmu AN SSSR. 1982

9M2
cs'): [800/803 3"”

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY