FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.PRS L/ 10555

1 June 1982

USSR Report

POIJTICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 17/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nor:

ms publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(P000 17/8 2)

CONTENTS

NATIONAL

'Third Rome' Theme Raised, Discussed
(Y8. N. Shchapov; VOW ISTORII, Mar 82) 00.000.00.00.

Philosophy Journal on Importance of Militant Atheism
(VOW nmﬂl, m 82) III-OIIOO'IOO;OOOOOOOIIIO...

Volume on Statistical Sources for Stuw of Soviet Society
Reviewed
(Yu. V. Amtyunyan, A. A. Susokolov; VOPROSY ISTGIII,

“31‘ 82) .0.e00.00.0eeeeeeeeooO0eoeoeooooooeeooeeoeoaooee

New Book Sees Administrative Role for Labor Collectives
(V. A. Haslennikov; SOVBTSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO,

Apr 82) one09.000000000000000eeoeoeeeooe-eeoooeeeeooeene

Ethnodemographic Sourcebook Reviewed
(A. Ya. Shevelenko; VOPROSI ISTORII, Mar 82) ...........

New Historians in Soviet Acad of Sciences
(VOW ISM, Her 82 OOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQ00.0.0000...

All-Union Conference of Jurists Reported
(SOVE‘I‘SKOIE OOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO, Apr 82) ...............

Book on Soviet Rituals Reviewed
(V. A. lots; VOW PHOSOFII, Mar 82) 0.09.00.00.00...

-e- [III-USSR-35]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

"ﬂlIRD ROHE' THEME RAISED, DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 150-151

[Report by Ya. N. Shchapov on "The International Seminar 'From Rome to the "Third
Rom“! It]

[Excerpt] During 21-23 April 1981 a seminar on the history of the political ideas
in ancient and medieval Europe was held on that topic. Its purpose was the study
of the history of political ideas and legal institutions in which conceptions
about the significance of Rome in the ancient and medieval world found reflection,
as well as about the transfer of the political and ideological center of the empire
from Rome --after its conquest by the barbarians in the 5th century--to Constanti-
nople (the “Second Rome"), and also the study of the spiritual-political ideas
which arose after the fall of Constantinople to the onslaught of the Ottoman Turks
in the 15th century and ascribed to Moscow, the capital of the Russian state, the
significance of the "Third Rome". The seminar was organised by the University of
Rome. Participants included scholars from socialist and capitalist countries.

The seminar was chaired by I. Irmscher, corresponding member of the GDR Academy of
Sciences. Besides Italian scholars, papers and reports were presented by represen-
tatives from Austria, Bulgaria, the GDR, Greece, West Berlin, Cyprus, Rmnia, the

USSR, France, and Yugoslavia.

The history of Russian political conceptions and links of Russia with Rome and
Byzantium were examined in papers of Soviet scholars. 2. V. Udal'tsova, corre-
sponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, in a paper entitled "Ancient
Russia Between Rome and Constantinople" presented at the first plenary session,
demonstrated the close relations of the Ancient Russian state with the countries
of Western Europe and with Byzantium in the sphere of culture and art, noting the
special role of Byzantium in the transfer of the heritage of antiquity of the
ancient states of Europe to Russia. The paper of V. T. Pashuto. corresponding
member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, was devoted to the subject of "Moscow-
the 'ThirdRome' (The historiographical Aspect of the Problem)“. It examined the
history of the political ideas of the Russian state of the lath-16th centuries
and the place of the theory of "Moscow-the 'Third Rome'", which occupied a sub-
ordinated place among them and lost its significance toward the end of the 11th
century. In a paper entitled "The Ancient-Roman Calendar Tradition in Russia in
the llth-lbth Centuries“, Ya. N. Shchspov showed that in Russia, which was the
heiress of the civilization of antiquity and the scientific knowledge developed
in Rome. a unique all-European calendar was created in the 14th century, which

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combined the systems of time calculation disseminated in Eastern and Western
Europe.

In the diacussion of the problems of the history of Russian social thought and its
place in the systen of the political thought of the European countries foreign
historians also took part. H. Arranz (Italy) called attention to the ritual of
anointing during the coronation of Ivan IV, so different from the Byzantine tradi-
tion, and caplained it by the fact that Hetropolitan Hatarius "did notdare to
imitate Constantinople". L. Ronki de Hicelis (Italy) reported on the Italian
(evidently Toskana) treatise "Notes on Muscovy'J of..the year 1722, which was
directed against the recognition of the imperial title for Peter I. H. Skadutto
(Vatican) spoke about the political ideas of Antonio Possevino connected with the
acceptance of the title of tsar by Ivan IV. A. Tanborra (Italy) devoted his paper
to the subject of "Honor-the "Third Rome' in the Social Thought of Russia During
the t8th-l9th Centuries.

The seminar made it possible to begin a comparison of the political and legal con-
ceptions of medieval Europe developed in various countries. A decision was adopted
about the continuation of its work. It is intended that the papers and reports
presented at the seminar will be published.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'atvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

8970
cso: Iago/445

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN)! (NﬂﬂCJAl.USE§(MULY

NATIONAL

PHILOSOPHY JOURNAL 0N IMPORTANCE OF HELITANT ATBBISH
Moscow VOPROSY FILDSOFII in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 3-16
(Article: "A Fighting Program of Creative Marxism")

[Excerpt] The struggle against bourgeois ideology, V. I. Lenin stated, is s
component part of the single process of the formation of a scientific Marxist
worldview and s communist consciousness in the broad working masses of socialist
society, which is impossible outside of the complete liberation of people from
various kinds of prejudices and outmoded. unscientific philosophical views, and
outside of a struggle against alien philistine private-property feelings, and
against the survivals of the past in the consciousness of people, including
religious survivals. A relentless fighter against all forms of social and
spiritual oppression, in his struggle against religion and against religious
prejudices, Lenin called for a resolute rejection of an abstract enlightenment
approach to it. "we have to struggle against religion. This is the ABC of all
materialism and, consequently. of Marxism," V. I. Lenin stated. "But Marxism is
not a materialism which has stopped with the ABCs. Marxism goes further. It
says: You have to know how to fight against religion. and to do this you have
to give a materialist explanation of the source of belief and religion among the
masses. The struggle against religion must not be limited to an abstract ideo-
logical sermon, it must not be reduced to such a sermon; this struggle has to
be tied to the concrete practice of the class movement which is directed towards
the elimination of the social roots of religion."*

It is not accidental that Lenin understood the propsgandizing of materialism as

a militant materialism in the first place as the defense and championing of its
atheistic meaning, as the defense, championing, and development of militant
atheism. V. I. Lenin regarded the practical implementation of the principles of
militant materialism and militant atheism as two of the most important aspects

of a single task of communists in their struggle for the dissemination of Marxist
ideology among the masses--the propagandisation and establishment of a scientific
materialist worldview. It is this worldview which ensures the conscious partici-

*V. I. Lenin, "Complete Horks," Vol 17, p 418.

IKIR(NNNCIAI.USBGDNLY
FIN!(NNW(]AI.UBEZ(MVLY

pation by the workers in the revolutionary transformation of social relations, and
it is impossible without overcoming religious survivals, and without the effective
organization of scientific atheistic propaganda. This propaganda, in Lenin's
conception, should make thorough use of the heritage of the 18th century atheists,
it should be combative, witty, talented, and candid, should be based on the
latest achievements of Iodern science, and, noreover, should not simply retell
scientific facts, but make the most powerful use of them for a struggle against
the deception and prejudices on which religion maintains itself. " . . . the
masses have to be given the most diverse materials in atheistic propaganda,"

V. I. Lenin noted. "They have to be made acquainted with facts from the most
diverse fields of life and approached from various angles in order to interest
them, awaken them from their religious sleep, shake them from the most different
sides, with the most diverse methods, and so forth."* Scientific atheistic
propaganda has to be concrete; it does not tolerate cliches and general phrases;
it has to be conducted intelligently, passionately, and humanely, for during the
course of it and as a result of it the masses have to be made interested in a
conscious attitude toward religious questions, made conscious critics of
religion. A further strengthening of the material and spiritual foundations of
developed socialist society and the formation of a Marxist-Leninist worldview
among the broad masses of workers creates favorable conditions for a strengthen-
ing of atheiatic education. It is also acquiring especial importance in connec-
tion with the exacerbated ideological and political struggle on the world arena,
and the use of religious slogans by the reactionary forces.

Unfortunately, shortcomings are still to be met with in our scientific atheistic
work. Scientific atheistic propaganda is lacking in aggressiveness and concrete-
ness. and is doing a poor job in unlasking the harm of religion for society and
the individual and attempts by the church to adapt to contemporary conditions
and speculate on difficulties in life and cases of an indifferent attitude toward
man. To date, fundamental works have not been created on the history and theory
of atheism, a criticism of religion, and the practice of scientific atheistic
propaganda, and there are not enough highly qualified cadres of atheists. In this
direction also a large amounf of work will have to be performed by our entire
ideological front, including the periodical VOPROSY PILOSOFII. Atheistic work
has to be conducted by the method of persuasion, all of the diverse forms and
means of ideological political influences, including individual work with belie-
vers, has to be used in it, and the point of departure has to be Lenin's proposi-
tion that the struggle against religion has to be waged with extreme caution.

Those who bring an insult to religious feelings into this struggle do a great
deal of harm.** Religious faith is overcome not simply by knowledge and, es-

pecially, not by formally presented knowledge. The real overcoming of religious

 

*V. I. Lenin, "Complete Works,“ Vol b5, p 26.

**V. I. Lenin, "Complete works," Vol 37, p 186.

FOR OFFICIALVUSIICHVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

faith is achieved by means of the scientifically substantiated persuasion of
people, and the replacement of their religious faith with scientific convictions.
Moreover, in this process opinion and conviction have to correspond to the real
practice and real relations of people. Of great importance here is concrete
human sympathy and concern for the daily needs of believers, for it is on this
that the clergy has been playing in recent years.

The collapse of the traditional rationalist values of bourgeois philosophy has
given rise among a considerable section of the intelligentsia of the "eat to s
gravitation toward irrationalism in general and toward religious-mystical ideas
and conceptions in particular. Daocism and Shintoism, the "ecological" ethics
of Zoroastrianism, Zen-Buddhism, Suffism, Vedanta, and the mystical ethics of
Gnosticism--this is an incomplete list of those trends, which, in the opinion of
various Western authors, are capable of saving contemporary civilization from
the harmful influence of the scientific and technological revolution. For this
reason, a defense of science and, consequently, of scientific materialism turns

out today to also be a defense of the values of rationalism. but rationalism
interpreted dialectically.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPSS “Pravda". "Voprosy filosofii”, 1982

2959
650: 1800/666

IND! OﬂﬂﬂC1A1.lﬂ§Ei(NVLY
FOR‘OFTTCTAL USEGDNLV

NATIONAL

VOLUME ON STATISTICAL SOURCES FOR STUDY OF SOVIET SOCIETY REVIEWED

Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 117-120

[Review by Yu. V. Arutyunyan and A. A. Susokolov.of book "Hassovyye istochniki po
sotsial'no-ekonomicheskoy istorii sovetskogo obshchestva" [Haas Sources for the
Socio-Economic History of Soviet Society] by I. D. Koval'chenko, editor, Izdatel'st-
vo H60, 1979, 376 pages]

[Text] An orientation in the research of socio-economic history which is actively
being developed new is connected with the application of mathematical methods. The
book under review makes it possible to assess the possibilities of such an orienta-
tion.* It sums up, as it were, a certain stage in the development of the "static?
tical study of sources". We have before us one of the first works systematizing
the experience of applying electronic computers in historical research. This is
not simply a methodological novelty. The broad utilization of high-speed computer
technology opens up a qualitatively new stage in the elaboration of a number of
theoretical problems of historical science, connected above all with the passibil-
ity of conducting "machine experiments". In addition, turning to electronic com-
puters makes it possible to introduce into scientific circulation a number of new
sources which have practically not been utilized or utilised only on a very limited
basis because of the extreme labor-consuming character of their processing.

The work may be useful to all who study general problems of social development, and
not only because it contains valuable information abour nass sources on the history
of Soviet society (some of which are considered in detail for the first time in a
scientific publication). The investigation involves the analysis of mass socio-
economic sources and focuses closely on the study of broad problems of our time by
sociologists: The development of social structure and cultural processes in dif-
ferent strata and groups of society. The likeness of the problems and sources
gives rise to a considerable coincidence of methodological approaches, makes the
exchange of methodological experience in the use of sources between historians and
sociologists useful, and confirms that the effective utilization of sources makes
it possible to develop a more profound approach to problems of the methodology of
social research as well.

The task of the collective monograph, as the authors note, is, first of all, to
generalize the experience of the application of mathematical-statistical methods
and electronic computers in historical research, as well as to undertake a
characterization of the mass sources on the history of Soviet society, and to de-
termine the future prospects of this direction in the study of sources.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The monograph consists of two parts. The first examines mass sources on the
history of the population. industry, the working class and the intelligentsia,

the second--sources on the history of agriculture and the Soviet peasantry.
characterized in greater detail are the prcfessional censuses of the working class.
the white collar workers. and the intelligentsia. sample budget investigations of
peasant households, as well as sources on industry and "dynamic censuses"--investi-
gations of peasant households conducted in the 1920's.

The selection of the mentioned sources as the basic subject of examination seems
successful. First of all. they contain a large quantity of economic and social
indications. which places them in the same rank with contemporary sociological re-
search; secondly, the elaboration and publication of these investigations by
statistical organs are very limited, which significantly narrows the possibilities
of their scientific utilization. The use of high-speed electronic computer tech-
nology allows the authors to turn directly to primary statistical materials and
forms of investigations. This confronts the researchers with new problems of
methodology and method: The preparation of the source for machine processing, the
construction of a representative selection from the mass of documents, the selec-
tion of mathematical methods of analysis, and, finally, the complex of problems
arising from the fact that the historian in the given case is dealing with a-to
him unaccustomed--form of delivery of material in the form of information and re-
gression coefficients, factor weights, etc.

The solution of these problems does not relegate the traditional questions of the
study of sources to a place of secondary importance: The history of the formation
of the source, the change of its contents, the elaboration and publication of
materials, the safe keeping and use of them in historical research, problems of the
reliability, authenticity and comparability of data collected at different times
and by different regions. In the monograph "traditional" and "non-traditional"
historiographical questions appear as natural supplements to each other.

One of the basic problems arising in connection with the wide use of electronic
computer technology in the analysis of mass sources in historical research is the
problem of the interrelationship of the empirical and theoretical levels of know-
ledge. In the work with mass sources it reduces itself to the following question:
Which path is more efficient--the preliminary formulation of a theoretical hypo-
thesis which is then tested with the aid of statistical methods, or the "complete"
analysis of the entire mass of statistical information with the aid of some kind of
methodological approach (for example, the coefficient of information coupling used
in the work) in order for the result of such an analysis to serve as the basis of
the qualitative comprehension of the problem. It is evident that the combination
of these methods is most fruitful, each one of them being able to have greater of
smaller significance depending on the stage of the research and its basic tasks.
There is no doubt, however, that in any combination of these components the
theoretical comprehension of the problem is the basic goal of empirical research.

The entire work is permeated by the idea that the application of quantitative
methods strengthens the link between the analysis based on the study of sources and
the solution of the concrete qualitative problem of the research. This link be-
comes especially clear in those parts where the results of the statistical analysis
of the source are set forth-~in the examination of professional censuses and the
budgets of peasant households. In both cases the problem of the internal differen-

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0R40FFKJA1.USE¢DNLY

tiation of the basic classes of Soviet society is the focus of the researchers.
However, this problem is studied with the aid of different methods. Thus, in the
analysis of the materials of a professional census of workers and urban employees
of Russia matrices of twin relationships between different socio—cultural indica-
tions. The latter were examined as qualitative variables, and to expose the close-
ness of the statistical dependence between them coefficients were used that were
based on a measure of information of joint distribution of indicators. The analysis
of the twin relationships allowed the authors to elucidate the role of different
factors in the differentiation of the working class. Thus, the investigators came
to the conclusion that the level of the link of the workers with the soil—~a factor
which is assigned a significant place in intra-class differences--plays an appreci-
able role only in the regions that are least developed with respect to industry,

as well as in enterprises located in a rural locality. At the same time, a signif-
icant role was played by such factors as the duration of the link with industry,
the size of income, and others (p 151).

The analysis of peasant budgets yielded interesting results. This scurce allows
the characterization not only of the economic and social, but also the cultural
activity of the peasantry since it took into account cash expenditures of the
peasants for all needs. Factor analysis of the economic characteristics showed
clearly that gross agricultural income is the most sensitive and generalizing
characteristic, which characterizes the dimensions of the peasant household in all
economic-geographic regions that were examined. It is closely associated with the
provision of the means of production--land, cattle, and implements. However, this
characteristic characterizes the general economic state of the household with in-
sufficient preciseness; a second important parameter is the size of incomes from
non-agricultural trades. In addition, the for the study of the internal class
structure of the peasantry of the 1920's extremely important conclusion was drawn
concerning how the natural and climatic conditions of the various economic-
geographic regions reinforced or weakened, but did not break the basic ties of

the internal structure of the agricultural household. In characterizing the
budgets, the authors noted that "the unique possibility of studying the cultural
aspect of the peasants, including also the level of literacy, in connection with
their membership in a certain socio-economic group, as well as the prospect of
the exposure of the factors of the cultural development of the village, distinguish
this source advantageously from the others" (p 288).

The authors show convincingly that the analysis of the source with the aid of
electronic computers makes it possible to approach the solution of a number of im-
portant questions that were not properly illuminated in the literature, in par-
ticular in what way the economic peculiarities of the peasant household determine
the size of expenditures for cultural and hygienic needs. The research not only
confirmed naturally-arising hypotheses, but also made possible the posing of a
number of interesting questions. Thus, the conclusion presents itself naturally
about the fact that both the size of gross income and the intensity of trade
activity are positively associated with the magnitude of expenditures for cultural
needs. However, the economic differences among households do by far not fully
explain the dimensions of expenditures for cultural needs. Among the well-to-do
hoaseholds, the members of which are engaged in seasonal work, there is a suffi-
ciently large percentage of households which have no (or almost no) "cultural" ex-
penditures. Another fact requires explanation: The non-linear dependence of ex-

penditures for cultural needs on the magnitude of income of the household, which

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

expresses itself in the falling of the average magnitude of these expenditures in
the middle peasant households compared to the poor peasant and kulak households.

To explain these facts, as the authors themselves acknowledge, a more profound
statistical analysis of the source is needed. in particular a study of the correla-
tion of “cultural“ expenditures with other socio-economic indicators. Sometimes a
divergence is noted among the tasks of the research and the selected methods of
analysis of the source. For example, in the study of the structure of social
generalities it is expedient to utilize the methods of the discernment of models
allowing the distinction of groups of individuals or families which are most similar
in terms of socio-economic and cultural parameters.

of course. the authors themselves are aware that they have by far not exhausted all
the possibilities of the quantitative analysis of mass scurces. But it is indis-
putable that what has already been done in the book speaks to the outstanding re-
sults and great possibilities of the new and important direction in the social
sciences which centers around the study of sources. The systematization of the ex-
perience of the use of electronic computers in the analysis of mass statistical
scurces on the socio-economic history of Soviet society makes it possible to outline
the basic prospects of this direction. As is correctly noted in the work, the most
important task is the creation of a bank of computer information that would bring
together, on the basis of common principles, the information of all sources acces-
sible to investigators. The creation of such a bank will provide the possibility
of combining the information of various sources within the framework of the solu-
tion of a single scientific problem--which will increase the efficiency of their
use many times. The concentration of presently uncoordinated information will make
it possible to make wider use of the possibilities of the hypothetical-deductive
approach in research and thereby to penetrate more deeply into the essence of the
historical process. The possibility emerges of approaching in real earnest the
construction of models of social processes. The creation of such models will not
only make it possible to understand history better, but also to make more reliable
forecasts of the change of social structure--which, undoubtedly, will constitute a
new stage in the development of historical—sociological research.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel‘stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

8970
CSO: 1800/443

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

NEH BOOK SEES ADHINISTRATIVE ROLE FOR LABOR OOLLBCTIVES
Hoscow SOVETSKDYB cosunansrvo I PRAVO in Russian No 4, Apre 1982 pp 161-163

[Review by V. A. Haslennikov. candidate in juridical sciences, of book "Trudovoy
Kollektiv Kak 0b "Yekt 1 Sub" Yekt Upravleniya" [The Labor Collective as an
Object and Subject of Management] edited by A. S. uashkov, Leningrad,
IZDATEL'TSTVO LGU, 1980, 118 pp]

[Text] The constitutional consolidation of the role of the labor collective

as a component element of the political system of Soviet society has stimulated
an interest in a study of the different aspects of its structure and functioning.
0n the basis of concrete materials which were obtained during the course of the
composition of draft plans for the social development of a number of Leningrad
enterprises, the monograph examines certain philosophical, sociological,
socio-psychological, and legal problems of the participation of the labor
collectives of industrial enterprises in the system of social management.

Among the basic points of the book, let us take note of the interpretation of
the concept of the'labor collective of a state enterprise with regard to which
a generally accepted position has not yet been worked out. The authors of the
section dealing with this (A. s. Pashkov and A. T. Perfil'yev), taking as their
point of departure the basic ideas of the "theory of the collective" which has
been put forward by A. V. Venediktov, look upon the collective of a state enter-
prise as an objective social formation which possesses a definite organization,
an internal structure. and the appropriate managerial agencies. (Pp 8-9) "An
analysis of the legislation in effect and of the practice of its application,"
it is emphasized in the work, "testifies to the fruitfulness of the theory of
the collective which has the advantage that it makes it possible to understand
and cover the labor collective in all of its complex and diverse aspects and
that it provides the fullest validation of the labor collective as a subject of
law." (P 56) An important aspect of this study is its thesis that the basic
social functions of the collective (production-technical, socio-economic,
organizational-managerial, and ideological-educational) are realized in the
activities of all of the structural elements of the collective as a social
organization (that is, administration, public organizations, and self-actuating
agencies of the collective); moreover, with the application of both law and
non-law means. (Pp 13-16, 57-58) In accordance with this. the possibility
arises of studying the relationships of the labor collective with the other
elements of the system of social management on the basis of recognizing in it the

10
FOR OFIHCJAI.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quality of an independent subject of law, and a participant in an extensive range
of relationships which are regulated by the norms of the various branches of law
(constitutional, administrative, financial, labor, and so forth). From this

there follows an important conclusion: The social functions of labor collectives

are realized not only on the basis of political-ideological imperatives, but
also on the basis of legal norms.

The singling out of the "managerial" function as an independent function of the
labor collective has occurred in the literature before; however, in the book
under review this function of the collective has become pivotal in the study.
The authors distinguish the following three basic organizational forms of the
participation of collectives in management: a) the direct participation of
workers in discussing and deciding upon state and public affairs; b) the par-
ticipation of collectives in deciding upon political, economic, and social issues
through the mediation of public organizations which have the task of expressing
the interests of collectives; and c) the actual managerial work of the collec-
tive's directing agency and of its administration. The two basic directions in
which the collective's participation in management is carried out are also
singled out: within the collective, in the sphere of its labor and public life;
and outside of it, in its interactions with other elements of the political
system, and with the institutions of socialist democracy. (P 57)

By performing their manifold functions in the system of social management, labor
collectives help in the realization of the leading role of the workers, especially
of the working class, in society, which provides grounds for acknowledging the
labor collective as having the quality of a public political institution. (P 20)
An important and controversial concrete problem--the relationships of labor
collectives with the territorial agencies of power and management-is examined
from these positions.

Proceeding from the task of increasing the role of the local soviets in ensuring
the overall nature of the economic and social development of a territory, the
author of the section of the book dealing with this (P. N. Lebedev) calls
attention to two important points. 0n the one hand, he takes a critical posi-
tion with regard to arguments in favor of a substantial expansion of the acti-
vities of enterprises to satisfy the social needs of their members, not without
grounds believing that this path of reducing labor turnover and creating stable
labor collectives cannot be regarded as absolutely indisputable (since a sub-
stantial improvement of social living conditions at one set of enterprises
results in an increase in labor turnover at those enterprises which, because of
various reasons, including those which do not depend upon the efforts of their
collectives, do not have sufficient funds for housing and social and cultural
construction). In the opinion of the author, a shift of the center of gravity

in the struggle against labor turnover to factors which accompany labor activity
(the amount of wages and working conditions, the degree to which the social and
everyday needs of workers is satisfied) will develop into a “luring away" of
workers and into an increase in "collective inequality." P. N. Lebedev sees

the chief stimulus for attracting a worker into production activity and maintaining

11
FIHICHﬂﬂCIAl.USE(HVLY
INDRIOF$ICIAI.IISE (”ULY

the stability of labor relations in the equalization of working and living con~

ditions at all enterprises, and in a maximum curtailment of hard physical and
unhealthy labor.

The author correctly calls attention to the fact that sometimes in collisions
between the ispolkoms of local soviets and enterprises and organizations which
are not under their jurisdiction the latter turn out to be the "injured party."
From this there follows the natural conclusion that an expansion of the juris-
diction of the local soviets in their relationship with enterprises and organi-
zations which are not subject to their authority has to have definite limits.
Incidentally, while it substantially expands the authority of the soviet in the
planning of the economic and social development of territories and in controlling
the construction of housing and social and domestic objects, the 1981 decree of
the CC CPSU, Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, and USSR Council of Ministers
"On a Further Increase in the Role of the Soviets of People's Deputies in
Economic Construction" proceeds from a premise regarding the necessity for
coordinating the positions of enterprises, organizations, and depart-ents with
those of the local soviets, without depriving enterprises, associations, and
their superior organizations of the rights needed by then to effectively carry
out their functions of satisfying the social needs of their workers.*

In our view, it is an expansion of contract relationships between enterprises
and organizations and the local soviets, reinforced by legal responsibility for
the proper execution of these comitments, that is under present-day conditions
the most effective way of ensuring the overall development of territories.
Moreover, one of the central issues in improving the legal contract relationships
of the local soviets with the labor collectives of enterprises and organizations
of superior subordination is the establishment of the necessary responsibility
of the sides, including civil legal responsibility, for the fulfillment of
adopted commitments.

The question of a worker's satisfaction with his work is at the center of the
attention of scholars who are studying the problem of social activeness. On the
basis of sociological studies which were conducted at eight Leningrad enterprises,
A. N. Sharov comes to the conclusion that an individual's subjective attitude to-
"er his work and enterprise is pervasive for all of the types of a person's
activity (p 43), while Yu. S. Suslov emphasizes the necessity for making wider
use of the mechanisms of social psychological compensation in order to increase

a worker's overall satisfaction with his work, including the degree to which

the ordinary worker is involved in the management of an enterprise’s affairs.
(P 33)

The book cites the data of sociological studies which show the level of the
public political preparedness of workers, the basic indicators and sources of

* VEDOHOSTI VERKBOVNOGO SOVBTA SSSR, No 13, 1981, p 636.

12
‘Nﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their information on the social and economic problems of the work of enterprises,
and also their opinion regarding the administration's position with respect to
the initiative of workers. (Pp 68-50) However, although_Fhe individual items of
data are of interest, nevertheless, an integrated picture which reflects the
forms, methods, and effectiveness of the participation of labor collectives in
the management of enterprises is not created. One regrets the fact that the
indicators which have been obtained by the Leningrad sociologists are practically
not compared by the authors of the book to the results of analogous question-
naires which have been conducted by other researchers, which reduces the
generalization level of their own data.

In recent years there has been a marked increase in interest in the questions
connected with the formation of labor collectives, and the selection and place-
ment of leading cadres. Analyzing the legislation and practice, Ye. M.
Kanevskaya takes note of a tendency toward granting primary labor collectives
(teams) the right to admit new members into their midst, and she proposes the
consolidation in a legislative act now being prepared on the rights of the
labor collective of the rule that the hiring of workers be performed with the
preliminary agreement of most of the members of the team, and that the team
leader be elected by the team. (Pp 72, 75) A definite step in this direction has
been taken by the 31 December 1980 Standard Regulation on the Production Team,
Team Leader, Team Council, and Team Leaders'Council. It is established there
that when new workers are included in a team the opinion of the team is taken
into consideration, and that the team leader is appointed by an administration
representative upon a presentation by the foreman and with regard to the team's
opinion.* Of course, it would be desirable for a greater degree of clarity of
the formulations to be reached in the future legislation, and for them to be
applied to a wider range of leading cadres.

The book contains a special chapter devoted to the social-psychological aspects
of management in the labor collective which was written by a collective of
social psychology-V. A. Bogdanov, V. Ye. Semenov, A. A. Rusalinova, and

Yu. N. Yemel'yanov. From their point of view, management and self-management
in the labor collective are "processes of influence on the interaction and
socialization of the members of a collective and on their social aims for the
purpose of creating a united stress-resistant collective which is effective in
public political and production respects." (P 89) In this connection, they
examine the contents and basic indicators of the social-psychological climate
in the collective, the social-psychological characteristics of the leader as
the subject of the management of the collective, and also certain methods of
their psychological preparation. The inclusion in the book of this kind of
material broadens the ideas of the legal specialist on the real social-psycho-
logical mechanisms of the functioning of the labor collective and, thereby,
promotes a deeper study of it.

* BYULLETEN' GOSUDARSTVENNOGO KOHITETA SSSR P0 TRUDU I SOTSIAL'NYH VOPROSAH,
No a, 1981, pp 6-5.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1982

2959
C80: 1800/571

13
Ff”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(MVLY
FOR OFI1C1AL USEllNLN

NATIONAL

ETRNODEHOGRAPHIC SOURCEBOOR REVIEWED
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 3, Mar 82 pp 139-152

[Review by A. Ya. Shevelenko of book "Naseleniye mira. Etnodemograficheskiy
spravochnik“ [The Population of the World. Ethnodamogrsphic Reference Book] by
S. I. Bruk. Nauka, Moscow, 1981, 880 pages]

[Text] S. l. Bruk, doctor of geographical sciences, is a specialist on ethnodemo-
graphy and ethnic cartography. Monographs on this subject matter have come from
his pen, as well as parts, chapters and maps in many collective works.1 The book
under review is a comprehensive reference volume. Giving a demographic survey of
the world as a whole, the author cites information about the sire and structure of
the population: Its dynamic and reproduction, its growth from medieval times, the
contemporary "demographic explosion", the birth-rate and death-rate, the family
and age structure, the sexual composition, migrations, the distribution of the
population and urbanisation. In regard to the ethnic picture of the world, he
writes about the existing ethnic communities, ethnic processes and ethnic Ebrma-
tions. the numerical strength of the peoples, their national self-consciousness,
language families, racial composition, and religious views. This part of the work
is concluded with summary tables containing basic geographical data about all
countries, the demographic indicators of the population in each one, the largest
cities, the most important peoples, the language groups, and the racial strength
of the ethnic communities. In moving on to the ethnodemogrsphic survey of the
regions of the world and the countries separately, the author reports information
(arranged in approximately the same columns as above) on the USSR, on Europe
beyond the border and on Asia beyond the border, on Africa, America, Australia
and Oceania, historical information being given in paragraphs about the individual
peoples, including historical data about each one which explain its origin and
development. The reference volume contains an alphabetic list of the peoples of
the earth indicating their numerical strength. All in all the book contains inf-
formation on 210 countries and almost 1,400 peoples. No other specialized book
published in our country contains anything similar, if you please.

The population as the main productive force is illuminated in the book in two of
its aspects-~the ethnic and the demographic, the first one yielding in the major-
ity of cases in development and the constants of the second one being calculated
primarily for the end of the 1970's. The reference volume contains generalized
quantitative data from a mess of other sources and thus becomes a necessary aid
for the historian. Specialists will constantly turn to the book by S. I. Bruk,

1h
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

making intensive use of the material that fills it.

The professional historian can draw a number of useful data from it: About the
types of ethnic communities, beginning with the various family tribe formations of
the primitive communal stage and ending with the contemporary nations, as well as
the metaethnic communities with all of their inherent processes of consolidation,
assimilation, isolation, blending and integration (pp 71-83); about the ways of
formation of national consciousness (pp 87 ff.); about the essentially new classi-
fication of the peoples of the earth adopted by the author (pp 97 ff.), which takes
fully into account the latest scientific data concerning ethnogenesis. Interesting
are the characterizations of the historical evolution of the peoples, which are
compressed but saturated with facts. This concerns chiefly the nations and nation-
alities of the USSR (independent short essays on each one of them are inserted on
pp 221-251), Asia beyond the borders as a whole (pp 369-565), and selectively--many
regions of Africa and America. To a lesser extent this may be said about Europe
beyond the borders.

The reference volume well justifies its functional purpose. This is especially
noticeable when it is compared with the literature which is close to it in subject
mater. If, for example, one can find in it data about the majority of the now
existing 2,000 peoples of the earth, only a few dozen peoples each figure in the
theoretical-methodological book by A. Yagel'skiy. in the research of V. I. Kozlov,
in the manual of E. L. Shuvalov, in the scientific-popular work of V. V. Pokshishev-
skiy, and in the previous reference work (a collective work) published in our
country. 2 Having turned to the in part conceptually similar works of the
American sociologists C. Trewarths and J. Spengler, the English demographers 0.
Class and D. Eversley, C. McEvedy and R. Jones, the Italian and German statisti-
cians M. Strassoldo and K. witthauer, and, finally, to the generalizing publica-
tion undertaken by the United Nations, we become convinced of their relatively
smaller degree of completeness. If the reader wOuld want to find compact quanti-
tative material on the 272 nations with a population of over 1 million each, he
would previously have had to leaf through practically the entire multi-volume
series "The Peoples of the World", published by the Institute of Ethnography of the
USSR Academy of Sciences, or to make hundreds of inquiries in different encyclo'
pedins. Now all of this is concentrated in one.

The book by S. I. Bruk is basically intended to meet the needs of ethnographers and
specialists in modern history. Therefore, it is precisely the historical part of
the paragraphs concerning the past which is elaborated in less detailed fashion in
the book. This circumstance gives rise to the debatability of some of its proposi-
tions affecting the more remote epochs. Thus, the author notes that "the character
of the migrations of the population in the last decades has rather fundamentally
changed. Along with economic factors, which have always played an important role
in the development of migration processes, political factors are becoming of in-
creasingly great significance in the determination of the direction of migrations.
. Sometimes migrations are caused by national and religious motives" (p 68).
This assertion is insufficiently legitimate. Previously, too, political and
religious factors exerted the strongest influence on migrations. For example,
after the abrogation by Louis XIV in 1685 of the Edictsof Nantes and Nines,
400,000 Huguenots, who were being persecuted by the Catholic Church, left France
and went to protestant countries. The punitive laws of the Anglican Church during

15
can omcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1695-1745 against the Catholics of Ireland induced a mass of Irish to move to
America. One can also mention the French bourgeois revolution at the end of the
18th century, which compelled many thousands of nobles to flee abroad, above all
for political reasons. 0r let us take such a grandiose migration movement as the
Great Migration of Peoples during the 4th-7th centuries: At that time dozens of
ethnic groupings were pushed out from their long-occupied places by the conquerors
and, having set out on the long road, then themselves moved others, these migra-
tions being by far not always caused by purely economic reasons.

The prcblem of urbanization requires discussion, which affects a number of contro-
versial aspects. It is solved by the combination of the results of investigations
at the macro-, meso-, and micro~levels.4 The present reference volume, which
generalizes mass indicators, is based mainly on the achievements of statistical
macro-research. Hence the possibility of a partiallack of coincidence of the con-
clusions contained in it with the results of the study of concrete phenomena in
"small scope". For example, the author included in the list of "millionaire-
cities" (by number of inhabitants) for 1975 30 cities in the United States with a
total population of 94.6 million people (p 163), meanwhile narrowly specialized
works name 27 such cities in the United States with a total population of 83 mil-
lion people.5 However, the root of the variant readings, evidently, is to be found
not in inaccuracies, but in unequal models of estimation or in the extraordinary
mobility of the urban population which call forth the transient character of such
calculations even within the framework of one year.

It is not entirely clear from the text what ultimate meaning the author assigns to
the concept of urbanization itself. The impression is created that he simply un-
derstands it to mean the growth of cities and their population. Meanwhile dif-
ferent points of view on this question are expressed in the literature. Some
treat urbanization as a process which consists of three stages: The initial
separation of the city from the country; the further withdrawal of the rural popu-
lation, leading to the growth of cities; and the gradual liquidation of the dif-
ference between town and country.6 Others focus primary attention on the socio-
economic process and perceive in urbanization the concentration in cities of the
highest achievements of production and culture with their subsequent diss mination
everywhere7 (sometimes they call the second phase indirect urbanization). Still
others treat the given concept also by stages, but under different criteria: The
growth of cities, the thickening of their network, the formation of whole systems
of cities, and their amalgamation into megalopolitan units.9 Of course. a
reference volume is not the place for theoretical discussions. He are merely
speaking abOutthe desirability of a more problem-centered organization of the

rich data cited there.

In some other cases one would like to see in the book a more clear-cut division of
the material. Thus, for example, the part dealing with migrations (pp 48-55),
which is saturated with interesting facts, is not broken down into headings--
sufficiently traditional for the specialized literature--of stationary migrations
(change of the permanent population), seasonal migrations, pendulum migrations
(labor journeys), and non-stationary migrations,1 although the author correctly
breaks down the material between external and intra-state migrations. His point
of view on the sufficiently high level of purposeful regulation of migration flows
in the USSR (see p 56) seems too optimistic. Unfortunately, in the meanwhile the
case is somewhat different: "The proportion of the population which is being

16
FOR OFFKJAL.USEZONLN
FORl0F1ﬂC1Al.USE1JNLY

moved as the result of organization still remains exceedingly low. The basic

masses of migrants move spontaneOusly, selecting the rOutes of their migrations

on their own responsibility and at their own risk. . . The migration processes are
II

o

still far from meeting national economic and public interests.

Full of interesting historical and ethnographic data are the characterizations of
the peoples and states of the globe, including also the ones that have been

formed recently, which are inserted in the second part of the work. The author
combines here conciseness of exposition with diversity of the cited data. Let us
take, for example, Vanuatu (pp 836-838), which gained independence on 30 July 1980.
It is already taken into account and the following information is reported about
it: Whose colony it was and how it was administered, where it is situated. of what
territories it consists, its administrative structure, general geographic data,
population, ways of emigration and immigration, growth of the population, history
from olden times to our day, ethnic composition, linguistic picture, and the re-
ligious beliefs of the inhabitants. And so it is throughout the book.

In essence, the reader received a unique publication--a one-volume encyclopedia of
the peoples of the earth.

1. S. I. Bruk, "Atlas narodov mirs [Atlas of the Peooles of the World], Moscow,
1964; by the same author, "Problemy Rartogrsfirovaniya v etnogrsfii" [Problems
of Cartography in Ethnography], Moscow, 1973; S. Bruk, "Die Bevoelkerung der
Welt heute" [The Population of the World Today], Moscow, 1971; S. Brouk, "La
population du monde aujourd'hui" [The Population of the World Today], Moscow,
1980, etc. See also: "Narody Peredney Asii" [The Peoples of the Near East],
Moscow, 1957; "Ocherki obshchey etnografii (Obshchiye svedeniya, Avstraliya i
Okeaniya, Amerika, Afrika)" [Essays in General Ethnography (General Informa-
tion: Australia and Oceania, America, Africa)], Moscow, 1957; "Asiatskaya
chast' 5558" [The Asiatic Part of the USSR], Moscow, 1960; "larubezhnsya
Aziya" [Asia Beyond Our Borders], Moscow, 1959; Yevropeyskaya chast‘ $853“
[The European Part of the USSR], Moscow, 1968; Materialy I meahvedomstvennogo
soveshchaniya po geografii naseleniya“ [Materials of the First Inter-Department
Conference on the Geography of the Population], Moscow-leningrad, 1961; "Chis-
lennost' i rasseleniye narodow mire" [Numerical Strength and Settlement of the
Peoples of the World], Moscow, 1962; "Narody yevropeyskoy chasti SSSR" [The
Peoples of the European Part of the USSR], Vol 1-11, Moscow, 1966; "Maseleniye
mira" [The Population of the World], Moscow, 1965; "Narody Vostochnoy Azii"
[The Peoples of East Asia], Moscow-Leningrad. 1965; "Naseleniye semnogo chars"

[The Population of the Globe], Moscow, 1965; "Naseleniye mirs (osobaya chast'
t. 5 Kratkoy geograﬁichoskoy entsiklopedii)" [The Population of the World
(Special part of volume 5 of the Short Geographic Encyclopedia], Moscow, 1966;
"Marody Yugo—Vostochnoy Azii" [The Peoples of South-East Asia], Moaxoq, 1966;
“Rasy i nsrody. Ezhegodnik" [Races and Peoples. Yearbook], Nos l-ll, Moscow,
1971-1981; "Problemy kartografirovaniya v yasykoznanii i etnografii" [Problems
of Cartography in Linguistics and Ethnography], Leningrad, 197b; "Btnografiya
v stranakh sotsializma. Ocherki raavitiya nsuki“ [Ethnography in the Countries
of Socialism. Essays in the Development of a Science], Moscow, 1975; "Geogra-

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fiya i razvivayushchiyesya strany [Geography and the Developing Countries],
Moscow, 1977; "Areal'nyye issledovaniya v yazykoznanii i etnografii" [Areal
Research in Linguistics and Ethnography]: Leningrad, 1978; "Issledovaniya po
obshchey etnografii" [Research on General Ethnography], Moscow, 1979, and
others.

A. Yagel'skiy, "Geografiya naseleniya" [The Geography of Population], Moscow,
1980, ch 11; V. I. Kozlov, "Btnicheskaya demografiya" [Ethnic Denography],
Moscow, 1977, pp 33-67; Ye. L. Shuvalov, "Geografiya naseleniya" [The Geography
of Population], Moscow, 1977, pp 50-63; V. V. Pokshishevskiy, "Geografiya nase-
leniya zarubezhnykh stran" [The Geography of the Population of Foreign Coun-
tries], Moscow, 1971, pp 72-82; "Narodonaseleniye stran mira. Spravochnik"
[The Population of the Countries of the World. Reference Guide], Moscow, 1978,
pp 370-371., 393-397.

D. V. Class, D. E. c. Bversley (ed), "Population in History. Essays in histor-
ical Demography“, london, 1965; G. T. Trewartha, "A Geography of Population:
world Patterns", New York, 1969; by the same author, "The Less Developed Realm:
A Geography of Its Population", New York, 1972; K. Hitthauer, "Bevoelkerungs-
zahlen im Handel. Lawine oder Aufgabe?" [Population Figures in the Process of
Change. Avalanche or Task?], Gotha, 1971; M. Strassoldo, "Lingue e nazionaliti
nelle rilevazioni demografiche" [Language and Nationality in Demographic
Studies], Trieste, 1977; J. J. Spengler, "Facing Zero Population Growth: Re-
Actions and Interpretations, Past and Present", Durham, 1978; C. McEvedy, R.
Jones, "Atlas of World Population History", London, 1978; "Patterns of Urban
and Rural Population Growth", Unites Nations, Department of International Eco-
nomic and Social Affairs, POPULATION STUDIES, No 68, New York, 1980.

N. T. Agafonov, S. B. Lavrov, B. S. Khorev, "Magistrali razvitiya geografii
naseleniya SSSR" [The Main Lines of Development of the Geography of the Popula-
tion of the USSR], in the book “Sovremennyye voprosy geografii naseleniya"
[Contemporary Questions of the Geography of Population], leningrad, 1977, p 10.

B. L. Ginsburg, "Millionnyye goroda mira v XX veke" [Million-Strong Cities of
the world in the 20th Century], ibid, p 133.

B. Khorev, "Urbanizatsiys i edinaya aistema rasseleniya v usloviyakh razvitogo
sotsielizma " [Urbanization and a Common System of Settling in Conditions of
Developed Socialism], in the book "Rost gorodov i sistema rasseleniya" [The
Growth of Cities and the System of Settling], Moscow, 1975. p 5.

0. N. Yanitskiy, “Urbanizatsiya i nekotoryye probleny obshchestvennogo razvi-
tiya“ [Urbanization and Some Problems of Social Development], in the book
"Urbanizatsiya i fornirovaniya sistem rasseleniya" [Urbanization and the Forma-
tion of Systems of Settling], Moscow, 1978, p 19.

I. Musil, 1. Link, "Urbanizatsiya v ChSSR i nekotoryye ee osobennosti“ [Urban-
ization in the Czech Socialist Republic and Some Its Peculiarities], in the
book "Urbanizatsiya i rasseleniye" [Urbanization and Settling], Moscow, 1975,
p 47.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. A. D. Rondeli, "anbennoati fornirovaniya regional'nykh grupp (sistem) gorodov
lranu" [Peculiarities of the Formation of Regional Groups (Systems) of Cities
in Iran], in the book "Probleny geografii naseleniye i ispol'zoveniya terri-
torii" [Problems of the Geography of Population and the Use of Territory],
Tiflis, 1976, p 73. See also: "Hezhdunarodnyye probleny narodonaseleniya"
[International Problems of Population], Moscow, 1981.

10. c. Merzhanov, V. Chapek, "Vidy migratsii naseleniya i ikh klansifikatsiya"
[Types of Higration of Population and Their Classification], in the book "Rost
gorodov i sistema rasseleniya", p 63.

11. L. Rybakovskiy, "Kacheli nigrotsii" [The Suing of Migrations], PRAVDA, 11
Sep 1981.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", “voprosy iatorii", 1982

8970
C80: 1800/1046

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR'OFEK]AL.USEZONLY

NATIONAL

NIH HISTORIANS IN SOVIET ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian Mo 3, Mar 82 pp 105-107

[Text] In accordance with the Statute of the USSR Academy of Sciences, elections
of members (academicians) and corresponding members of the USSR Academy of Sciences
were held at its General Assembly on 28 December 1981. Elected to membership were
44 academicians and 91 corresponding members. In the Department of History 2
members and 5 corresponding members were elected.

Elected as member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of "History of
the USSR" was Aleksandr Mikhailovich Samsonov, senior scientific associate of the
Institute of History of the USSR of the USSR Academy of Sciences (city of Moscow).
born in 1908, Russian, member of the CPSU, correspondent of the USSR Academy of
Sciences, doctor of historical sciences, specialist in the history of Soviet socie-
ty and military history, author of approximately 150 publications, including several
monographs. In his works "The Great Battle of Moscow. 1941-1962," "From the Volga
to the Baltic. An Essay in the History of the 3rd Guard Mechanized Corps. 1942-
1945", ”The Battle of Stalingrad. From Defense and Retreat to the Great Victory on
the Volga", "The Failure of Fascist Aggression", "The Defeat of the Wehrmacht Mear
Moscow", and "At the Halls of Stalingrad" are characterized the greatest stages and
events of the struggle of the Soviet people with the Fascist invaders. They re-
search problems of the history of the Second World War, reveal some of its important
aspects, subject the anti-scientific conceptions of bourgeois authors to criticism,
show the decisive contribution of the Soviet Union to the crushing of Hitlerite
Germany and imperialist Japan, and uncover the laws which determine its victory.
These books have been translated into a number of foreign languages. Under the
editorship and with the participation of A. H. Samsonov, such collective monographs
and collections of articles and memoirs have been published as "The Liberation of
Hungary from Fascism", "The Downfall of the Hitlerite Attack on Moscow. 25 Years
of the Crushing of the German-Fascist Troops Near Moscow. l9hl-1966“, "The Defense
of Leningrad. lSkl-l944. Memoirs and Diaries of Participants", "The Stalingrad
Epopee", "The Liberation of Belorussia. 1964", "The Soviet Union During the Years
of the Great Patriotic Her. 1941-1905", "May 9, l9b5. Memoirs", and others. He
was a member of the Chief Editorial Council for the publication of "The History of
the USSR from Ancient Times to Our Day" and editor-in-chief of volume X in this
series, a member of the editorial board of volumes 5 and 6 of "The History of the
Second world War", and the scientific editor of "A Short History of the USSR".

A. M. Samsonov is the editor-in-chief of the journal ISTORICHESKIYE ZAPISKI.

20
FOR,0FFHJA1.USE1MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was Sergey Leonidovich Tikhvinskiy, rector of the Diplomatic Academy of
the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs, editor-in-chief of the journal NOVAYA l
NOVEYSHAYA ISTORIYA (city of Moscow), born in 1918, Russian, member of the CPSU,
corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences, doctor of historical sciences,
professor, specialist in modern and recent history of China and Japan, historio-
graphy, the study of the sources and history of international relations in the Far
East, author of over 300 publications, including the monographs: "The Movement for
Reforms in China at the End of the 19th Century and Rang Youwei", "Sun Yet-sen.
Foreign Policy Views and Practice. (From the History of the National Liberation
Struggle of the Chinese People 1885-1925)", "The History of China and the Present",
and others. His works have been published in several foreign languages. He took
active part in the preparation of the multi-volume works ”Hbrld History" and "The
History of Diplomacy", "The History of the Foreign Policy of the USSR", and others,
he is the initiator of the elaboration of the problem of the formation of the
Chinese nation, the ideology of Chinese nationalism, and is the investigator of
other important problems of the history of China. He has distinguished himself in
the criticism of anti-Marxist, Maoist conceptions of the historical development of
China. 5. L. Tikhvinskiy has made a great contribution to the study of Russo-
Japanese and Soviet-Japanese relations, the foreign policy of the USSR, and the
national liberation movement in the developing countries. He was the director and
a participant of the author collectives of the collective volumes of articles
"China. Japan. history and Philology", “China and Her Neighbors in Ancient and
Medieval Times", "The Manchu Dynasty in China", "The Xin Hai Revolution in
China", "The Tatar-Mongols in Asia and Burope'ﬂ "Sun Vat-sen. 1866-1966. In Com-
memoration of the 100th AnniVersary of His Birth", and the collective monograph
"The Modern History of China“. A number of collections of doCumenta on the foreign
policy of the USSR were published with his participation, including "The USSR at
International Conferences of the Period of the Great Patriotic War 1941-1945", as
well as about the relations of the USSR with other socialist countries, on Soviet-
German, Soviet-French, and Soviet-Mexican relations, the fundamental publication
"Russia and the USA: Establishment of Relations. 1765-1815", the director of

the publication of which he was on the Soviet side, the publication of documents on
Russian-Chinese Relations in the l7th-l8th Centuries, and publications on the
foreign policy of Russia. S. L. Tikhvinskiy devotes a great deal of attention to
the training of scientific cadres and is the deputy academician secretary of the
Department of History of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the chairman of the National
Committee of Historians of the Soviet Union, a member of the Bureau of the Interna-
tional Committee of Historical Sciences, the first deputy chairman of the Central
Management Board of the Society for Soviet-Chinese Priendship, and the vice-
president of the "USSR-Japan Society".

Elected as corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of
"History of the USSR" was Valeriy Pavlovich Alekseyev, senior scientific associate
of the Institute of Ethnography imeni N. H. Miklukho-Maklay of the USSR Academy of
Sciences (city of Moscow), born in 1929, Russian, non-party member, doctor of
historical sciences, specialist in historical anthropology, author of more than

300 publications, including "The Origin of the Peoples of Eastern Europe. (Cranio—
logical Research)", "The Origin of the Peoples of the Caucasus. Craniological Re-
search", "Paleoanthvopology of the Terrestrial Globe and the Formation of Human

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Races. Paleolith", "Osteometry. Method of Anthropological Research", "The Geo-
graphy of Human Races", "Historical Anthropology", and others. The majority of

his works are devoted to the elaboration, on the basis of anthropological material,
of the problems of ethnogenesis, the relationship of contenporary and ancient
peoples, the interrelationship of social and biological factors in the history of
mankind, anthropogenesis, the demography of the ancient population, and the level
of the productive forces in primitive society and its periodization. The works of
V. P. Alekseyev have been translated into foreign languages. He is n member of the
permanent Organizational Committee of the International Congress of Anthropological
and Ethnographical Sciences.

Elected as corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of
"General History" was Grigoriy Haksinovich Bongard-Levin, sector head of the Insti-
tute for Oriental Studies of the USSR Academy of Sciences (city of Moscow), born in
1933, Jew, member of the CPSU, doctor of historical sciences, specialist in the
history and culture of Central and South Asia, author of more than 100 publications,
including the monographs "India of the Epoch of the Haurya", "Ancient Indian Civili-
zation. Philosophy, Science and Religion", "The Art of Sri Lanka. The Classical
Period","Research on Ancient India and Central Asia", and others. His works are
devoted to the problems of the history, culture and ethnogenesis of the peoples of
India, the socio-economic structure of ancient Indian society, and the history of
Buddhism and Central Asian monuments of Indian culture. For his Indological re-
search he was awarded the J. Nehru Prize and the Gold Medal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengali. He is vice-president of the International Association for Sanskritolo-
gy, honorary member of the Indian Archeological Society, and a number of his works
have been published abroad. G. H. Bongard-Levin is a member of the editorial board
of the journal VESTNIK DREVNEY ISTORII, deputy chairman of the editorial board of
the series "Written Monuments of the Peoples of the East", and a member of the
Executive Committee of the Society for Soviet-Indian Friendship.

Elected as corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of
"History of the USSR" was Yelena Yioasafovna Druzhinins, senior scientific associate
of the Institute of History of the USSR of the USSR Academy of Sciences (city of
Moscow), born in 1916, Russian, member of the CPSU, doctor of historical sciences,
specialist in patriotic history of the 18th and 19th centuries and the history of
Russo-German cultural relations, author of more than 100 printed works, including
the monographs: "The Peace of Kuchuk-Kainardzhi in 1774 (Its PreparatiOn and Con-
clusion)", "The Northern Black Sea Littoral during 1775-1800“, and "The Southern
Ukraine in the Period of the Crisis of Feudalism, 1825-1860". These works show

the progressive consequences of Russia's exit to the Black Sea and the Sea of

Azov, and the role of the popular masses in the settlement and economic assimila-
tion of this region. A large place in her research is occupied by the elucidation
of the social division of labor between the "outlying districts" and the internal
gubernii [provinces] of Russia and by the refutation of the conceptions of bour-
geois authors who attempt to distort the character of Russia's influence on the
Ukraine. E. I. Druzhinina took part in the preparation of a number of collective
works, including "Essays on the History of the USSR". She is a member of the
International Commission on Slavic Research and the Commission of Historians of

the USSR and the CDR, and works in the All-Russian Society for the Preservation of
Monuments of History and Culture.

22
FORIOFFKJAI.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Elected as corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of
"History of the USSR" was Baydabek Akhmedovich Tulepbayev, vice-president of the
Academy of Sciences of the Kazakh SSR (city of Alma-Ate), born in 1921, Kazakh, mem-
ber of the CPSU, doctor of historical sciences, professor, Academician of the Acade-
my of Sciences of the Kazakh SSR, specialist in the history of agrarian transforma-
tions in Central Asia and Kazakhstan, author of more than 70 publications, including
the monographs: "The Triumph of Leninist Ideas of the Socialist Transformation of
Agriculture in Central Asia and Kazakhstan", "Agrarian Transformations in the Repub-
lics of the Soviet East", "The Realization of the Leninist Agrarian Policy of the
Party in the Republics of Central Asia", and "The Communist Party of Uzbekistan in
the Struggle for a Steep Upsurge in Agriculture (1953-1958)". B. A. Tulepbayev is

a deputy of the Kazakh SSR Supreme Soviet, a member of the Auditing Commission of
the Communist Party of Kazakhstan, a member of the Alma-Ata Obkom of the Communist
Party of Kazakhstan, and chairman of the management board of the republic society
"Znaniye" [Knowledge].

One vacancy for a member of the USSR Academy of Sciences and two vacancies for cor-
responding members of the USSR Academy of Sciences remained unfilled since none of
the candidates for them being voted on received the necessary majority of votes.

Elected as corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences in the specialty of
"Ethnography“ was Kirill Vasil'yevich Chistov, editor-in-chief of the journal
"Soviet Ethnography", sector head of the Institute of Bthnographv imeni N. N.
Hiklukho-Haklay of the USSR Academy of Sciences (city of Leningrad), born in 1919,
Russian, member of the CPSU, doctor of historical sciences, professor, specialist
in Slavic ethnography and the study of folklore, author of more than 200 publica-
tions, including the monographs: "Russian Popular Socio-Utopian Legends of the
l7th-19th Centuries" and "National Poetess I. A. Fedosova. Essay on the Life and
Creative work". The research of K. V. Chistov is devoted to the methodology of the
study of the historical process, the theory of spiritual culture, the development
of ethnography and the study of folklore, socio-psychology and socio-linguistics.

A number of his works have been translated into foreign languages.. A member of
the authors' collective of the work "Contemporary Ethnic Processes in the USSR",

he was awarded the State Prize of the USSR in 1981, he is vice-president of the
International Society of Researchers of Folklore in Europe, an honorary member of
the Polish Ethnographic Society, the Finnish Literary Society, and conducts peda-
gogical work at Leningrad University.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravda", "Voprosy istorii", 1982

8970
C80: 1800/442

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

ALL-UNION CONFERENCE 0F JURISTS REPORTED
mscow SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARSTVO I PRAVO in Russian No «'0, April 1982 pp 131-139
[Conference Report: "The Tasks of Developing Juridical Science")

[Excerpt] In October 1981 the All-Union Scientific Coordination Conference of
Jurists, "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of the Development of Juridical
Science," was held in Moscow. The conference which was organized by the Scien-
tific Council "The Laws of the Development of the State, the Administration, and
the Law" of the USSR Academy of Sciences and the USSR Ministry of higher and
Secondary Specialized Education was the most inpressive form of legal special-
ists in recent years. Kore than 1200 legal scholars and practical workers

took part in its work.

Seven reports were heard at the plenary session. In opening the conference,
the USSR Minister of Justice V. I. Ierebilov enphasized that in accordance with
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, juridical science was faced with
responsible tasks. Soviet legal science had attained definite results in
solving the theoretical problelu of the state and the law, and in introducing
scientific achievements into practice. V. I. Terebilov took note of the
necessity for studying the problems of improving the management of the economy,
improving state nanagenent, and strengthening the public principles in the work
of the state apparatus, and he emphasized the ideological importance of juri-
dical science.

In his report, "The Theoretical Problems of Juridical Science in the Light of
the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress," the director of the Institute of
Governnent and Law of the USSR Acadany of Sciences and Corresponding Haber of
the USSR Academy of Sciences V. N. Kudryavtsev considered the tasks of Soviet
juridical science which he connected with the functions that are performed by
Soviet jurisprudence. Soviet juridical science perforns not only descriptive
functions which cone down to comentaries upon juridical material, but also
cognitive, explanatory, and ideological functions. One of the tasks of jurists
is to know the objective laws of the develop-eat and functioning of the Soviet
state and law. In this connection, the reporter also enphasized the inportsnce
of a deeper revelation of the mechanism of law application activity, and of a
study of the ways of increasing the effectiveness of the legal regulation of
social relations.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The forecasting and planning of the development of the state-legal superstructure
in our country for the 1990's and the years after the year 2000 is an important
task. Considering the explanatory function of jurisprudence, the reporter

spoke about the practical importance of work by legal scholars which should con-
tain concrete recommendations on the preparation of new legislative acts. The
ideological function of Soviet jurisprudence which plays an active role in
defending the communist worldview and in propagandizing the advanced and humane

ideas of contemporary legal science is acquiring especial importance under present-
day conditions.

In his report, "The Tasks of the Juridical Vuzes in the Organization of Scientific
Research in the Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress," Yu. H. Koslov
took note of the importance and significance of the scientific research which

is conducted in the vuzes for the accomplishment of the tasks of communist
construction. In order for vuz science to be able to accomplish its tasks more
successfully it is necessary to eliminate such shortcomings as the lack of a
single state plan for the development of vuz juridical science and for the
scientific research specialisation of the country's vusea. The reporter threw
light upon the problem of the coordination of scientific research work in the
juridical vuzes and scientific research institutes, and also the institutions

of juridical practice.

The General Procurator of the USSR A. H. Rekunkov devoted his report to the tasks
of strengthening socialist legality and increasing the effectiveness of the
struggle against law violations in the light of the 26th CPSU Congress. he noted
that an improvement of the legislation, an improvement of the work of the law
protection agencies, and greater activeness by the public and an increased role
for it in protecting law and order create the necessary conditions for realizing
the party's instructions on eradicating all kinds of violations of law and

order, liquidating crime, and eliminating the causes which give rise to it.

After having shown the general tendency toward a decrease in crime in our
country, the reporter considered the problems of the eradication of crime and,
especially, of its prevention. Legal propaganda is not only one of the measures
to prevent violations of legality and law and order; it also has to be directed
at strengthening discipline, organization, and legality.

In a report on the legal problems of improving the direction of the economy, the
corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences V. V. Laptev spoke about the
fact that this necessitated the creation of uniform legal principles for the
organization and work of the territorial production complexes and industrial
centers, and the working out of the juridical means which will ensure the
development of cost accounting in all of the elements of the economy. with the
agroindustrial complex a uniform approach is needed to defining the way in which asso-
ciations in industry and agriculture are subject to law. An improvement of
planning requires an improvement of the legislation on planning, the creation

of legal guarantees of the quality of planning, and the securing of the rights

of enterprises and associations in planning work. It is also important to im-
prove law application work in the economy, to perfect the work of state arbi-
tration and legal work in the economy, and to expand the training of scientific
cadres in economic law.

25
son omcw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In his report, "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of Improving Soviet Legis-
lation," K. P. Gutsenko emphasized that juridical scholars have done a large
amount of work in this direction. The Principles and other acts of all-union
legislation and the republic codes have been adopted, and much has been done

in the field of systemstizing the union and republic legislation. But “the
work to improve legislation," L. I. Brezhnev noted in the Summary Report of the
CC CPSU to the 26th Party Congress, "will continue." The following directions
should be the top priority ones here: the leadership of the economy, the
mechanism for realizing the constitutional rights of citizens and public organi-
zations, and the completion of the all-union Code of Laws. The actual outcome of
the work to create a USSR Code of Laws has for now been expressed only in the
publication of its first volume. In connection with the legislative work, not
only practical agencies, but also scientific collectives are being faced with
large tasks. ﬂhat has to be involved here is both the theoretical scientific
substantiation of the various legislative decisions and a direct participation
in the preparation of draft laws, the development of concrete norms and formu-
lations, and so forth.

In his report, "The Problems of the Integration and Coordination of Juridical
Science and Its Connection with Practice," the corresponding Member of the USSR
Academy of Sciences 6. A. Aksenenok noted that the 26th CPSU Congress had singled
out as being among the key scientific organizational problems the integration
and coordination of scientists upon which the success of the development of all
of Soviet science and, in particular, of juridical science depends to a substan-
tial extent. It is necessary to concentrate the attention of juridical scholars
on studying important overall problems. The reporter also believes that the
coordination of science should be concentrated in the scientific coordination
council of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of Sciences which should work on
these problems on the basis of uniform scientific organizational principles. He
made a number of proposals on improving the whole of coordination work in the
country and on the reorganization of the system of coordination agencies in the
system of the academies of sciences of the union republics by means of the for-
mation in the Academies of Sciences of the Kazakh 383, the Belorussian $83, the
Georgian SSR, and the Uzbek SSR of independent institutes of state and law. and
in all of the remaining republics by means of the transformation of the existing
scientific legal subdivisions into departments made directly subordinate to the
presidiums of the academies of sciences of the union republics. This kind of
organization would promote a further development of research and the performance
of the tasks which follow from the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, the USSR
Constitution, and the Constitutions of the union and autonomous republics.

The conference had 10 sections working at it.
COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauks", "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1982

2959
CSO: 1800/470

26
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

BOOK 0N SOVIET RITUALS REVIEHED
Moscow VOPRDSY PILOSOPII in Russian No 3, HI! 82 p 162

[Review by V. A. lots of book "Sovetskaya Obryadnost' i Dukhovnaya Kul'tura"

[Soviet Rites and Spiritual Culture] by h. H. Zakovich, "Naukova Dumka," Kiev,
1980, 225 pp]

[Text] The author regards ritual in general as a form of the accumulation and
retention of social experience and as a mechanism for its transaission to new
generations. The establishment and development of Soviet ritual is characterized
in the book as one of the aspects of the cultural revolution in the USSR. This
to a large extent has defined the social and educational functions of ritual.

As a component element of socialist culture, a new ritual, as is shown in the
book, is closely connected with the spiritual values of our society and actively
influences the formation of a worldview.

The author investigates the dependence of r.:usls upon the type of social re-
lations and the way of life of people.

The analysis in the work of the social-psychological functions of rituals is an
important one. Rituals are regarded by the author as one of the forms of social
intercourse which manifests itself on various levels. Along with this, light is
thrown upon the needs which determine the ritual form of social intercourse. and
the socia1~psychologica1 and educational functions of rituals intheir unity are
analyzed. It is ritual, in the opinion of the author, that establishes and con-
solidates the social status of the individual, offers a person a standard of
values during periods of important life changes, and helps his to avoid a feeling
of uncertainty about his future and to base himself on already existing social
experience.

whereas at the dawn of their establishment Soviet rituals were formed as one of
the means of struggle against religious survivals, the further progress of
Soviet society and the departure by the masses from religion advanced the posi~
tive function of socialist rituals to the forefront. Along with a rejection of
religion, Soviet holidays and rituals help to affirm the humanist ideals of the
new society and are an expression of the socialist way of life.

The theoretical aspect of the study of the probles is closely connected in the
book with practical tasks. A great deal of attention is devoted in it to the

I‘ll(ﬂﬂﬂC1Al.USE(HVLY
FOI'DFF“3AI.US£(MQLY

problems of increasing the effectiveness of the syste- of the atheistic education
of the workers, and to improving the organizational and artistic expressive
aspects of socialist holidays and rituals. The problems of the formation and

development of new rituals, as is suphasized by the author, requires the overall
efforts of philosophers. sociologists, teachers, psychologists, and aestheticians.

COPYRIGHT: Izdstel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda", "Voprosy filosofii", 1982

2959
C30: 1800/668 END

28
FOI_OFIIC1Al.lEﬂi(HVLY