FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10687
27 July 1982

Worldwide Report

TERRORISM
FOUO- 8/82

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

mmmomy
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
WORLDWIDE REPORT

Teaaoalsn
(moo 8/82)
Coumrs
ASIA
JAPAN
bat Ila Practice International“: 9th Anniversary of
Lydda Struggla
(MUSAI $8061 0 .1181“!!! 83110. 30 Kay 81)
“381' EUROPE
ITALY
Conan”. and "a:
(Antonio lent: It. WIS!” 8 LA GUERRA. Bay 80) ......
SPAIN

ETA (to-1mm!» to Baaqua Paopla
(202“. Jul 81) O0.0000...OOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
LET US PRACTICE WIIOIALISK: 9'!!! ANNIVERSARY 0? mm STRUGGLE
Unblown KOKIISAI SEUGI 0 Jrsm sum in Japanese 30 Hay 1981 pp 1-38

[Text] Introduction

Citizens. conredes and friends fighting against Japanese inerialisa: On
this 30th day of Play. the ninth anniversary of the Lydda struggle. and ten
years since fighting with the Arabs. we. the Japanese Red any. send heart-
felt greetings of solidarity to citizens. conrades and friends fighting across
the seas. fortified with clenched fists in the confident belief in certain
victory and with the conviction cz' our own revolutionary duty.

Now. together with our Palestinian revolutionary counties. with when we are
tnaeparably united as we were 10 years ago and are even nore so now. and
our world revolutionary oonrades. we have nurtured solidarity. studied. en-

courages and supported the autusl teachings that we should transforn the
heightening of world confrontation into revolutionary victories in various
countries. we. the Japanese Red Arly. while asking the precept of world
struggle honngeneous with the precept of Japanese class struggle. and securing
step by step the actualization of revolution by uniting our strength, vow to
carry out the duty of a Japanese revolution.

Japanese Red Any
30 Hay 1981

l. Provocation by the enemy has caused the Lebanese civil war.

with the change in the 0.8. imperialist govemnant and Reagan's appearance
on the scene. Lebanon's civil war has once again begun to intensify. The ba-
lance in Lebanon which had been a divided rule by two powers since the 1976
civil war-“the Lebanese progressive forces and Palestinian revolutionary
forces which rule over the area ranging south fron Beirut. the Lebanese capi-
tal. to the Israeli border. and the rightist. fascist Kataib forces based in

the northern region-“has begun to be destroyed by the provocation of the
rightist faction. At present. Israeli cooperation which had foraerly been
carried out in secrecy has meet! with joint tactics based on an overt
ellience between Israel and the northern Ksteih forces. The direct csuse of
the civil wer originated when the rightists started construction on s ni‘litsry
roed tieing the scsttered rightist regions to the south; this is hssed on s
pincer stretegy with Isreel. This signifies the rightists will sever the
Syrien supply route to the Pelestinien forces in the south end will encircle
end isolsts the osuth. Attenpts to reunite Lehenon under the power of the
rightists have started es en ectusl plen.

The Areh peece keeping forces hewe d-ended e stop to construction of the
rosd end withdrswel of the rightist troops; the struggle hes intensified
with the provocstion and the we: situstion hes expended through the protec-
tion of lsreeli fire. end hes stsrted to spresd fron one region to the entire
area.

The Palestinien led forces continue to confront niliterily the deily provo-
cstion end sir ettecks of the rightists and Israel; and holding the 15th
Pslestinien Rational Assdy on 11 April. they explicitly spelled out the
snti-inperielist, enti-Zionist struggle es en anti-0.8., snti-Isrsel, enti-
rightist confrontstion.

Then. they nsde a resolution to strengthen their cooperation with the Lebenese
progressive forces. Syria end the Soviet Union.

Heemhile, es for the revolutionary situation in Letin Anerice. with the
victory of the Nicsregnsn revolution as the opportunity, the anti-0.8.. enti-
nilitery dictetorship. Lstin Anericsn. snti-inperielist forces of Centrsl
Anerics. for whon the El Selvsdor struggle is the clinex. heve united end
allying the-selves with the Mideast end socielist countries have spreed the
snti-iqerielist struggle.

In the nidst of the intensificetion of worldwide tension, such as the Polish
snd Lstin Anericen situetions, the enemy is intensifying the provocetion.
hsving esde enti-co-unisn end snti-Sovietisn the denrcstion line; the eneny's
intervention in the Hidesst hes ceused s linkage with the intensification of
the Lehenese civil wsr.

2. The ens-y hes sdvsnced a chess of confrontstion end provocetion with anti-
co-unia end snti-Sovietisn es the key.

Sin:e Resgsn eppeered on the scene, as csn be seen in the snti-co-unist,
anti-Soviet propegende ectivity during Secretary of State Isig's visit to the
Mideast in April. the enst hes strengthened its posture of confrontation
with military power es the exis. sgeinst the worldwide edvence of the anti-
iqerielist struggle end hes reinforced its enti-revolutionsry answers

in an offensive revs-ping of its enti-co-unist stretegy.

nun the revolutionery victory of Vietnen in the 70's as the daercstion
line, the may pressed for s rev-ping of its enti-co-unist nilitery elli-
enoe. end by neens of its dsngerous eggreesion sgeinst the progressive forces
who sin st the people's liheretion. denocrscy end socielisn. that is, the

2
the strategy of power and ailitary provocation of the 80's, a desperate
rollback of capitali- has started, deepening the danger. Its distinctive
feature is first of all. intervention in the socialist countries with an
anti-Soviet strategy as the asix; secondly. its distinctive feature is to
stave off the weakening of inerialisl's political. economic and nilitary
control of the "third world;" they are pronoting class differentiation
with anti-co-unisa and snti-Sovietisa as the denarcation. and loving ahead
with the capitalistic revaning of demoracy. In the Mideast. joint Arab-
Israeli control and, as the concept of the second Can David. disasntling
of anti-Zionist at the religious level by the nationalist rightists and the
formation of an anti-Soviet encircleaent net are being advanced. That is
nanifested in the intensification of the ens-y's sunken-confrontation
and internal destruction—against the progressive forces of Palestine and
Syria and the anti-inerislist forces. Such scheming is tied to the present
Lebanese civil war. Thirdly, they are trying to unify and regulate the con-
tradictions within i-perialisl with anti-co-unisa and anti-Sovietisn as the
axis.

These are life and death issues for inerialisn and for their realization,
first of all. they will establish a collective security syste- with lilitary
power as the axis on the basis f a superiority of power. Secoadly, in order
to press for a national reorganization suitable to this anti-co-unist. anti-
Soviet systeu. they will build up nationalistic exclusivisn as the anti-Soviet
anti-conunist ideology. And thirdly. with the revoling of hunn rights di-
plomacy, and the coabining of nilitary fascisn and inerialisn on a world-
wide scale. the world lines have been drawn delineating whether anti-co-un-
ist and anti-Soviet or not.

Reagan's policies have strengthened this bellicose tendency even further.
In Asia. the intensification of the anti-conunist, united strategy with
Japanese iaperialisn. the nilitaristic rave-ping of Japanese iaperialisa
asnifested in the switch from lulu-directional diplonscy to anti-Soviet
diploaacy. and the alliance with Chun Doo Ewan are moving forward to an en-
gulf-ant of China.

In order to suppress revolution in Central and South America. the "frontyard
of the 0.8.," they have begun strengthening the propping up of anti-co-unist
nilitary dictatorships and the direct intervention in suppressing the pro
greasive forces. they have brought about the intensification of the anti-v.8.
struggel in various countries where Cuba and Ricaragua are behind the revolu-
tion. and in the neantine. they are repeating their vigorom posture of urg-
ing the governing class in various countries toward an anti-comnist. anti-
Soviet decision.

With an anti-conunist strategy linking Poland and Latin America. the enemy
has created the danger of constant war in the Mideast.

Although the revamping of imperialist control by 0.8. iaperialisl which nskes
this anti-co-unisn and anti-Sovietisa the denrcation line is supported and
strengthened as a nutual strategic lifeline through European and Japanese
Inpcrislisn, and at the one tine, contradictory to the sch-e of colonial
donination of various countries, its direction rains in the groping stage
because of conflict.

The isperialist countries view an anti-commist. anti-Soviet. cooperative.
anti-revolutionary alliance as a collective security systen for prolonging
the capital theory which dusnds the pursuit of profits because of the re-
treat of 0.3. inperialisn's centralised unity and the progress of 'the pro-
gressive forces. However, these countries are restricted in the face of
thier own inperislist pursuit of profits, are unable to resolve this and are
deepening still nore the contradictions and expanding their ferocity.

With the anti-counnist strategy as the key, nodern inerialisn shows its
basic character in being compelled to "restrict" the blind pursuit of pro-
fits and the rivalry anong the inperialist ocuntries by scans of political
power. The nature of inparialiss hes not changed; it is restricted by the
struggle with the socialist forces born froa capitalise. is unable to resolve
the contradiction and denands the prolongation of capitalist production. And
the socialist forces born fron capitalism are also constantly restricted by
the struggle with capitalist forces and are unable to actualise the building
of socialise in one country as a pure culture. and then forn the transition
to a world socialist systen which advances, overconing the restrictions and
errors.

we lust stand fir: in the struggle between inperialist forces which try to
prolong this capitalist production relationship and. in opposition to then,
the forces denending advencenent with socialian as the densrcation line of
fighting people. This basic contradiction penetrates everything through
and through just as no setter how such one cuts a nagnet. plus and ninus
renain. Plus and ninus exist in the individual, in the group, in capitalist
countries, in socialist countries. It goes without saying that for this
reason the sctualization of revolution is required even nore in the position
of capitalist criticism. including self-criticism

3. Let‘s fight the enenys provocation which has anti-comisn end anti-Sov-
ietisn es the demarcation line; and let's strengthen our anti-inerialist
encirclelaent net.

At present, the ens-y has set about revamping the cysts. on a world scale
with anti-conunisn and snti-Sovietisn as the delercetion line.

The intensification of class contradiction between inperialisn which is based
on an anti-cc-unist strategy and the forces wanting world wocialisn. includ-
ing the people of our own inperielist country who oppose ilperialisn, has
produced an aggravation of U.8.-Soviet confrontation as a consequence. Aside
fro- whether the Soviet route is revisionist or not. the Soviet existence is
organically connected to the struggle in our own inerialist country and the
strmle of the third world which desires a people's liberation; objectively.
it is in the positon of being the neterial essence of the struggle and for that
reason. the anti-Sovietisn of inerialisn has increased.
What is required is recognizing the world class struggle as a unity, under-
standing its distinctive featm' e as the essence of class and carrying on
the struggle in each country for the liberation of the united worker class
of the world.

Not looking at the essence of U.S.-Soviet confrontation. and. as a conse-
quence of that. advocating from the viewpoint of one country so anti-social-
ist iwerslist or anti-Stalin strategy or a ”vodka-cola" theory will result
in being unable to grasp the world class struggel as a united class contra-
diction; and not looking at the reel world has the direction of the people's
revolution in various countries or in the dynamic view of what the USSR did
or did not do will end up distoring the world.

The reality in which the revolutionary forces, who seek socialiss in the Mid-
eaet, Latin Anerica, Africa and Asia, discerning the eneaies of the people.
stand up to fight agath imperialism, and unite in recognition of the social-
ist countries as strategic friends and fight to dissolve the satierial of
capitalism is behind the people's struggle against Japanese inerialiss.

a. How shall we fight the struggle based on internationaliss?

How should we fight in order to actualize the Japanese revolution in unity
with the world revolution and to sctuelize the liberation of Japan's worker
class and citizens as part of the world's citizens?

In the past, we looked at internationalism from the lofty sacrifice of Che
Guevsrra that internetionalism is fighting for the actualiaation of a unified
world progressive independence and the readiness to sacrifice willingly for
other people. however, we were unable to grasp the struggle at our in feet

as the realization of internetionalies, and being unable to determine ourselves
whether our own actual way of fighting is internationalism or not. built a
Great Hall between internationaliss and reality; we were fighting within the
country while only looking efer. Real internationalism is shown in how one
fights now in one's own place, not sonewhere far away.

In order for the worker class and all people to liberate themselves from the
yoke of capitalism, the world's workers must unite and throw off the control
of capitalism. The worker class and oppressed people and races. who have been
placed in a canon destiny by isperielisa with its anti-conuniss as the main
point and who organised because of that. will continue fighting to "gain value
as a person.'.' (Marx) a mutual benefit crossing all borders. Being conscious
of the class confrontation and linking together class consciousness by means
of the value of the homogeneity of allies in the whole world is the fight
which will gain value as a person. For that reason, it will be shown as a
person's attitude toward people crossing over all people and borders. It

is shown in whether one can or cannot consider the people of other countries
who are placed in a canon destiny as our own problem.

The worker class in their own inerialist ocuntries. separated by national
borders. understanding the mechanism of class confrontation and capitalism
and discovering their own social existence. have power and self-awareness
when confronting the enemy. Then when this is negatively linked to universal
value. through the diecovary of eociel eriate nce and the affirmative under-
standing of thanaelvee, an attitude toward people placed in a co-on deatiny
is required an the eubetance of the nature of clean. Sinilarly. when citi-
zone who ate at the people'a liberation graap the real aituation in which
people are placed because of inerialiat control and continue to diaevow the
excluaiviet tendency through the eteedfaet atruggle for the eetahliahnent of
the people, and when thia ia linked to universal valuea, the attitude toward
people with a co-on deatiny ie d-anded en the auhatence of cleae. Inter-
nationalien ia nurtured on the baaie to thie amathy.

while the torn which power takee ie a one etate power. "claeeneea" ie tomd
in the ideology which conaidera- other people with a coma deetiny and the
people'a etruggle in one nation ea one'a own. and thin in the heaia of inter-
netionelien. that in, the co-onality of attitude with caredea in neighboring
countriee.

We think that in the peat we put great value on the ion of ”internationalien"
and did not underatand the aubetance.

The fight to actualize intemtionalian ia naniieated in the perty'a line.
policy and tactica ea its political poeiton, based on the fundanental apirit
of internationaliee. The queation ie on the baeia of whet poaition ahall
we fight in order for the world'a people to be united an a clean.

Bow did Lenin carry out internetionalien?

Lenin'e poeiton and coneciouaneee of purpooe waa alwaya in the torn of a world
united proletariat. When the overthrow of the our ia coneidered, upon re-
flection. the denand to reeolve the people'a problem appeere becauae the
unity with alliee ia kept in nind. when one verifiee one'a own poaiton by the
poaition of other people and other countriea, one can greap the link in the
condition of homogeneity (that ia, unity). The haeie of Lenin'a ideee ia
ahown here.

When inperilian created a world eyeten and becene the eneny of the people
through a aeriea of joint oppreaaion of the people. Lenin needed to conquer
the nationliat tendency. which prevented cleea eolidarity, and, trenecending
people and nations, the coanopolitanietic tendency to any that people'a prob-
lene do not exist. The development of inequality of people in the product
of inerialiat control, end ao. it ie neceeaery to create conditione of true
equality end inpertielity along nationa. both ideologically and naterially.
through the nediationof the party'a ideology of homogeneity which trenecende
people. The frectionalired nation it aubleted and power leading a united
people to a world aocielien with clean unity at the aria ie foetared. The
reaaon Lenin nade a diatinciton between oppreaaor and oppreeaed wee to con-
quer the obetelcee to unity. Lenin hoiated eelf-deternination of people ea
the precondition of free unity, not ilperialiaa'a emulaory ”unity" (anal-
genetion) or "aeparation" (territorial aeparetion); fighting ageinat i-perial-
ain. oppreeaed people will liberate thaeelvaa apontanaoualy.

Likewiae. he eade it clear that eince the lueaian revolution. even though the
etruggle between the two valuee of socialian and capitalise ie the fmdeeen—
tel contradiction. it ie poeeible for "developing nationa" to advance direct-
1y into socialian without going through capitalise; and the Soviet experience
applies to feudal or semi-feudal agrarian relationships. The anti-ilperialist
struggle can be carried on without the need for the proletariat and petty
bourgeoisie; thus he allowed the development of the party to the position of
winning class unity along peoples, toward the value of socialism In Lenin's
presentation of the probla. the may was always clear and that was penetrated
through and through with the consciousness of purpose of how to united with
allies in order to triulph.

Lenin's ideological position was unable to be carriee through into the strug-
gle after the third international novaent.

In referring to the oondtions of that tile, the 1928 general plan of inter-
nationel co-unisn provided for the "significance of the USSR and its inter-
national revolutionary duty." It prescribed as the key point that "the 1188!
is perforning the role of prototype of the brotherly nutual relationship of
people in all countries gathered together into a world union of soviet soci-
alist republics which is supposed to be set up before long-and the prototype
of econonic unity of the workers of all countries for a single. socialist
world economy." The basis of the theory of Soviet socialisn as the proto-
type was expressed in this. Then after that, socialise was victorious and
in the process of giving birth to several socialist countries after the

tine when there was only the USSR. internatioaal support was required for
the formation of conditions of equality among nations and people. The new
socialist countries were also required to perforn the role of "prototype"
and to bring forth the transition to a single, socialist world econouy
through the formation of conditons of equality on the basis fo the people's

self-supporting econouy .

however, the Soviet Union. the precursor, could not help the new socialist
countries build a people's self-supporting econon based on the rebirth by
their own power, dependent on their own people for the purpose of overcoming
the develop-eat of inequality. the legacy of for-er iqerialist control.
Conversely. because they froze the developnant of inequality, the legacy of
forner imperialist control, and noreover, built on the basis of the expansion
of socialism, they for-ed the condtions wherein the socialist economies in
various countries would set up a division of labor, and b-case the root
cause leading to the present contradiction. At the sane tine. there is also
the problen of autonoqy for those receiving aid. The nutual relationship
which was unable to create equality of the people caused a regression in the
unity of socialist countries and gave birth to a history of confrontation
and dependence.

What is the link which will defeat the enely and unify allies?

we have learened from the present socialist countries that if we do no Interi-
alize the cor-on struggle, asking it the nutual value. it is ispossible to
sublate the contradiction along people to the condition of true equality and
class unity.
5. The aain point of internationaliaa is anti-uperialian and rebirth through
one's own power.

At. present. it is required that internationalisn unify allies on the basis

of a "position of anti-inerialiss and rebirth thromh one's own power."

In a word, that nesns that on the basis of the ”position of fighting against
imperialist and fighting with dependence on the power of one's own people.”
the leaders of the people learned a Iutual lesson and achieve the unification
of allies for a world proletariat independence.

At present. in the situation where the value system of "socialise” differs in
any ways. fighting on the basis of giving isportance to what met be grasped
as the link in the unification of allies and on the basis of how we can fight
so that the struggle of various people and nations will becoee unified ates
it possible to create conditions in which we can fight together the class
struggle beyond the seas in the neaning of the value of oneness.

The present daily struggle confronts inerialisn's class control and oppres-
sion of the people on the basis of the capitalist production relationship

and thereby foras a socialist consciousness and on the basis of the socialist
production relationship forns the relationship of persons with new persons.

To the extent that the capitalist production relationship exists, socialist
countries and socialist forces are not free and are constantly influenced by
it. Therefore. they nuat work for unity for the liberation of the world work-
er class by unifying the party's consciousness of purpose on the basis of anti-
iaperialise and fight relying on the people of their own country who are the
fountainhead of anti-isperialist power. In this point of view it is possible
to view the single preparations as having a duality whereby establish-ant of
Japanese socialise for the first tile will perforls the role of being an inter-
national base of operations on the basis of a people's self-supporting econoqy.

At present. without a world party. the more the socialist practice of party
led forces is restricted to a single country. the nore it is liable to bend to
the interests of that one country. Rather. it is required that we understand
the world situation as a unity and that we advance. firmly grasping the link
of unity for the canon objective.

we can see any lessons in the world struggle. One lesson is that we will
certainly give birth to deviation if we cannot fight with anti-inperialisn
and rebirth through one's own power as the key points.

The Afghanistan People's Desocratic Party seized power in a coup d'etat. even
though their position is anti-imperialist, they were unable to fore the party
role of relying on the people and helping the people. On account of that, the
result was that they overcane the contradictions and confronted imerialiss
relying on Soviet power.

Further-ore, as for the problem of the party in Poland. to the extent it de-

pended on Soviet power over a long period of tine after the establishaent of
the socialist state and was unable to draw on the power of the people, the
fountainhead of power, it was unable to pull together the power of the people
and was unable to sake the desires and creativity of the people the power of

the party.

The direction of future develop-cut is indicated in whether or not the revolu-
tion of the party which is desired by the independent labor union (Solidarity)
can be nade the power of the anti-imperialist struggle and the establishlent
of the state.

There is also the lesson of China's anti-socialist ilperislist line.

The lesson is that if. after the one state seisure of power, the class contra-
diction in one's own country is not understood as united with the world class

contradiction and if the world class confrontation is nderstood as a duality
with the contradiction in one's own country as the nucleus, there will be a
fall into a nationalist tendency.

Self-reliant birth (rebirth through one‘s own power) is power dependent on

the people, and if this is not tied to the anti-inperialist struggle to liquid-
ate capitalist production which is the fundasental contradiction of the world
class struggle. the result will be a prolongation of inperialisn and the de-
struction of the gains of our revolution.

There is also the lesson of Soviet assistance to anti-imperialist countries
and people.

On the one hand, the Soviet Union followed an international line based on its
two policies of relaxation of tensions with inperialisn through detente and
assistance to the "third world." Aid to forces taking on the anti-imperialist
struggle is being given as backing for the revolutionary forces of the "third
world."

Especially under the present world situation in which the anti-revolutionary
governing class in various countries tries to crush the revolution in various
countries with the backing of 0.8. iaperielisa and by neans of the power of
an international, anti-revolutionary alliance, the revolutionary forces in
various countries are requesting an alliance of regional and international
anti-inperialist forces to confront this in each country. However, if the
revolution in various countries is not carried on with the power of the people
the-selves in those countries, it will be unable to create the fountainhead
of true anti-inperialist power and will be unable to continue the anti-imperi-

aliat fight.

If they are unable to organize the synpathies of the people and to carry on
the people‘s struggle in a country independently, this will give birth to
dependence and they will be unable to fora the conditions for true equality.

The sane is true for us. In the process of creating a brotherly union with .
our comrades and friends in the world. with the joint struggle of the Pales-
tinian revolution as the departure point, we sublated our own mutual individual
interests and created a mutual relationship of equality. fighting toward the
coupon objectiVe of anti-isperialian iron the position of carrying our respons-
ibility by relying on the people of our own country.

In this process, from our own self-criticisn, we have made lessons of the
fight against the :ontrol-non-control tendency. the fight against the nation-
alist inclination and the fight against the tendency to make rebirth through
our own power the total substance. In that, we have learned to grasp the con-
ditions which unite the national inequality of class based on the party a
equality as the sublation of contradiction.

we fir-1y believe that the process wherein, as the main points of internation-
alism. the revolutionary forces adhere to the position of anti-imerialisn
and rebirth through one's own power, and learning together, help each other
and bring the lessons to life by leans of the antual party revolution which
sakes the revolution one, is the process which will overthrow the enemy and
unite the fighting forces of the world.

Under present circumstances. the world appears complicated at a glance. In-
perialist control is clever, and on ther other hand, socialist countries are
fighting each other and it see-s that socialism which was the fortress of the
people's hope is dissolving. Some people have lost hope in socialisn, sone
people say it is the final days of Stalinisa. and none people criticize the
hegenony and big powerism; and some people explain that it has no relation-
ship with socialisa, but is a confrontation between nationalists.

However, the reality is that these facts have clearly given profitable nsterial
to the inerialists.

It is an unmistakable fact that this is not only a difficulty for the people
of the country in question, but is the nain factor hindering the fight of those
fighting with the aim of actualizing socialise.

However, historically speaking, capitalism has a 200 year history, calculated
free the industrial revolution: socialism only has the experience of some 60
years since the Russian revolution. Socialisn which was born out of the filth
of capitalism is in the process of creating, struggling and establishing a
country, and in those restrictions is advancing by assaluting those any
errors. we think that we who are late in establishing socialisn nust stand

in the position of winning socialisn in the right direction by neans of the
generalization of lessons, studying and overseeing the errors as our own prob-
less. In the past, Lenin .said "Marxisn has done no nore than place one corner-
stone of science which nust advance in every direction." The value of com-
nunisn's struggle is in reforming reality; and in that reality. the main posi-
tion of revolution is in correcting errors. linking them to victory. To con-
denn the USSR and give up hope for China and Vietnam as not being correct
socialisn indicates the lack of generalization to our own fight.

Conversely. it is required that understanding socialism nore correctly and

pulling lessons fro. reality, we temper the direction of today's struggle as
steps toward the actualiaation of what kind of socialist. shall we actualise

10
and how shall we for: the Japanese revolution as an international base of opera-
tions.

And we would like to excel in carrying out this struggle with Japanese citizens.
conrsdes and friends.

6. Let's grasp the proper role for the party in the lesson of Japan's class
struggle.

Just as we were. the party. which rust Ianifest leadership power in Japan's
class struggle, has not correctly understood the role of the party. As s re-
sult, we think that we lust decisively face the reality of being unable to
fight on the basis of the key points of internstionslien .the direction of
Japan's class struggle in unity with the world revolution.

we frequently had the chance to recapture the value of the party and the role
of the party, as we recaptured our defeat in the 70's and as we learned the
lessons and experiences together with our world conrsdes and friends. In
Japan's class struggle. we understood the value of the party within the nove-
nent and tactics of the reality of whether it is "a fighting party or not."
On account of that, the nain duty overseas was fighting to unify the "organi-
zation by neans of the nutual sued struggle." In a word. it was to place the
role of the party in the activity of such stove-ents as the armed struggle. to
escalate revolutionary tactics and try to for: a non-cowronise on the "fight-
ing party." The Red Arly'a defeat and errors departed fro. these values and
unable to sublets, spread a blight on the revolution to the very foundation.
In the translation tactics of 1976 and 1975 and in the defeat resulting in
the arrest and confession of defendant Stoke, we verified that the novenent'e
progress would not necessarily strengthen m. and reversing the way that

"the nain point of our party" should put value on "fighting." we recaptured
the party's role fron a positon of asking the worker class and the people

the sain point of the revolution. Going from the ides that we are central

to the idea that the worker class and people are central. in short. on the basis
of the principle of the penple, we recaptured the way the new left should be
as our own problen. At that tine. we could not help but feel deeply what
kind of for-nation process the Japanese class struggle was in and even in that.

arrived at the present situation. unable to nake the fundanental generaliza-
tion.

Prior to the war. the Japan Oo-uniet Party. our precursors. did not face
squarely the reality of not being able to fight as an organization: and

were unable to grasp the lesson fron the dissolution of the isportsnt leader-
ship body 15 years prior to the war. and entrusted itself without generali-
zation in the uplifting flow of democratization. The axis of party concen-
tration consistenly depended on commas and, not generalizing the lack of
unity which should be the basis. started out after the war as well with

this is tow.

Because of the non-generalization, sublstion of the party's dissolution paid
honage to the novaent's breakthroughand srned struggle. and brought about
defeat in 1975. So. generalization was basically required, but they still
could not grasp the correct role of thepsrty in the generalization of the
problen of 1975 and coling to the present. they were unable to sublste the
the singleneaa of the tendency of assist. planning and the tendency of action
planning and this resulted in the realization of tin new left. the Japan
Co-unist Party. The fund-anal question of lamina-is- and minute-is.
called into question prior to the war, is nothing mre than the result of
being unable to properly grasp the role of the party, that is. the proper
conditom of the relationship between the party and the people, and also

in tht 197$ problus. they were unable to sﬁlate

He nade a lesson out of our own defeat. as we studied the defeat of our pre-
decessors; "we lust carry cut the revolution of the leadership forces as a
struggle in oneness with the generalization of the Japanese co-rnist nove-
nent. and the key point is to grasp the role of the party. learning iron the
1975 Problea.

He know that in that problen. our predecessors learned a lesson fron pain

and recaptured the organisation. that is. the party's value. That was the
"two-legged" line of establish-cut of the party ad answering of the senses.
and this gained success in the anese of "organisational tactics;" and on the
other hand, because the sect which stayed behind in the unchanged organisa-
tion for the struggle of the assess added up non-generalizations. it was
learned they could not bring about the party's rebirth.

“owner, we think that we oust face squarely that the fact that with the 1975
problen we truly could not asks a generalisation on the role of the party

is nanifested in our present day insufficiency. First of all. that cannot
be taken as eelf-criticsin because. with Stalinis- as the problem of Stalin.
we put ourselves in the position of being the'target for external overthrow
or in the position of victin; and it was indicated in the fact that actually
we are founded on the Stalinist view of the infallibility of the party even
though we say we are anti-Stalinist.

We think that conquering the view of the infallibility of the party which

is found in the position of party equals universality is the struggle which
surpasses Stalinisn and the struggle to conquer the syste- of party as center.
The one-sided aphasia that "the experience of one person cannot be set up
against the erperien-e of the world party" brought about the death of the

party.

If we consider ourselves the universality. the essence will becone a non-self-
swarenesa that we are part of the class and have restrictions on the natural
growth and understanding which are geographically and historically ordained.
If we are one-sidedly founded on this subjectivity. we would take it that the
party cannot mks errors because of its "universality." and errors are the
responsibility of the individual or an external cause and we would deal with
the tonal logic of which is correct. because of that, we would be unable to
allow Marxian to develop for the victory of the revolution. And so. value is
put on the universality of the party; that is conservative.

If there is no generalisation reeling the partiality of the party. in strug-

gling against that and always revolutionizing the party. "universality" will
fall into being a dead dogls. Pron there. the united struggle toward the

12
seizure of power will not case forth and the united front will fall into being
a subordinate organisation of the party. Then secondly, as prescribed in the
above state-ants, what should be done is not put value on whether or not real-
ity was changed for the objective but put value on the correctness of what was
said. We think that in the value criteria of the revolution which put value
on actual change. if what was said asterializes its subjectivity is correct.
and if it does not asterislize, the subjectivity is not correct because it did
not correspond to the rule.

Thirdly, there is the question of responsibility.

The party which actualizes the revolution eust advance. leading the generaliza-
tions and precepts as the part concerned with the entire class struggle as

Our problee. "hen the worker class and people are considered central, evil
flows in the offense end defnese between the ens-y and the worker cless and
people. no setter what the defeat of other organizations. we think that the
leadership which undertakes to overcone that can truly fore the capability

of the wroker class and people. That is because the party is created and
chosen by the worker class and people.

7. Let's practice internstionaliss by properly grasping the role of the party.
Generalization creates the foundation and fares the consciousness of purpose.

The consciousness of purpose is not aoeething distant. it aetersines the pre-
sent way of fighting and the capability to judge. In that sense. we learned
the lesson that the key to the question of leadership of Japan's class strug-
gle which has not been conquered is in the i975 problee. and we learned free
that con-conquest the actual lesson of our predecessors--the lesson of whet
is the role of the party.

That is, first of all, to grasp the role of the party fro. the relationship
between the party and the people, that is, the wrokar class and peeple then-
selves are the nucleus of the revolution, end-the party carries out the role
of assisting in its actualization. secondly. in order to actualize the liber-
ation of the world united worker clans as part of the world revolution. the
central role in which the party must assist is: 1. it nust aim at asking the
revolution hosogeneous to internationaliss; 2. it must fora the conditions for
a seizure of power; 3. it lust take on the responsiblity of tieing individual
struggles to the battle for-ation of insurrection and of having an autononoue
political and ailitsry capacity and a party organization. Thirdly, eateriel-
istically, the party is part of the worker class. and the essence of that part
is to assist the worker calss and people by having a party organisation based
on a plan for internstionalisa. seizure of power and revolt. The party aust
constantly unify (by by study and generalization) the people's coialist prac-
tices. By scans of this. self-criticise which revolutionizes us points out
the practice of the party's consciousness of purpose as the party's judgment.
He think that making unity the position by means of generalization. in short.
when we give life to the revolution of the party via generalization, us can
truly esterialize the capability of the party on a continual basis.

l3
Lenin submitted the role of the party as follows in his draft on the general
principles of socialise written in 1896 while in Peterhurg prison.

"The Russian social-desocretic party declares as its own duty to develop the
worker class consciousness. to help in their organisation and to assist the
struggle of the Russian worker class by neans of pointing out the duty and ob-
jective of the struggle." ("Ce-entary and Treatise on the General Principles
of the Social-demoratic Party.")

On the point of "how nust we tie the air of socialist: with-the people's nove-
nent born free the life conditions of the ages old aia of trying to do away
with the exploitation of nan by nn created in the large factories." Lenin
stipulated that " the party's activity is to help the class struggle of the
workers" and "to assist the workers in thie struggle which they (the workers)
have already begun theneelves."

We think that when trying to carry out the party's role fro. the viewpoint of
this assistance. we were able to reap the direction of the struggle which is
always tied to the consciousness of purpose and through the study of the now:-
aent's spontaneous generation and individuality, and to work out the strategy
of the plan to seize political power.

The role of the party is not to cause the perception that "the party is uni-
versality." and is not party centris- (naking the party central) which sub-
stantially united nan around the party. but on the contrary. it is to point
out the direction by neans of increasing the cognitive ability to generalize
the people's eocinl practice. standing together with and as part of the class.
toward the present objective of the revolution and the ultilate objective.
Ordinarily. it is to assist in jointly unifying thought toward the objective.
putting value on changing reality. It is to nurture the power which will al-
low every opportunity to materialize into a victorious transforaation of the
revolution. by neans of preparing independently and underground the conditions
for the asterialiration and for the seisure of power.

We think that the root of the weakness of the Japanese class struggle is the
fact that it is not cut off fron neterialisn. He think that we nuet question
the values of Marxist-Lennie. and the party role by looking squarely at the
overall facts of social relations. seen fro. the actualiration of the ob-
jectives. not the fact of actualisation nor one-aided facts for ourselves.

it is not to insist on and verify the correctness but to allow each defeat to
he changed to victory within the actualisstion of a "loss until we win" class
struggle. Because of that. it is to collectively unify the individual strugo
glee of the worker class and people. to green the direction of the struggle
fro. the viewpoint of solving the strategic power question and international
relations; and to assist the nein struggle of the worker class and the people
the-selves by neans of returning it again to the worker class and people.

And we think that we trust expedite the party‘s autonoaous preparations suitable
to the battle formation of insurrection. and we lust mks use of tactics for
victory.

16
If we cannot grasp the role of the party which sakes the workers and the
people the nucleus, we will be unable to truly take on the role of seizing

the struggle of the Japanese worker class and people honogensons as one part
of the world revolution and we will be unable to actualiee' the class hosogene-
ity and unity of various peoples beyond nationalist exclusiviss.

while there is equality, whether a large country or snail country. in the

class vlsue, at the sane tins. historically oppressed and oppressor exist asong
the various races. The party mes internationalian to create conditions
which will overcoue the differences of people in order that the worker class

and people of various races will fight together with the value of oneness
and toward one objective.

He think that in the Japanese oomunist sovessnt. the question of international-
iss has not yet been resolved.

Certainly, the Japanese (Io-unist Party began to derive the party's equality
and the party's independence iron the generalization of commas. Howaver,
because the Japan Co-unist Party is unable to grasp the role of the party

of tenaciously airing the people the nucleus of the revolution, there is the
weakness for the Japan Co-unist Party of only having an independent line in
its relations with theparties of other foreign countries. That is because in
the Japanese class struggle they were unalbe to grasp as isportant how to fight
at present toward siting the Japanese people's struggle honogenous with a single
world worker class. On account of that, in the anti-inperialist struggle, we
would not see the Japanese position in the real world of oppressing people

and our struggle is restricted to a nationl. one-country situation, placing
Japn in the position of independence free 0.8. isperialisn

To the extent it is a struggle of the people in imperialist countries. we sust
snake the anti-imrialist struggle fully understood in s proletariat inter-
nationaliss. However. free the viewpoint of considering the party's equality.

we are unable to grasp the world position of the class struggle in Japan.

The question of strategy of the Japanese revolution has also brought about
a one nation tendency became of that.

Internstionsliss cannot be actualired unless penetrated through and throagh

with the viewpoint of bieng in union with allies and sutuslly supporting each
other while fighting against one enely in order that the people of the world
will be victorious in a single buss liberation and class liberation.

The reality in which, being unable to clarify the difference between enelly and
ally. the attitude of criticising neighboring leadership forces as our own
basic position in order to prove that we are universality, whether subjectively

or not. objectively gives a period of grace to imperialist cont’ol. cannot
be overcom.

15
we think that the way to fight against national exclusivian is to confront our
own country's inperialisa and consciously units as anti-iapcrialist forces
one part of the international anti-incrialist struggle, no latter what the
differences in their line. and through that, change the differences into a
class hooogeneity. It is required that ve prepare to fight for seissure of
pover at the present tine o! the Japanese revolution as one part of the vorld
revolution based on the understanding of world unity.

8. "hat is the current condition of the Japanese clsss struggle?

More and sore it is required that we take on part of the world class strugle,
based on internstionslisn as the nucleus. The ectualisation of international,-
in occupies the ilportsnt position of toning the condtiona in vhich the op-
pressed people confront the canon en-y via the anti-iaperialist struggle
and the struggle for the overthrov of inperialian in one's own country by the
worker class end people of ilperialist countries.

At present, in the retreat of 0.8. ilperialisn and the anti-co-unist strategy
by vrold ilperialisn. Japanese inperialisn is advancing in the direction of
achieving its own inerielist profit while carrying out the role as the politi-
cal end military stronghold in Asia. The distinctive feature of the revaqing
of Japanese ilperialisn with anti-co-unin as the nain point cannot be seen
simly as a push by 0.8. ilperielian. Likevise. at the sale tile, it cannot

be seen as the eapeneion of the contradiction between ilperialiss and 0.8.
isperilisn nor as the edition for independence. Inerialisa can only be pro-
longed by the sutuslity of anti-co-unist strategy vorld vide and cannot help
but control rivaly betveen i-periliats by leans of political power. For that
reason, Japanese i-perialisn has developed policies with a dualiss of discover-
ing its own interests in the prolongation of coope-ative iqerielisn and de-
siring its ovn interests in that.

At present, they are in the stage of ansolidsting their on base vithin the
country as they discover that view in the anti-co-unist. anti-Soviet collec-
tive security system. weathering the crisis of the 70's which loved to a col-
lapse of the "1980 Systa" with an absolute ujority of conservatives in the
double election. and on the basis of generalisation of the 70's. we are planning
qualitative changes in the 80's.

The enesy's clever attack is being expedited by the national consensus by leans
of the sobilieation of the ease nedia. local governing bodies and various nat-
ional organisations as the pronotion of nilitarisn and reectionisu fro. belov.

0n the basis of anti-columnist. anti-Soviet exclusivisn. the eneny is now
pushing for militarization on s daily basis. nelting 1983 the target date, as
seen iron the speech on constitutional reforn by liinister of Justice Okuno.
the resolution on national defense, the "constituional revision resolution"

16
which nade use of local governing bodies, and the exaggerated interpretation
of the constitution to "statutory constitutional revisions." Hith the najori-
ty control as the background, the ener controlling class. looking at now as
the opportunity for nilitariration. is designing Iilitarization in every field,
such as the idea of a conference on cuprehensive security, the dispatch of
troops and theplan for conscription.

This way of acting deepens the confrontation for the worker class and people,
and expands even further the chronic dpression. the decline in real wages

and rationalisation. and nkes the uncertainty and instability of life nore
serious. Making the internetinal problea and anti-co-unist exclusivisn
public. and instigating confrontation along peopel, they are turning the
worker class to the right and strengthening their control by division on the
basis of national gain and national defense. In production. workplace control

is being advanced in the industry's inforlstion with the alliance as the nu-
cleus.

Regarding the fact the alliance is unified by the anti-co-unist ideology of
"labor unionisn" under the nane of labor front unity, the Gernal Council of
Trade Unions of Japan has started to break up. unable to possess a line which
will change that.

The Japan Conunist Party has expanded the contradiction between the Japan
Conunist Part y and the General Council of Trade Unions of Japan by system-
tically setting the unified labor union groups of the left against the General
Council of Trade Unions of Japan. On the other hand, the monopolistic capi-
tal, the country and governIent have unified and are extending their total
personal control to all people. The schene for ideological and physical uni-
fied control over all areas of production. distribution and consumption is
expressed as control of life as hmns.

Likewise, while advancing a systmtic dissolution and personal destruction
toward the revolutionary forces from their ideology which has anti-columnists
and anti-Sovietisn as the key points, they are planning the oppression of the
people who are fighting indefatigahly end the strengthening of public order
and econonic clasp-down.

Against such novenents by the may, the revolutionary political party is un-
able to sufficiently institute a strategic direction from the generalizations
and lessons of the 70's.

If we do not prepare for a fight which never loses sight of the eneny and the
strategic fight by neans of putting the party which is one part of the worker
class into a social relationship and standing togethr with the worker class
and people and firmly grasping the key points of the enemy's attacks, we will
be unable to confront the plan for reactionisn and militarization fron the
battle front. It is required that we stiffen the strategy and tactics of the
people to constantly fight against party centrist which concentrates the worker
class into the "position of theparty."

l7
Likewise, even in the anti-governs” political parties, we are unahle to
for- the concept of cahined political power with the power of the people as
the basis. and because our political has is anclusiviat. having entrusted
the people's spontaneously developing and i-ediate desires to the unity of
the eneay’e exclusi'wisn for national gain and national defense. we are unable
to confront than.

The present situation is the result of the people. political parties and poli-
tical factions advocating oppostion iron their own position. individually and
in various classes ad groups. and the link for strategic unity has not yet
been grasped.

9. Fight against anti-mist. anti-Soviet aclmiviss: create an anti-
isperialist tide.

Standing on anti-inerialiae and rebirth through one's own power. and atrate
gically identifying the ens-y. we would like to take on the Japanese revolu-
tion as pert of the world revolution while persistently changing our environ-
sent and conditions in order to advance the fight to ovaroone the breakup of
the strategic alliance of our allies.

Because of that. first, it is required that we weaken and dissolve one section
of the international anti-revolutionary alliance by organizing the fight to
overthrow our own inerialais with an anti-ilperialiat struggle.

At present, Japanese inperialisn is based on the power of a handful of nono-
polistic capital with fainancial capital at the peak. and sovereignty is under
the control of monopolistic capital. And the national authority froaa the
foundation of the irreconcilable confrontation with the life of the people.

as the bureaucraticdpolitioal, nilitary, police and judicial systal. For that
reason, it is necessary that the fight to overcone Japan's inerialisa sakes
preparations for the seizure of power by the thoroughness of the anti-inertial-
ist struggle. asking anti-nonopoly the key point.

Secondly. we have to fore as the axis the political issue of fighting against

a revs-ping of nilitarisa by news of anti-co-unlst. anti-Soviet exclusivisn
which is the core of present day Japanese inperialist control. The many is
advancing a national revs-ping shown in the security treaty, dispatch of troops
and conscription. as constitutional revision, strengthening of the Japan-ROI
anti-revolutionary alliance and the rationalisation of the national goveruent.
It is required that we confront these policies of the essay. and fora an anti-
inperialiat encircle-eat net. and with the union of anti-isperialist forces as
the axis. to collaborate with and units with the anti-Stalinist, anti-socialist-
isperislist tide.

And thirdly, we are deepening the solidarity of the individual struggles of

our allies towered the foraation of an array of revolts based on the quanti-
tatiwe and qualitative power of the world worker class and people who are the
fountainhead of power and wisdu. It is required that we tie up various sites

18
under one purpose by means of various tactics, while asking an alliance
the thinking of our actual judgsent and tactics. That is because we can pre-
pare conditions for the establishment of the party. based on the value of

oneness and the great alliance and unified battle array of anti-isperialisn
through this fight.

The enesy's exclusivisa is strengthening note and sore the oppression toward
the anti-isperialist forces in the country under the name of anti-colnunisn
and anti-Sovietisn. For that season. the true value of leadership is required.
we nust win qualitative progress. fighting with the idea that "failure is the
mother of success." It is required that we fulfill the role of the party in
the consistency of the Viewoint of assisting the struggle which has the worker
class and people as its nucleus and that we politically, militarily and eateri-
ally strengthen the leadership ability of the party.

Not recognizing defeat as defeat, what is demanded is a fight which organizes
defeat into victory as a lesson toward the seizure of power based on a strate-
gic viewpoint. not tactics of a one-pattern iorsula nor a fight which sakes the
projection of the movement everything. We think that we aust pour our strength
into the forsation of a truly collective order. forning the battle array of
revolts free the fight which sets individual against exclusiviss.

Conclusion

To all citizens, conrades and friends confronting and fighting against Japan-
ese inperialiss:

We, the Japanese Red Arsy, fight based on the position of anti-isperialisa and
rebirth through one's own power in the Japanese class struggle chained to the
international class struggle.

In taking on our duty in concert with Japanese citizens. comrades and friends.
we would like to grasp the conditions for the establishssnt of a single party
which corresponds to the class unity of the people fron an ingenious plan.

we will take an the part of the Japanese revolution by allowing the lessons of
the revolution develop as a class response of the people iron Palestine to
Japan and Japan to the world. on the basis of internationaliss which the fight-
ers in the Lydda struggle constructed. Perhaps the arsed struggle will be de.
sonstrated as a more effective fight in that view and position.

We call upon you to take on together the fight for the formation of an anti-
imperialist tide. by confronting the anti-cossunist, anti-Soviet esclusivisn
and relying on the worker class and people who are the fountainhead of power
in the struggle.

First of all. let's practice internationalian for the forsation of an anti-
isperialist tide.
The Japanese Red Army
30 Hay 1981
9400
080: 6000/0013

19
caemxsn AND UAR
Milan 1]. WIS!” B u GUERRA in Italian May 80 pp 7-136

[Book by Antonio Negri, "Mamet Hateriale" eariea. edited by the Collettivo
di Scienze politicha di Pedove [Padova Political Science Collective],
Giansiacono Peltrinelli Bditore. Milan. 136 pages]

[Text] Table of Contents

Cheater l. Self-criticise and new problem

i. Prieon. the narket, truth.

2. The territory of the love-ant.
3. The making of the Proleteriet and eubjective organization.
A. New problem, of nethod.

Chapter 2. Criaea of the Crieie-State
1. He and the 1930's.
2. Tome of the criaie: crieie of lack of proportion.
3. Form of. the criaia: crieia of circulation.

6. Font of the crieie: crieie and violence
5. Problela to Explore

Chanter 3. Figures of capitaliet ntoyie
1. Control of the refuaal to work?
2. Control high levels of conflict?
3. A parentheeie on the ghetto,
It. Problene still open

Chapter d. The probl- of war and the theory of value
1. Between Aden Snith and Vladimir Ilich Lenin,
2. Beyond the theory of value?
3. The problen of reeetablial-ent
4. Her. Betmn i-agination end reeeon,
5. To elininate the problem
6. Other (2) problena.

Chapter 5. 60min end organization

1. The for- of eelf-veloriution
2. The torn of self-determination

3. The torn of organization.
6. Beyond war, for co-unien.

20
mammal“
me 0PM“. use ONLV

To ly courades of 7 April and to the 61 of Fiat

Chapter 1: Self-criticise and new probleas

any years ago his anther

used to sing this song

so she eilled while she sang
the corn people have a song too
it is beautiful

I refuse to reveal it
(infatuation of the Keresan
Indian tribe, received by
trans Boss in 1920)

1. Prison, the earket. truth

We need to get things straight. lot in a long essay, but going back frm w
present situation to a clear assess-ant of the hove-ant. Starting again and
going over that territory, starting fro. the subjective aisery of our position.
"hat is concrete nov is prison, separation, being cut off fro. the nova-ant.
but this assist- of separation is not the nause- of alienation, constriction,
being subjected to doaination. That is the scandal. In this radical break
betveen swjectivity and objectivity, between the ontological dinension of

the revolutionary subjective and the institutional veight of exploitation and
repression. no one knovs how to judge this scandal, and all attths to inter-
pret it are like an inconplete cries, a frustrated desire, fraud vithout action.
So the separation is not alienation. Alienation requires an upside down

but effective relationship, a turning upside down and a wrenching froa a pre-
constituted or desired totality; so it is nostalgia for sadistion, or suffering
because of its nonexistence. But here and nov, separation has nothing to do
with aediation. It does not contain it or inagine it, neither like utopia nor
like a phantoa; it does not desire it. The sign of separation is discontinuous
with respect to the turning upside down that is presupposed by alienation:
discontinuty, a break of aediation fros totality. The totality separation lives
through is not honologous to that suffered by alienation. The struggle which
arises in separation is not the fluctuation of a totality to be restored. It
is rather the concrete truth, inediate and masdiated, unresolvable by sedi-
ation or by capitalist reason.

Opposed to this is the abstract operation of the eneay, of his totality, of
aedintion. He knev the earket was coepletely overdeterained by capitalise.
But we are learning that today the aarket, after losing all connection with
the radiation of value, has becoee a political function for the reconstruction
of capitalist doeination. After losing all capitalist truth, the narket has
becoee the terrain of capitalist fiction. The overdeterlination of truth no
longer concerns the determination of value, added value, and profit, from the
capitalist viewpoint. It just concerns the controlled play of social and
political forces. Introducing than into a planned narhet. capitalise dotin-
ates the. at will. Capitaliss is nediation. The equivalence of accents, their
exchange, dialectics and nediation are the substance of capitalist control of
the earket, of its preconstitution, of its doeinating action. If monopoly

21

MWWWY
controlled the market (once) to make a profit from it, today it preconstitutes
the market to determine truth. This is why this truth is always abstract, the
product of mediation.

i am on the other side. I have meaning, and can be defined, only within the
framework of capitalist mediation of the market: this is what they want. But
I amlm-mediate 'ﬂrrational." Capitalist rationalism says I can be expressed
only in so far as I am mediated. From its point of view, this is true: Surdum
est quod affabile non eat, as capitalist political science has repeated from
the beginning, to justify the functional exclusion of sectors of society. So
I on deaf, opaque, and can't be mediated. But do I really have no truth of my
own? Do not prison. struggle, and separation give rise to their own internal
truth? Only truth itself is a sign of truth: this has been said and is the
seal of every rigorously materialistic position. Now, there is a truth of
what is deaf, opaque, not susceptible to mediation. There is the truth of its
tireless growth, of the continuous exploration of separation.

The immediacy of separation is not a break of circulation within the separate
world. On the contrary. Here a new language is developing with the force of
a new production, of an innovation of uncontrollable fall out. They hypothesis
and its verification are ontological; materialism is always ontological. It

is a formative movement of being that we are witnessing. This deafness of
being and its ineffability have a life of their own. It is a profoundly atheist
life: an animal which refuses to be dominated by any divinity or owner. The
word does not create life but merely tries to dominate it. Here posterity's
recognition of the word is whole. A new being which capitalism would like to
bring under its mediation and which it is forced to recognize as limit and
resistance--a new being has emerged seeking a language of separation. All
this is given in principle: it is given from the moment in which separation

is action, not alienation; it is not nostalgia for totality or endurance of
detachment. Capitalist overdetermination of the truth of the market corres-
ponds to the underdetermination of separation from the market, of the truth of
theim-medlateand that which cannot be mediated. There is only a formal cor-
respondence. In reality there is a break. After the break there is freedom
for development. Every attempt to recover the content of the break-~as a
subject, as an effective cause--is mere rhetoric. The break liberates the
subject and begins the separation.

All of this is fantastic. you will object! It is not. It is the content of
the collective imagination of the proletariat, it is the real substance of its
struggle. It is communism as a movement of the value of use in separation.
But if all this were true, you would still object, this separation would be

so profound as to specify an ontological state similar to war! It does. I

am certainly not the first to describe war as an ontological state; a long
philosophical tradition views war as a natural state which historical evolu-
tion is led to from time to time by a crisis. From Lucretius to Hobbes, from
Spinoza to Gibbon, from Burckhardt to Foucault, where “progress" unravels

you find war as the connotation of the basic social relationship.

Here the problem touches on the specificity of the definition, on the genesis
of the present situation: the collapse of the market. This causes a state

of war. So on the one hand the emergence of the value of youth as a mass
movement records a state of war. On the other hand the capitalist artifice of

22
FOIIIIHNCJAI.IIII(IWLY
FOI.0FTNCJAI.USE|INLY

a programmed fixing of the value of exchange as political command, as a
determination of truth, also records a state of war. The great pacifist
invention of the bourgeoisie, the great pacifist stimulation of war, the logic
of egoisms revisited and brought to found ru‘3s, all that collapses; the market
stops being a rule and becomes a place, a territory, a battlefield. Separa-
tion does not separate the market, it destroys it. It destroys it as mediation,
as reforming logic. It destroys it as a possibility for determining equival-
ences and setting sequences of truth in motion. At the limit, separation

can be imprisoned, delineated, excluded; but this, too, destroys the truth

of the market. In fact it does not recognize overdetermination, at this point,
which is not an act of war. Here the market is an abstract place to which is
opposed the concreteness of separation. Har is the ontological state which

the breakdown of the market leads to.

But the problem is truth, extricating the truth of separation and pinning it
down in its im-mediacy. The universal, this ancient form of mediation, does
not mean anything to me; the linguistic totality, the cousunications horizon

i am concerned with must be born of a break, born from within it. It is
ontological totality that issues from a particular separation-this is what
interests me. The state of war does not exclude a search for truth, it exalts
it. The breakdown of the simulated truth of the market, the crisis of the
capitalist example of overdetermining the process, leave me in the unique
situation of having only one possibility and that is to remodel the language
of truth. Truth as a movement of the value of use, as articulation of separa-
tion. So I break with all mediated totality, universal, intentional. 0n the
otherhand I must subordinate totality as tension and trend to the formative
process which starts from the particular of the value of use, of the reproduc-
tion of life, of the affirmation of freedom. This is a superficial action of
mine in a terrain which is torn by war but animated by the irreducibility of
proletarian existence. Hy language is inevitably vague. Nevertheless, in
prison sensitivity to signs is highly accentuated. He send kites outside to
the infinite sky.

2. The Hovement's Territory

Dialectical residues litter the field. They are notso much the historical
advances of the traditional workers' movement. Who still has the problem of
voting for a party because it is the official representative of a class? “he
still has the problem of wresting--in the struggle-a card from a sold-outtrade
union? The birthright has already been ceded. Millions of proletarians
abstain from voting, thousands of autonomous struggles have shown this. Socio-
logists and journalists can have the privilege of demonstrating that these facts
are irrelevant!

No. dialectical obstacles are not to be found in this dimension but rather
within the territory of the communist movement. This territory is stratified
and full of ravines. If you want to build you have to work on this ground and
make it smooth so that you can build on it. First of all there is a need to
do this through self-criticism of what exists. This self-criticism must take

into account, together with a description of what exists, the strength of the
adversary, his ability to insinuate himself destructively on the discontinuity
of the political processes of the proletariat and erasperate this discontinuity,
reducing it to the capitalist reason of repression.

23

IIHICHNNC1A1.USIGNULY
FORiOFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

Now the fundamental moment of crisis of the communist movement seems to be a
progressive estrangeaent of the mass proletarian movement as regards needs and
the movement as a counterweight. Only bad dialectics, pure politics, have
tried to maintain a relationship between these tensions of the movement.
Attempts to link things up are wasted. The means of politics, bad dialectics.
have ended up sowing confusion about the very importance of the problem. when
it was first raised. before 1977, it had the merit of giving theoretical
relevance to a heavy dualistic situation which was then present in a movement,
a situation which was more endured than desired, perhaps derived from the
diversity of the times and of various forms of resistance to the strength of
the capitalist counterattack and restructuring after 1968. So the problem was
raised in order to urge people to overcome it, to anticipate the synthesis
which the movement could not produce itself. Instead, division and estrangement
were even accentuated in the phase of the movement's recovery. This is not the
place for a historical reconstruction of that event or for the determination of
specific responsibilities in the failure to produce moments of synthesis
effectively enough or resist the enemy's fire, understood as determining de-
feat for any such attempt. However. the result was that the destabilizing
movement of the enemy ran with suicidal, accelerating speed towards the and of
guerrilla vanguard war; the deatructuring movement became more and more closed
on itself, touching on the isolation of the ghetto and conceding part of its
wealth to the final determination of the capitalist market. The combattant
party and the ghetto appeared as mirro images of each other, as an ambivalent
and unique result, as a transformation of the theory of functions in duality of
components of the movement. where conditions governing the mass revolutionary
process-—perhsps for the first time, and certainly very intensively-were push-
ing in the opposite direction. they were pushing urgently towards recovery of
functions of counterpower within the process of self-valorization of the masses.
The counterweight. which was not associated with self-valorization, thus re-
appeared as a variable gone crazy. Self-valorization sought in small markets
an alibi for defeat in the terrain of the invention of a new way of producing,
in the vast soup of the "personal is political" alibi for the failure of
practical struggle. In the middle, attempting an impossible syntheses, remain-
ed the most disqualified politician or the last of the 1968 prophets of
mediation.

lure, however, the problem is that of political critique, so a critique of the
residues of a pale dialectics and of its effects on the theory of the movement.
rolitical critique means getting to the point right away: to the need to
roarticulate not the self-valorization with the themes and practice of
counterpower, but the new communist movement per se, from within, in the
absolute immanence of its existence. In the indistinguishability of its
expressions. In the fullness of its action. In the power it can express.

So in the separation it lives in. The development of coercive relationship
between classes and the dissolution of the market as a norm of the hierar-
chical bonds of society, as a legitimizing source of the distribution of
income. poses the separation of the proletariat not as residue and limit of

the capitalist means of production but as a crisis of this means of production.
within this crisis, the power of proletarian separateness has already imposed
formidable new mortgages on the articulations of the distribution of income;

26

FOIiOFIICIAl.USI:O*ﬂJf
FOR (WHOM. WE ONLY

it has already started up a reconatruction of the social working day which
restores time and wealth to the proletariat. As always. on these slopes,
workers' science has nothing to invent. It must merely contribute to the
process of self-valorization of the proletariat in the self-determination of
the mass communist movement. The problem is not power. It probably will be.
but already the traditional image of power is radically contested, and its
validity goes back to the masses' criticism of politics. The problem is.
rather, the expression of proletarian might within the crisis of market capit-
alien and its falling apart. The political process.is completely internal;

it can neither conceive of nor foresee delegations or derogations from this
present strategic program. The power of the proletariat does not need inten-
sity along the vertical dimensions of the emanation of state power, but rather
an extension and a broadening of wide horizons of the social reproduction of
the crisis. Consolidating proletarian night is an objective internal to its
conquest. He have no resistance to overcome, no more than we have space to
occupy. He have no need for dialectics or philosophers or aediation or
politicians. Re need, first of all. to gather in and develop the proletarian
program against the misery of linkages. Might should be developed within the
workers' use of the crisis. It is to be identified in an expanding taking
root of the trouble.

Thus we touch another limit of the movement's arguments: Its socialism, the
concept of subject in sociological terms. In fact, no one-oer very few people--
has been able. in the movement. to understand the ontological scope. the
totalizing meaning of the definition of the social worker as an axis carrying
the new class composition. Unlike in other phases of the struggle and analysis,
we were not faced with the result of a process--the mass-worker-which had

to be recognized and imposed on the strategy and tactics of the communist
movement. renewing its tradition. Instead, in this case it was a question of
fixing the presupposed present development, which appears immediately as a
break. He were not faced with a political requalification scheme of a section
of the class composition, but with a long term proposal for reading the class
struggle. in power relationships between classes. of the communist project.

The sociological preliminaries are therefore not so much the object-however
central-~as the qualifying form. blending scientific analysis and political
practice. It is the element of self-criticism which did not understand in
time the importance of this determination. It is so complex it swallows and
includes any preceding determination of composition. The mass worker is a
partial element of the long term subjectivity of the social worker. There can
be no political reasoning except about the complexity of the ontological and
material versions of the social worker. Instead of understanding this signifi-
cance of the category and of its theoretical and political implications--the
relationship between production and reproduction, the transformation of intel-
lectual work, the valorisation of circulation--we kept on mincing words about
the old dogmas; worker centrality or not? Without understanding the by now
elementary truth that the social worker was also at the center of direct
exploitation in the factory, both in national enterprises and multinational
ones. But. God willing, this is not all. There is a total historical central-
lty. the militant opposite of the narket crisis: this is the social worker,
the aovement of the value of use. And this becomes the communist movement.

25
FIN!(NﬂW(1Al.lINI(H‘LY
it is this 'becoming” that is the center of the antagonistic analysis which
should be proposed as the only subject for worker and proletarian discussion.
it is a becoming which we catch in all its pregnancy and theoretical complexity
and which leaves no room for other hypotheses. It is a long term composition
which covers the whole historical period of the crisis of the market and there-
fore of the communist transition-~that of the social worker. It is not by
carrying out defining sociological operations or dialectical and political
conjugating operations that we will solve this problem. It is only by penetra-
ting the internal dynamics of this subject, of this becoming, that we will
proceed to revolutionary knowledge. Articulations, sequences, and connections
are not external to the reality of the social worker, but inside this reality.
It is not a question of part of the collective worker but rather of the
collectiVe worker. It is within this unity that individual-individual
collective sequences should be judged. The ground covered by subjectivity
within this collective subjectivity. Which is however always, in any case,
separation, antagonism. If we forget this we fall into the indecency of the
pathetic and substitute Proudhon for Marx.

3. Prnletarian Formation and Subjective Organization

Starting from the concept of power and proletarian might, this means that the
problem of the material formation of the proletariat and that of subjective
organization are comparable; in other words, they can be reduced to a single
fabric on which--in accordance with good manual art--we can trace the warp of
the fabric and the flexibility of its material. Subjective organization is a
moment of the proletariat becoming a subject, a form of its collective practice.
The process of the formation of the proletariat follows from workers' science
from within a formative phenomenology which determines the single passages and
their continuity. I am not interested here in the method we should choose;

1 am not interested here in choosing among the variants of a theoretical
intention; I am interested in emphasising the centrality of the problem and
the dimension of its development.

i am interested, above all, in excluding alternatives to this determination:

In the first place, if not exclusively, that acnool of thought which stems

from the third international tradition and the experience of so-called "real
socialism." Because of the failure--or, if you prefer, with greater historical
justice, the exhaustion--of the doctrine of the extraneousness of subjective
organization to the formation of the proletariat, we find ourselves in a
uniquely rich situation in which we can deal together with the immaturity of
our tradition (with a series of our defeats) and with the gigantic historical
example of the falling away of an illusion. New dialectical residues--physical
masses of dialectical rhetoric. blocks and detritus of old and frustrated
knowledge-~have fallen on us. At the present level of its composition, in

the wealth of its formation and its needs, the proletariat as a columnist
movement does not know what to do with the radiant future offered to it by
subjects external to its movement; it does not know what to do with the "pro-
gress" that it is being led towards. Those sublime heights to be conquered
dwell in the abyss of a distance corrupted by discontinuity with proletarian
needs and by the time during which they were so mystified. it is only by
destroying all distance, all stopping, all interruption between form and con-
tent of proletarian constitution and form and content of subjective organization

26
F0. 0'11C1A1.USI‘0N1~
lilt¢lﬂﬂ€1dl USIiﬂl'LY

that we can allow ourselves to reaodel a real autonoey of class politics. The
critique of politics has only one subject: nedistion, dialectics. This object
is articulated in two points, one derived from the other: the bourgeois

theory of representing the general interest and the socialist theory of revolu-
tionary representation. The result of political criticise cannot be a restora-
tion of a direct isnediate passage between proletarian fornation and subjective
organisation. Let us hear no sore of iousseau and Stalin! The history of
political theory of our tine is a constant bouncing back and forth fron one

to the other!

let us hear no nore of the universal, the aarket. utopia! Because the univer-
sal and the serket are nerely utopias. ineffective and painful, to cover up
war. The absolute of conflict and violence which the failure of the aediation
of the Isrket has restored to us, this unresolvablc situation which sakes
separation becoae note and sore distinct. Within this horizon of need there
is an energence of the expression of a new rationality, a lethod of struggle
which can rationally doninate war, which, destroying universal oystification,
inposes the force of totality on the particular of proletarian for-ation.
There is no subterfuge or shortcut, faced with this problen. Any universalist
contaainationwhichthe Left of the working class reproduces is destined to
self-destruction. There is no longer any possible realisni Does the generous
nasochisa of "dirtying" one's hands with institutions pay? has it ever paid?
The spectacle of power cannot be de-ystified except by taking away fron it
rather than separating oneself.

But this separation is power, this taking away is wealth. Living and working

in the fornation of the proletarian pro-sting the cos-unist sass aoveaents,
assusing cos-unisn as a present process is the only reality we can grasp. It

is the only, and very rich. rational way we can doeinste war. There is no
civilization in the aarket: the only social contract which can be established
is within the horizon of separation. The whole couple: of relations of deline-
tion has shifted with Marxist geonetry. The social contract of the aarket

has been destroyed by the social conposition of the proletariat. Social
dualisn, which all bourgeois political econony has tried to reduce to the unity
of developnent. either through a controlled asrginaliration of the proletariat
or through its recognition within sechanisns of progralned cospatibility, and
with infinite other effective excogitation--that dualisl is in crisis. It

was suffering fron a dialectic sickness. Bialectics, however you conceive

then. are in crisis as real power. Perhaps in another revolutionary phase it
can be considered in a Kantian way according to the standards of science fiction.
Separation therefore calls for its rich existence. It calls for the eaterial-
ity of determinations within which it presents itself: behind it, an over-
turned world which no longer knows any truth except in the fore of syatification,
of the constant proposing of pacifist illusary utopias covering up the reality
of war; in front of it, cownunisn as the only possible way to end war, hatred,
the aarket. lies, and abstractions. Con-unisn is not a utopia, inassuch as

it is the only possible social contract. The social contract puts an end to

war by transferring the control of society to the proletariat, recognizing the
connunist novesent as the only ordering and conposing tension to meet collective
needs, as the only dinension in which the overturning of the market can occur
today.

27

F0I10FFKJA1.USIIIMLY
Thus we come back to the central theme of our argument: the making of pro-
lctarian and subjective organization. A terrain and a goal are set: the
terrain of separation, and within this terrain the unified but divisible
dynamics of its ends; the goal of the restoration of rationality as the ilmsedi-
ate expression of proletarian needs and peace. To use philosophical terms, the
formal cause and the final cause. But the effective cause? Enough scholastic
jokes: how do you articulate subjectively this process leading from war to
peace. from the dirty utopia of the market to the reality of cosmmmism? As

we know. the various theories of the social contract have never been able to
explain the driving force. the effective cause that makes this contract run.
The reason is obvious: the theory recorded and made rationally plausible not
the problematic datum but its overcoming. It was an apologetic theory because
it was a bourgeois capitalist theory. He do not have this option because
proletarian science is a science of the immediate. not of mediation. "Trouble"
is therefore necessarily the point around which it concentrates. "hat is the
point where formation is articulated into subjective organization? At what
moment does normative and revolutionary expression emerge from the particular
interests of the worker? The whole tract revolves around these questions,

and there is certainly no point in shortening the argument to a few words here.
But to make it easier and clearer to read. it is enough to say that the analy-
sis must be carried out determining:

l. The complex condition of the crisis of the capitalist market and its
superfectations, recognizing in the crisis itself the decisive movement of the
composition of the working class and proletariat;

2. The forms of capitalist utopia in the attempt to break the ontological
solidity of the state of crisis and war;

3. Only then will it be possible to tackle the problem of the relationship:
proletarian formation/subjective organisation of its effective dynamics;

6. And determine historically defined points of attack. in relation to the
situation at any given moment of the struggle and to the strategic dimension
of the communist program.

But all this is possible only if we bear in mind the fact that the elements of
sell-criticism proposed so far. and the first thematic approximations. lead

us to a fundamental premise: the ontological impossibility of discriminating
between the form of the "social" composition of the proletariat and the crisis
of the market and of the capitalist state; secondly. the political impossibility
of dividing the making of the proletariate (which is given separately here)

and the tension of subjective organization, the expression of proletarian might,
both as a movement and as a communist program.

A. New Problems, Problems of Methods

Dear Comrades, if we were together I would propose to you this schematic
outline so as to explore theory and practice. in search and in organization.
But we are not together. and for this reason there are certain problems. The
first is mine-~it is the difficulty of being in prison trying to write a
theoretical work: the second is directly inherent in the discussion of how an

28
F0.‘0IFIJAI.USI¢NNLY
ETHICNNHKJAI.USE(MNLY

activity is carried on by various people, in other words the fact that in the
present situation it is not only difficult but perhaps impossible. because the
relationship between the separation of the movement and that of the person in
prison is a double separation (furthermore it is mediated only by the language
of power): on the one hand there is the logic of the workers’ self-valoriza-
tion, which occurs with a force that is difficult (except empirically) to even
grasp; on the other hand the solitude of prison, the voice of the world of
self-veloriastion. The de-territorialization, the abstractness of command is
directly perceived, within the specialization of the process, of its actors,
and within the specialization of bourgeois information. While to proceed
theoretically in the identified territory we need real information, what is
relevant to proletarian separation and what cannot be read-—except by analogy
and metaphor--in the press of the regime or in the massive repetition of the
mass media. in fact, we are subjected to a one dimensional type of information.
And all this in a phase in which coununism presents, on the other hand, its
novelty. the rationality of its project, in savage terms. Political prisoners
once lived in a situation in which the positive party line could be received
in the specificity of a coded language. Today this has no meaning anymore.
The whole capitalist world runs like a wartime organization, a co-and struc-
ture; its language turns reality upside down to make it homogeneous with and
adquate for the urgency of command. The employer's language does not trans-
late reality, it is not a channel of communication for reality. But on the
proletarian terrain there is no abstract production of truth, no language
appropriate to unmasking mystification. Either you are inside or your are
outside: this is the problem, laboriously, of the struggle of the social
worker. Separation is real and its language is rigid. It is a language that
covers reality but is nevertheless untranslatable, and cannot be communicated
to the outside. Penetrating this compactness, then, becomes the objective of
a search which I am making: this is a first objective to attain before reach-
ing the one that is farther inside. which can perceive reality only in the
band of light of the authority's information. This causes new problems. They
are problems which are born not only of the intrinsic novelty of reality which
we wish to explore, but also of the repressive situation we are living in.

here in prison there is no information about the movement: it is important

to be sure one is again on proletarian terrain. A posteriori, to achieve
this end, I can only proceed to put together information which I can gather;
I can only accumulate hypotheses approaching an understanding of reality.
This difficulty of mine is a very great one. In fact, there are people who
console me by saying that I am exaggerating. They are the theoreticians of
Oftentlichkeit, of the proletarian public's sphere. They say that this has
become consolidated and that at any rate it is proceeding in its environment
to construct meanings and significances. This is true, apparently. but it is
false in substance-oit is true because it is happening, it is false because
this is a wild and discontinuous process, it is a process of separation, it
is the invention of an untranslatable logic of universality and of bourgeois
and capitalist rationality. There is no possibility of translation, no homo-
logy or continuity. The public sphere which is constituted within the making
of the proletarian does not contain any teleological germs; it has no ends
other than those of the affirmation of its own special nature. The growth of
a workers' civilization has no prototypes. it only has limits. These limits
are due to the strength of the adversary first of all, but also. and much more
importantly, there are limits which are related to the nature of the process

29
FOIICIWNCJAI.USI1MNLY
of self-valorization-ontological limits. Collective proletarian existence
is all extended on the margin of the concrete position. the historical posi-
tion of its own being-it is what collective practice has created. Nothing
sore. Hts: collective practice has determined is the all of proletarian exist—
ence. Even a step beyond this reality is impossible. Any added meaning or
definition going beyond the given of that existence is absurd. but this
block of being is alive: without wanting to dip into the universal, it grows
on itself and at all tiaes has its own special nature and totality. So this
world should be seen from within its own existence. Therefore its language
is all within the present limits of its existence. Beyond the present deter-
mination of proletarian being there is only emptiness and dizziness.

From this is born the problem of a proletarian language which bridges the

gap between proletarian self-valorieation and the open space that it reveals
at its liait, which ties together the components of eelf-valorization, bring-
ing them to an expression of totality and normativity. This problem cannot
be reduced to tradition: let us take just two examples, populist and Jacobin
language, which are both impossible for us to take over. Because the popu-
list one flattens innovation on tradition and the Jacobin one exasperates
utopia in normative content; the first betrays the "truth of the movement“

in its philological devotion to truth, the second exalts the movement as
truth, it transfers its immediacy into words, denying the complexity of crea-
tion of a true language; it substitutes the word for the movement while seem-
ing to express it. Both these linguistic forms are completely extraneous to
the social workers' productive quality, to the creative nature and actual
class composition. And it is here and only here, in this new class coaposition,
that we must search.

If the problem is opened so intensely, it is inevitable for many approxima-
tions to be given. And those which are most fascinating are undoubtedly
searches for an analytical and recomposing language which, starting with the
subjects exploited, goes through the criticism of exploitation and constitutes,
in the ontological situation denoted by war, the radical nature of the antag-
unistic project. Barking on this terrain, we can proceed. working with
method within the "criticisa-transformation” sequence, the "exploited subject-
antagonist project." The only words which co-unicate are those which destroy
the present, recognizing it, denoting it critically, and constructing hope,

the practice of transformation. The truth of the movement of self-valoriza-
tiun as separation and a global alternative: this is the net in our new

codes of communication, according to which we are only beginning to communicate
with each other on the one hand; on the other hand, we are beginning to build
in the vacuum which opens up before us and which we must occupy and build in.
There is no truth unless one deternines the relationship between criticism

and transformation in the internal proletarian separation. In the totality of
sequences which are put in motion by this motor.

A fornal foundation? Perhaps. It is not less inportant if it is brought

back to the generality of the movement of self-valoriration and its quality.

It is a flat language which assumes a rejection of work as a connotative
basis-~criticism and transformation-of the signs it uses; a language which
never forgets its origin, the specific subjectivity it is the expression of.

A language in which we hear the difference and the plurality of subjects which
constitute that community of rebellion which is the process of self-valorieation.

30
INDI‘OIIICIAI.IIBIL(IULV
MWLUSEONLV

but it is useless to proceed! here in Iy special and double separation, as in
the separation which counterposes the antagonistic base of the ct-unist
novenent, the only indication is that of working on this terrain. is are
learning to co-unicate. we are constructing these new codes of trsn-ission—
within war, against war.

Chapter 2: Crises of the Crisis-State

I just reader that she always
wore a skirt with vertical stripes,
so she looked like a big wooden gate
with an ironed white blouse hanging
on it.

Robert Husil. posthuous pages
pd’lished during his life

1. He and the 1930's

"hat a bore, finding Iyself faced today with the sane old ethations ed
infinitt- of the theory and practice of capitalise of the 1930's! It is as
though the genesis of the state for. which we saw developed before our eyes
could still tell us sonthing about the crisis, let alone how to overcone it!
To eliminate all atmts to go backwards with an analysis that ought to be
projected forward, let us therefore ask ourselves:

1. that can be read in the 1930's:
2. that they wanted to asks us read in the 1930's;

3. why what they wanted to asks us read was false. and why does it not add
anything to our knowledge today;

4. what is the basis on which we can open an analysis of the present?

The 1930's were narked by s ripening of a crisis which characterised, in a
definitively consolidated way. new relationships along forces along the two
classes in struggle. Social and eccnoeic crisis effects the institutional
level. The crisis can be resolved only through a remodeling of the capitalist
state which reorganires production and reproduction, distribution and circula-
tion. interioriring the new quid of the situation. the dynsnic relationship
which the working class isposes on all aspects of the develop-ant of exploita-
tion. A new proportion and a new cowatibility are fired to define the
coeposition of productive factors: the state becones an internal agent of
their projects. of their planning. This nodification of the place the state
occupies with respect to the codination of factors of developnent radically
sodifies the institutional nechanisa. which flattens itself on the relation-
ships of production and is forced to initate then, to sinulste then in its
eaterial construction. This happened in the state's two great reforI experi-
nents of the l930's: the new Deal and the Keynesian one. end the Nazi and

31

Immune“
corporative one. The level of antiworker terror which the different systems
apply is commensurate with the urgency of renewed development and the complex
dialectics of social relationships, internal and international, within which
the project takes place. Reformism and terrorism are two complementary faces
of the reform of the state born in the 1930's, the quality of synthesis-as
the development of the model until the 1960's will show--is only determined
by the need to make those quantities of consensus and violence that were
adapted from time to time proportionate to the development of a mass produc-
tion and redistribution of income which kept the fundamental relationship

of domination intact.

The fact that today they want to point to the 1930's as fabulous years, the
[act that the undoubted novelty of the capitalist project of that reform is
claimed by the workers' movement, are only signs of cynical bestiality and
indecent formalism. because this type of interpretation shows that there is
no understanding of the essential ambiguity of capitalist reform. of the
capitalist nature of the project. Therefore it is not the indiscriminate
form of the project that has to be taken into consideration, mixing good and
bad--Heber and Lenin, Rathenau and Buchsrin, Roosevelt and Stalin, Keynes
and Schleicher--but rather its historical determination, which saw the New
Deal in crisis already in 1937, submerged by the wave of new proletarian
struggles. and Nazism obliged to adopt a forced enlargement of the happiness
of work, and Keynes suggesting war as the only solution to the conflict
between the two classes.

But as we have said, what they want to make us read from the 1930's is not
only inadequate for the reality of that time and for the truth ofitsinterpre-
cation; it is not only false because it drains the tangible accentuation of
mechanisms of exploitation in complacsny over enthusiasm for the project.

This image they propose to us does not help us, at any rate. with our attempt
to interpret the present. Starting with the 1960's, in fact, the form of

the crisis changed significantly. It changed because there was a change in
the relationship between the state and the composition of the proletariat.

He have said that the form of the internal relationship within the relationships
between classes is not mediation, it is war. This is true because every overt
determination of the market, every prospect for forced reaggregation of the
factors of production within a proportionality which is progressive and in
conformity with the rule of exploitation, is in crisis. It is a crisis of
ontological turns; it is not born of the difficulty of setting proportions,
but rather the impossibility of determining relationships; it does not emerge
from the delay in the institutions of development but rather from the enormous
distance of the state from the dynamic material of the proletarian struggle.
In the 1930's, with more or less violence, the state tried to interiorize the
struggle within development; today the state is navigating through an archipel-
ago of separation, it must control an irrelevant existence. Proportions,
compatibility: these words lose their meaning. Measure is an absolute term.
There is no measure because there are no measurable elements. The instruments
of overdetermination by force of the crisis, the fantastic aspects of the
state's repressive activity (currency, inflation. etc.) no longer work. It
started with the interiorization of of the working class, our crisis state of
the 1930's. Today it has been sucked in and placed within a large proletarian
dimension, and by putting it there it accentuates the distance and detachment.
Like a airage on an immense horizon.

32
lill¢lﬂﬂC1Al.USI:CIULY
FOI:0'1N(JAI.[EIE(INLY

The crisis of the law of value goes beyond the dimensions of the harxist
definition. in Marx the measure of exploitation yields to the need to over-
cone. in relation to the lack of proportion between the enormous growth of the
productivity of labor and the poor organisation of the working day. All this
is here. But there is more: there is the social figure of production, there
is the composition of the social worker and struggles. There is the invasive
making of a proletarian sociality. which affects every relationship and
dissolves it. It will certainly not be quantitative totalitarianism of auto-
matic control that will be able-like e lucid insinuating project-to reduce
the massive qualitative presence of the social proletariat. how, it is on this
foundation that we can open an analysis of the present and reconsider the waves
of war going through it. without any nostalgia or reminiscences about the
fabulous years of death: the 1930's.

One last point about the meaing the reference to recovering the 1930's. within
the framework of the traditional working class movement. has had and is
desperately trying to keep: The teaching of the crisis and of theories of
control of the crisis was translated into an ideology of transition. The
dialectics between economic development and political violence, its propor-
tioned calibration in a project of socialist transition. have been conceived
as the only path to follow; the subject is the party--but strongly linked to
the institution and the administration, the method is guided by functional
goals, the reference to society is understood as a fabric woven of smell
conflicts, on which it is possible to carry out operations of synthesizing
projects. The complexity of the political project and articulation of the
administrative intervention, voluntary rigidity in the general framework and
normative nobility of planning intervention; this is the dream of the 1930’s
of our reformist vanguard. Productivity as a result of development and vio-
lence wants to occupy the center of the transition project. "hat should we
say about this? "bet should we say other than to emphasise once more the lack
of symmetry between this project and the actual making of the working class
and proletariat? And the effects which this lack of ayametry produces: an
administrative rearticulation of divisions in the class where the social trend
of self-valorization denies it? The attempts to interiorise the violence-
development relationship within the movement of the class, to transfer the
problem of proportions of development and exploitation directly to the inside
of the class; and, on the other hand, as we know well, this too is a fruit of
the 1930's. But it is of Eastern. not Hestern origin; it is typical of
capitalist planning and socialism. So probably the moment will seem to have
arrived to compare the bureaucratic and capitalist model of Stalin's party
with the Western nyth of the new reformist state. Only such an analysis and
identification of the threads which join an updating of both these structures
can enable us to shed light on all the mystifications planned for the ”third
way." the 1930's. planned capitalist state. Stalinist transition party, pro-
jection and third way: all this is part of a heritage which has been rightly
rejected by the present class composition.

2. The Form of the Crisis: A Crisis of Mistaken Proportions

The corporate state, born in America of the crisis of the 1930's, lives on
proportions. lt regulates the proportions of income. It is a planned state
inasmuch as it organizes national production according to plans of capitalist

33

FOI‘OIFIJAI.UIIIINLY
reproduction. But at the same time it is a contractual state: representatives
of big vested interests are incorporated through a continuous contractual
dynamics. Institutions are conducive to the formation of contracts; the law
is bent to the administration of contractual convergences. All this can work
as long as the political framework-~designed to maintain and reproduce the
fundamental relationships-~is somehow consonant with the goals inscribed in
the material Constitution of the corporate state. The capitalist rule of
development is that which constitutes the material Constitution of the cor-
porate state. The control of enterprises is that which is imposed by the
terms. the rhythms, the quantity of social accusulation and intended redistri-
bution of income. Everything can work as long as the big proportions fixed by
the material Constitution are not attacked. From this point of view, the
corporate state represents a giant step forward with respect to the state of
law. The latter guarantees that these "spontaneously" determined market
relationships are gathered in a public project for which the state merely
observes the ways in which it develops. In reality, it surreptitiously
preforns them through the mechanisms of forming the political stratum. In

the corporate state, the function of preforming is completely conscious and
guaranteed institutionally. The conditions of reproduction must be contractual,
mediated with the general consensus, brought back to the proportions of capit-
alist development inscribed in the material Constitution.

And when this mechanism breaks down? When the contractual mediation is
interrupted which represents the point of transformation of values into
institutions, of social productivity into planning and normative capacity of
the state. This can happen for various reasons. all related to the terms the
society's fundamental rules are based on, in other words to the material
Constitution. Due to the dynamics of struggle, the social contract becomes
possible again only if the terms of the fundamental proportions inscribed in
the material Constitution are modified. Let us suppose that there is a lack
of proportion. This lack of proportion can be corrected in only two ways:
either by eliminating the terms of lack of proportion, thereby reestabliahing
the original conditions of the contract, or by modifying the basic proportion-
the overall picture within which the proportions exist--thereby bringing the
proportions back into balance. But in the present phase this can only be done
badly within [accepted] margins of risk. The consequences are very grave:

ii the proportions are mobile (and therefore lack of proportion is always
possible), but at the same time the framework within which the lack of propor-
tion must be set and brought back into balance is rigid and unable to function
as it should, the whole institutional apparatus breaks down. An institutional
crisis begins, in a context in which social forces, aroused by the dynamism of
the planned and contractual state, have difficulty accepting any impediment,
and there is no adequate output corresponding to the input of demand.

As you can see, this is not a formal scheme. It is important to view it from
the historical standpoint. In the present situation the material nature of

the crisis is evident. It attacks not only the proportions which have been
determined, but also the rules of proportions, the long term rules, the measur-
ing criteria which these rules are founded on. In order to have a contract it
is necessary to have at least a homogenous will on both sides. In order to
recover the contract of the fundamental law it is necessary to have permanence
and continuity, cooperation and loyalty to a scheme of reproduction of society.

34
FOIiﬂﬂﬂKJAl.UBEIIELY
FINI(NWHCJAI.USE(NVLY

But all that is no longer present. In the factories the working classes are
radically refusing to accept the redistribution of income on which the social
determination is based. This means they refuse not only the monetary quantities
rigidly fixed in the form of salaries, they also refuse the experiment of
capitalist work as the content of contracted salaries.

in this connection, I like to refer to the opinion of a scholar who is above
suspicion, Jases O'Connor: “The conditions for the accumulation of capitalist
profit inthe 0.8. have been undermined by the present class struggle and by
capitalist coepetition. which have effectively reduced the production of
absolute and relative added values; they have therefore reduced the rate of
exploitation, and therefore, in Marxist terms, the rate of profit and accumula-
tion. To use an excessively simplified formula, industrial capitalism in the
past faced the problem of the transformation of value and added value because
the production of added value was a problem which had almost been solved. In
recent decades, capitalise has been increasingly obliged to face the problem
of the production of added value, because the transformation of value (includ-
ing added value) is no longer a problem. This new imbalance (the destruction
of the unity of production and circulation) is basically the result of a pro-
found transformation of relationships between classes. To a certain extent.
struggle of the working class for labor has been transformed into a struggle
against work; the struggle for a salary basedrulproductivity has been trans-
forned into a struggle for a salary based on needs; needs defined as individual
needs for goods have been increasingly transformed into social needs for
equality between races and sexes, environmental protection. and other problems
related to the quality of life" (critique of Law No 167).

Elesents of rejection are piling up; the state's organs which are designed for
mediation (like trade unions. parties, local agencies, social services. etc.)
are thrown out of balance by radical alternatives: either reject this accumu-
lation of refusals and in that case lose representation; or accept it, and

in that case live on the sidelines of a lack of proportion which has been
induced and which runs the risk of leading to a breakdown of the social contract.
80 the situation is as follows: a crisis fueled by a lack of proportion brought
about in some way is open--and this is apparent in the description of elements
of pressure and their subversive accumulation--not so much to a relegitimirstion
of fundamental rules as to a shock wave against the fundamental rules themselves.
This is disastrous for all the institutional sequences sustained by those rules,
like doeinoes knocking each other down.

But this is still part of the old picture. Analyzing this series of phenomena
elsewhere (for example in "Proletarisns and State" and in "domination and
Sabotage"). we had given the state's answer. It seemed to me that I could

read it in the setting in motion of instruments for intervening in the economic
situation which we called "stop and go.” or periods of expansion and stagnation
appropriately regulated to correct any lack of proportion, to regain homogene-
ity in the whole cycle. Development and crisis seemed to us entities conducive
to capitalist maneuverability, understood in terms of control and resetting
fixed proportions during the class struggle. The state-plan became the state-
crisis inasmuch as it became able to dominate the contradictory turns of the
class struggle in the cycle. but this only applies to the past. The change
FIH!(HWW(JAI.USEZ(NULY

in the composition of the working class and the diffusion of productive labor
in society impose modifications on the state's control apparatus related to
modifications in the way the class struggle is used. what is possible
(although it is wearying) to dominate in the working cycle and enterprises is
hard to dominate in the social productive cycle. In fact, when salaries-by
means of infinite ways-~destroy their own model and become increasingly con-
fused with shares of income, all this not only dissolves the proportional rela—
tionship which the capitalist factory is presumed to determine; it goes beyond
this blurring permeating society, and transforms it into a diffuse political
awareness of the impossibility of containing the extent of worker reproduction
within proportions fixed by the state for the reproduction of capitalism. And
in that case it is not only the proportional reproduction scheme that breaks
down; social groups interested in establishing effective contractual forms are
also drawn into this crisis. Not only do the general proportions break down,
but there is an accumulation of mechanisms and dynamics, irreversible or diffi-
cult to reverse. which push the lack of proportion through the whole stat.
sequence of control through consensus on the basis of the material Constitution.

Salaries, social proletarian income, social conditions of reproduction of the
proletariat: it is around these fundamental terms that the constitutional
rules of capitalist production/reproduction are entering a crisis. of course
capitalists can divide the prolatarian thrust and try to break it by separating
its specific impact from its cumulative sequence. This can happen directly,
engineered by the state, or through delegation of power to the big trade union
confederations. But this is not a lasting remedy. In fact. as we recall, the
"social"composition of the proletariat has been so consolidated by now that the
circulation of struggles cannot help but be immune from all attempts to divide
it into compartments. Furthermore. the offensive encirclement of the most
consolidated corporate positions-~that aspect of the attack of the social
proletariat-~1s also a trend of the proletariat's struggle which cannot be
held back. Thus beyond and before any given forcast of breakdown, what we
must emphasize is that the causes of constant lack of proportion in the terms
of domination, in the quantity of exploitation, are enormously magnified by
the social dimension of the composition of the proletariat. The accumulation
of elements of lack of proportion, and their being pushed to the limit of the
fundamental constitutional law, thus becomes quantitative and qualitative ten-
slon: quantitative because it is in fact the sum of quantities of breakdown;
qualitative because the social dimension on which it is constructed and on
which the process grows is such that it is difficult to control as it is
extremely mobile and unpredictable.

As a consequence, from the point of view of institutions, the existence and
ncccntuation of an unbridgeable gap arises. Because the institutions of the
corporate state are founded on the representation of homogenous interests;

they are designed for organization based on division. they function for a
contracc between parties. The rule of proportion between profit and salary.
between exploitation and work. between production and reproduction is always
seen from the special angle of particular interests which only the state admin-
istration of the law of proportion brings to general mediation. But no longer.
The particular appears as totality. In fact the only possible control, faced
with the totality of the interest of the social worker. seems to be that

36
IND! OIINCJAJ.UGI:(IVLY
II)! OFFICJAI.l£ﬂE(MNLV

which is exercised through the fictitious totality of currency. But this
disturbs and destroys the whole social articulation of representation, it
destroys the laborious interiorization which special representations have made
of the fundamental law of proportion for exploitation and development.

Today in Italy~-but those concerned with things Italian can console themselves,
it is happening in all developed capitalist countries--these problems are very
relevant. The crisis is due to the fact that the planned capitalist state has
been submerged in a chemical solution which had dissolved the differences in
the proletariat. Thus all the criteria break down, all the measurements,

the functions of the reagents with which, in accordance with predetermined
proportions. the experiment was to take place and have certain results. Cap-
italism can no longer be sure of anything. The conditions of class confronta-
tion have been enormously advanced. It would take a radical reform of the
state. as intense as that determined in the 1930's. But this is a dream!
Under these circumstances of subversion, reform can only have a sign opposite
to that conceived by capitalism. For this reason, this reign of lack of pro-
portion has become a battlefield. Everyone is waiting for a new contract. but
between what parties? For whom? There is only one force here which can go
forward, and it is that of the socially productive worker. But why should it
be in his intereststoanve outside of himself? He has all the productive
force, and therefore he alone can fix new proportions, or no proportions.

To sum up: The fundamental difference between the crisis of proportions of
the 1930’s and today's crisis regards the state's capacity to intervene and
regulate, and it consists mainly of the fact that while in the 1930's institu-
tional dynamics retained relative autonomy of functioning vis-a-vis the social
antagonists. today the immersion of the capitalist project in the continuity
of social production makes it difficult if not impossible to adequately
articulate political and administrative autonomy for the capitalist project.
The capitalist constitutional norm therefore becomes, in an extreme attempt

to function, more and more rigid, while the mobility of social factors. of
social productive work, increases. The paradox is not a fleeting one; there
is a clash between logics based on alternative values, often openly antagonis-
tic So we have a situation in which a progressive institutionalization of
society into state rules is paralleled by destructuring, mobility, the dyna-
mics of differentiation produced by the new composition of the working force,
of the proletariat. This indeterminateneas, this progression of contradictions,
seems to constitute the specific nature of the crisis of lack of proportion
today.

3. Forms of Crisis: Crisis of Circulation

The crisis caused by the fact that the proportions of the relationship of
development (production versus reproduction within the rule of profit) have
altered, precisely and/or according to general sequences. are accompanied by
horizontal crises of circulation. Capitalist control is a circular function:
it must follow the realization of profit. The value produced must return to
those who ordered the production, after ordering society itself, going through
society. The process of control and the process of valorization run parallel
to each other, cross over. are juxtaposed, homologous, in each of these forms,
and they form one path, one circulation, returning alwavs to the point of de-
parture. But all this is deontological. Capitalism is a relationship and this

37

FINI‘IHHCIAI.USI¢I‘LY
relationship can be broken (we have seen this in connection with lack of
proportion). But this relationship can be broken all the more easily in
circulation. where lack of equality and discrepancies inherent in the produc-
tive process are apparent. Capitalism: its collective brain has naturally
been applied to these difficulties; it has tried to guarantee by force the
continuity of circulation and realization. In doing this it has juxtaposed

a political determination over the economic determination of circulation; it
has proposed both as tendencies towards unity. But this over-determination,
if on the one hand it has given new guarantees for development, on the other
hand has given new opportunities for breaks. Circulation of capital is a
relationship that can be broken, the circulation of control can be blocked.
Both can be shattered either separately or together, or temporarily interrupted,
or made viscous. The form this circulation takes can be broken or the times
of circulation can be drawn out enormously or rendered uncontrollable and
precarious, the content of circulation can be contested. Certainly to the
extent that capital must expose itself so absolutely (following its own law)
on the terrain-politically and coercively overdetermined-of circulation, it
attempts a jump forward to recover the productive value of circulation itself.
But this attempt to suck synergy on the terrain of circulation is subject to
the law of productive relationships; when capitalism broadens the terrain of
exploitation, it also broadens that of resistance and possibilities for break-
ing. But this is not what interests us above all. What interests us is

that on this vast horizon, where productive functions and command functions
must march together to make value and control circulate and be realized, on
this terrain blocks and opportunities for breaks occur in incredible abundance.
In other words the more production/reproduction, production/circulation, and
production/reproduction/control relationships are extended, until they consti-
tue the specific concept of the productive circulation of a planned state-the
more these phenomena occur, the more exposed they are on the side of social
worker. Our hypothesis of a progressive inevitable ineraion (and consequent
isolation) of the mature state form in the great sea. ontologically determined,
of the social composition of the class, is exemplified in a formidable way by
the new structure of productive circulation. Hence the might of the block,

of the crisis of circulation, which are determined by the situation itself, by
its simple material intensity and compactness.

while this general modification of the relationship develops, capitalism tries
to dominate it. We have already seen this: capitalism tries to extract value
from circulation. Rationalizing it, abbreviating its tempos, guaranteeing
fiuxes--but above all organizing production in the dimension of circulation.
When circulation is consolidated over the enormous expanse we have seen,
capitalism seems to be submerged in it. And in this way it agrees to act:
reorganizing itself while submerged, trying to find in the autonomous articula-
tions of the social worker points of recomposition of the relationship of
exploitation. This is the submerged economy. But it is not only this: it is
a simultaneous presence of elesents of exploitation and self-valorization.
Faced with the capitalist initiative of trying once again to bite the body of
the working class, there is above all another aspect: the proletariat's
capacity for resistance and independence. Nowwhatshould be considered, re-
garding the problem that interests us (the crisis of circulation), is the sign
which these contradictory relationships will assume. And it seems to me that
the situation is characterized by a series of mechanisms which help and extend,

38

FOIIOFIICIAI.UBE(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even in the case of the sub-erged initiative of capitalisa. the break. or at
least the exhaustion of the state's capacity to control circulation. This
leans that the multiplying mechanisms of proletarian self-valorisation are
stronger and sore rapid than those of intensification of control; in other
words. in the given situation, the expansion and strengthening of the social
composition of the working class is a fundamental elenent of crisis of the
unified process of circulation of profit and cmd.

Saying this we nust however innsdiately raise another problen. If the circu-
lation of capital is interrupted. in an ontologically determined situation,
by the energence of the workers' self-valorisation. we are not only faced
with a negative: the interruption of the circular control and realization

of capital. He are also faced with a positive factor: the energence of
infinite points of resistence and breakage in the proletariat, a reopening
which is in no way homologous to processes of independent circulation. all
on the part of the proletariat. Circulation of struggles. circulation of
experience, circulation of languages; the independence of these processes has
laws of its own: we will see sone later. For now we should stress that of
the lack of correspondence between capitalist crises and worker insurgence.
This connection has always been sought by capitalist econonic science, in
order to doninate it; from the point of the traditional workers' nova-eat this
connection has been interiorized to such an extent that it has becone an
obstacle ispeding the reading of any class autonony. It is tine to unload
these archaic relics of a pseudo-workers' science, relying on the originality
of the blending between the crisis of circulation of capital and autonony,
independence of the self-valorizing circulation of proletarian initiative.

This is not meant by any neans to evoke an inge of the development of
struggles, of cosposition. of worker science. that siaulate capitalist ones;
on the contrary. where the nechanisn of capitalist circulation breaks. we
cannot in any case see the precise and specific action of the working class.
He can and nust see it as a aonent constructed and accurlated fron a rich
congloneration of behavior and struggles which have been expressed within the
process of self-valorisation. when we consider the cycle/crisis/worker-atrug-
glee relationship we are struck by the always relative—and often extrelaely
high--unpredictability of the nonsnt of the break. Who could have foreseen
Hay 1968? This lack of predictability is the basis for all insurrectional
idealisms and ideologies of revolutionary irrationality. And these will con-
tinue to occur until we learn to follow the neterisl couplexity of for-native
paths of the class. and exclude nschanical correspondences between crisis of
capitalist circulation and the specificity of circulation of worker struggles.
The break, the insurrection is always a result of a given accunulation, not
Just the explosion of a situation that has been held down. Of course the
viscosity of institutions, the corruption of a political stratus. the crisis
deter-ined around a certain passage can be fundamental. but not decisive. The
only thing that is decisive is the process of accmlation of struggles, the
independent maturing of the physiological processes of self-valorization. He
can finally allow ourselves to assume. as far as the revolution is concerned,
a point of view like that of Tocqueville.

Throughout the space. throughout the area where the processes of self-valori-

zation are occurring. When these material dinensions are defined. linits are

also established which are determined by the interweaving of an independent
39

”WNW?
expansion of class initiative and the emergence of new components of the process
of self-velorization. Let us consider. for example, the case of the so-called
oil crisis. In this case, the revolutionary interests of the working class

of advanced countries, all centered on the independence of their self-valori-
ration, can be extended to be included in an accumulative mechanism with the
emerging struggles in the oil producing countries; but when these struggles
become workers' struggles, when they become trends toward proletarian self-
valorization, independent themselves (and this is what is happening more and
more, ever since the beginning of the 1970's). The process of the accumulation
of struggles, its dimension can therefore not be considered an expression of
organic and linear development. It must be considered rather a real material
acoumuletion. hence the possibility of continuous contradictions, dislevels,
lack of proportion. clashes. But this sets up a process which. whatever
difficulties there may he, represents an insoluble moment which cannot be
mediated by the complex of the capitalist relationship. The lack of homogeneity
of breaking points in the capitalist cycle and in the cycle of worker recom-
position is extended in these dimensions-I would say that it constitutes them.

Thus we come to the definition of an intermediate but very important point in
the theory of the forms of the crisis. If we take the crisis--of lack of
proportion or of circulation--as an interruption of development. of propor-
tions or of the circularity constituting it in/within the political form of
capitalist control--the economic and political being fused--and if we assume
the development of the social composition of the proletariat as independence.
if we therefore eliminate every automatic or mechanical independence from
both--the form of the relationship between development/crisis and class strug-
gle can only take the form of war. This means that every strategy. on both
sides, assumes not the reconstruction of a unitarian project but the destruc-
tion of the adversary. This means that the initial position of the two sides
is not defined in any way by relationships of interdependence, but by relation-
ships of antagonism. It means that every action, on both sides, is born and
develops within independent and antagonistic relationships. This situation

is what capitalist development leaves. for itself and for the class. Not a
desire, no one's desire, but a need, the necessary result of capitalist
development. The economic science of capitalism recognizes this when after
transforming itself from the triumphant calculator of develop-ant into a
modest administrator of state operations, today it has relinquished every task
that is not a tactical one. Because here there is another paradox-~after
having lain under the same cover for so long, economics and politics separate
again, but this time--since it is due to a situation of war--politics dominates.

4. Forms of the Crisis: Violent Crisis

The social and economic crisis is completely transferred to the political-
institutional terrain. The state as the center of overall imputation of
drvelopmentwithinthe compatibility of capitalist control is shaken by it.

The democratic specificity of the state, its capacity to transform economic
inequality into political equality as a basis for dialectics between consensus
and command, between organization and violence: all this falls away. Because
real antagonism has finally recognized in the form of equality the strait
Jacket it needs to free itself of. So a linear mechanism (inasmuch as the

40

I‘llflﬂﬂChaLlliiiﬂﬂll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

institution is a channel for prices) of breakage, discontinuous but progressive,
is set in notion which, to the extent to which it breaks the circularity of

the processes of reproduction of capitalism. affects and strikes and destroys
the links of obedience, it dissolves those of authority-wit reconstructs the
various and alternative classes of value.

He shall cone back later, within the franework of the analysis of the process
of the proletariat's self-detersination. to the content and definition of
these alternative classes of values. here we shall si-ply elphasise the
radicalness and totality of the interruptions which are detenined (clearly,
in this connection, 1 refer the reader to the specific works which are so
abundant at last in this field: the analyses of Klaus offe, Janos O'Connor.
theirnyhole entourage. and also to the studies contained in ny ”The torn-
State .

Every state institution-~1n general. but all the nore in a refined for: of
organization like the denocratic four-has a certain relationship between
functional effectiveness of cot-and end validity (legal or consensus legitini-
ring) of its rules. either in the content pacifying conflicts or as a function
of a pronised satisfaction. Production of goods and services. values and
reproduction of society according to a traditional scheme, goals and linits

of naterial constitution--all these functions are reforned in every act of

the edninistration and all the sore within the figure of the adlinistretive
body, the specific institution. Now. the transferrel of a crisis which is

not due to the econonic situation. but is ontological, within the state
nachine-oand of a state in which the institutional reflection of productive
capitalist processes is so far advanced-creates an expansion of the crisis

in which the phases of contagion becoue ct-ulative according to geoaetric
rhythes. The sanagenent of the crisis hecues shut the govern-ent's only
activity. As in the case of any epidenic, the only way to interrupt nultipli-
cation would be to strike at the causes by going back through the channels

of contagion. But the sources of contagion reside within the capitalist
structure of the democratic state. in the synthesis of organisation and
violence, of functionality and legiti-iration that the state requires in
saterially determined terns. Does this mean that the denocretic state is a
structurally weak form of the state which is unable to serve couple: ends?

No. The interaction of the reference to the experience of "irresoluteness"
of the Heinar Republic. so well known in the literature, does not help us:
what has changed is the class relationship. and it is a good rule not to
coepare different things if you do not want to produce sophisns. Speaking of
”weakness" and crisis of the state: this simply sense that today the dslocra-
tic state has outlived its usefulness--in the form in which we saw in evolve
historically, free the state of law to the planned state--for nanaging
capitalist developnent and for a capitalist solution to the crisis. But for
capitalise, for its ideology, the democratic state nust nevertheless be
considered the instrunent of douination. And now we see the deaocratic capit-
alist state nodified under the capitalist thrust. And since it is the pores
of contagion of the crisis that should he stopped up first of all, we see an
intervention which blocks the relationship between consensus and cor-and in
all the passages of administrative organisation, tending--ss is the case

in any energency regine-~to consolidate a unaninistic synthesis of counsel
and consensus-and at the highest level of state structure. The corporate

lol

summons
—-__—

state transforms itself into a mass authoritarian state defining administra—
tive bodies as separate bodies of the stereo-thus recognising paradoxically,
the independence of the proletariat and eliminating all the connections it
has defined to recover its pressure at every level-for the development of
capitalism. Every connection between form of administrative command and

its legitimisation is interrupted-and restored only beyond any possibility
that the administrative machine. suffering fro. s specific impact of the
crisis will communicate it to its own totality. It is an emerging.

Re are not interested here either in individual abuses or deviations, we are
interested in the whole process. Under what circumstances therefore. we must
ask ourselves. is this modification possible? It seems to me that there

are two fundamental conditions: the first is derived from the quality of the
subjective forces jointly leading to the emerging, the second from the specifi-
city of the device that they can put in motion.

Now. as regards the quality of subjective forces we should stress that they-
the parties-must be organised as popular forces. They must produce the
simulation of emerging within themselves. on large popular masses, to be able
to relive it at the level of that state. The result of this process is

purely functional: it reproduces repressive eotivetions of the crisis.
hroadenins them, leading to a domino-sytle falling of responsibilities, creat-
Ing coresponsibility in a generic way and act.rding to class lines, pushing
towards the emptiness of political autonomy, toward state totalitarianism,
every element of consensus and participation. As for the device put in action,
starting with the state centrality of the emerging program, it consists in
cooperation which the whole state and capitalist machine sets in motion to
sustain the action of special administrative bodies. These can sct-in this
situation all the state administrations act tendentially-like special bodies
(and other structures, previsously contractual, are reduced to the regime of
special bodies--the trade unions for example); so they can act according to
these sequences only to the extent that there is a very strong central mechan-
ism. rhythmically expressing the general motivating force. "down to every
specific moment. to every particular point where there is a breaking or weaken—
ing of the relationship between command and consensus. Through a general
emergency mechanism, the state replaces a certain synthesis which every adminis-
strative act requires of a democratic regime. The mechanism of cos-and of the
mass authoritarian state therefore imposes on every branch of the administra-
tion a defined autonomy within an extremely rigid framework of necessary
coercion, completely functional for the mere transmission of emergency commands-—
like a command based on the need to block every circuit in a crisis.

At this point, however. it is necessary to step back and consider the pathogenic
factors which this type of institutional transformation sets in motion. It is
clear that all the spaces taken from the political consensus in a situation

in which participation in the common social work is required, in which the
salary relationship is socially distended and is identified merely as quantity
of income distributed on the production-reproduction connection-«these are
spaces left open to attacks against the system. hot automatically. it is clear,
this potentiality is transformed into actuality and the presence of violence.
But gradually. even on this terrain, the elements of crisis become explicit

62
FOI‘OFFKJAI.U§I<UNLY
in their specificity: the capitalist operation of closing the spaces of con-
tractuality vis-a-vis the adeinietration, of defining fraaeworks of conflict
within econoeic and political limits that are clearly delineated free the
point of view of adsinistration and salary. and finally the conscious pushing
aside of consistent parts of the labor force-all this introduces eleaents of
violent crisis which soon because subjectively relevant for large sectors of
the proletariat. when the block of purely objective relevance of any love-eat
of proletarian autonomy hecoues a vital necessity of the system. this block

valence of crisis: a crisis of violence inflicted and/or endured-on both
sides. when the rigidity of the state machine, the viscosity of its operation,
the drastic per-anence of its cos-and hecone constitutional. and such that
iron the constitutional essrgency the state's intervention is extended in

crisis of lack of proportion and of circulation. the state cannot help but
respond with potential compensating violence at these critical points. The

part of the rules of ad-inistration. The ordering power which the planned
state wanted to include in its own definition (hut predisposing it to a
homogeneous relationship, on develolent, with the proletarian force) hecones
instead here a blade which cuts all the sore deeply, the sore rigid it is.
into the resistance of class coaposition.

He are facing a new paradox here. It is this: the state, as a pathogenic
elesent. as the proaotor of exceptional and exemplary violence, in reality
in this context the only terrorist agent. The state is forced to intervene
on the interrupted nerves of its design for donination. integration. produc-
tion, in a precise way, effectively from the point of view of terrorist
exemplification. But these central points of state intervention, and of its
logic of war, are not what is of lost interest to the proletariat if our

this large proletarian body, the state because the carrier of crisis and
probably of the hardest and nost decisive crisis, even if it has knowingly
advanced the structure of nany levels of authority. in order to specifically
react to the specificity of the elements of crisis already produced on the
terrain of complex circulation of profit and command. The proletarisn reaction.
on the other hand, follows its own channels of autonomy.

what can we conclude at this point, other than that the crisis condition is
changed by capitalism into a state of war, inevitably and as the result of the
simple clash with this class composition? This is what we have been repeating
from the start, namely that today the situation is defined by a making of the
working class and proletariat which is so socially invasive it impedes all
capitalist reproduction which is not posed in terms of war. Thus if we follow
the transformation of the working class and define the consolidation of its
social situation, we are inevitably led to pose the problem of overcoming war,
and this is the same as the problem of overcoming capitalism as a form of
organization and control of society. A utopia? A utopia ceases to be utopian
when the existing order is atrocious and when the utopian subject has become
more real than the existing order.

5. Problems to Explore

Comrades, as I said and want to repeat, these are notes of subjects. They pose
many more problems than they solve. Re have to work on these subjects. On
what in particular? 0n the fundamental difference of the state-crisis, on the
specificity of the class composition which is forming within this crisis.

This is an epic making passage. In past years, in the last two decades, when
we have stressed so much the emergence of the working masses--thus effectively
combining theory and revolutionary practice--in reality we were only marking
one stage of the development of class composition. an anticipation of the
crucial and decisive moment: the emergence of the social worker and the
definitive break between capitalist development and the development of class
composition.

Now, if this is true. as I believe, as the experience of our struggles is
beginning to show so widely, so arduoualy, and if worker freedom is finally
beginning to express itself so forcefullyo-if this is true. therefore, we have
initially four problems to face, which we already raised in a disorderly way in
Chapter 2. The first is that of defining the movement of social capital. The
second is the problem of the definition of self-valoriration in all the dimen-
sions which are characteristic of the subject/social worker. The third is
that of a modification of the configuration of the state and, in general, the
definition of forms of sanctions. The fourth concerns. the global worldwide
dimensions, of the relationship between the extension of worker self-valori-
zation and the restructuring of cot-and at the multinational level. These
are directions for research opened up by this simple approach to an analysis
of the crisis; many other problems, above all those related to an analysis of

the articulation of the practice of the collective proletarian subject, are
still to be raised.

All I could do here is list the problems to be faced in the framework of this
strategy of the social worker.

I. The concept of social capital is the first point. In Marx, this concept
is barely touched upon, although it is solidly rooted, in the internal
articulations to be shown. The relationship production/reproduction, inasmuch
as it is mediated by the administrative structure of the state, is the first

as
FOIIOIFKJAL.U§IIIULY
FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY

point of the analysis. This eeans that all the categories of social capital,
and in particular those of profit and incoee, should be studied separately as
to their eechanise of forwation, and productive circulation which eaterially
fore these categories. One should probably take as a point of departure the
crisis of bourgeois political econowy. in its entrant theories. dissolving

the very horizon of global analysis. The central problee will undoubtedly be
that of identifying the social relationship between (social) exploitation and
(class) self-vsloriration in discontinuous and dishoeogsneous terns, where the
experience of struggle shows that the problew arises. So there is no clai-

to global dislectics, but si-ply to s totality of specific categoriel behavi-
are. The fact that these problems are not posed and cannot heuby definition-
posed in relation to hoeology (direct or inverted) does not wean that these
terns do not define relationships enong the-selves, relationships foraing
structures which are sonatines resistant both toalogical analysis and to
significantly long periods of history. It is probably only the design of this
ewpirical picture which can, within broad and solid investigation, enable us
to redefine categorial sequences at the level of the proble-atics of social
capital. The concept of social capital cannot in any way be considered, there-
fore. a sinple expansion of the very general category of anarchy and coepeti-
tion as defined by Kerr. The fourth or fifth book of the "Capital" that we
are preparing to write is born of an effective shift in the docuentary base of
the analysis. The absolute antagonise of relationships we see today is a
powerful driving force for shifting the analysis; and this is so-sthing that
can be done only by putting oneself inside the antagonism and the tension of
dislocation. In theory, too, the point of view of war eust be asst-ed, i.e..
the independence of factors, of their contribution in working together to
destroy every preconstituted relationship, in projectiu separation.

ll. Self-vslorisstion of the social worker. he regards method, there is no
doubt that the history of the "other workers' wovenent" has offered us rich
instruments of analysis. But it is clear that the level at which our hypothesis
is placed requires more thorough exploration. "hen we speak of the social
worker we are in fact speaking of a network of behaviors and a circulation

of values, ontologically consolidated. which are tendentislly controlling ale-
nents in the society of capitalist crisis. The crisis itself. and the social
phenoeens it causes, are dowinated by the redundancy of the self-valoriastion
of the worker. A few corrections have to be ads in the traditional written
history of the "other workers' nova-ant." firstly to cancel the ninoritsrian
blot which too often corrupts it and secondly, and as a consequence, to
articulate the couples of discontinuous but effective relationships which the
asssive social deteraination of the class ilposas on the adversary and on the
notions of its crisis. Thus in a purely introductory way we have a dual level
for our analysis: on the one hand we have an analysis within self-valorisation
that begins with written history and loves to the asking of the class; on the
other hand, for now without any certain contacts, we have an analysis outside
class coeposition which feels its effects (albeit discontinuously and errati-
cally)--effective and draaatic againuin determining the capitalist crisis.

It is useless to dwell. above all in this second case, on how fundanental
techniques and sccentuations of thought are in war. As far as 1'. concerned,

I have already developed allusions to self—criticise as regards lechanical
wethodology which in past years has led us to conduct an analysis of the crisis
and an analysis of self-valorization in almost coeplinentary tar-s. But then

65

FOIOII'IGALISIONLV
we risk liberating, in unjustified terns, elements of pure destabilization,
almost as though we were saving the originality of the communist movement
which the complimentarity of the aspects of the crisis, or of development,

ran the risk of suffocating. But if this self-criticism is correct and should
be deepened, the most important thing is not yielding to the opposite tempta-
tion: the linearity, the organic nature, the spontaneity of the process of
self-valorizstion. This is lethal.

111. A third problem regards the specifices of the state. He must review the
criticism of the adsinistration and the Constitution. It is probably the
problem of the process of individual branches of the administration forming
"special bodies", and placing themselves within the framework of administrative
authority. and the flux of decisions and specific sanctions, which we are most
interested in. In other words, in this case, too, it is not so much the
globality of the criticism of the Constitution, its ssterial and qualifying
elements, which is central; it is rather the discontinuity of the devices of
power to be brought into play, so as to criticise them precisely and identify
their evolutionary and destructurising dynamics. The relationship which
relates these modifications in the state structure to the energing crisis, the
effects of break and repression, all this should be studied separately, with
attention to specific techniques.

IV. This brings us to what is increasingly perhaps the most central point to
raise: the doubt that any analysis does not start from a preliminary analysis
is vsin. This is the problem of s sultinational formation of capital, it is
the problem of the multinational dimensions of class composition. What shall
we say? Here we can only stress the urgency of a program. of an accumulation
of initiatives in this connection. Starting, as we do, from the definition of
the social composition of the working class, this urgency becomes even greater,
if possible. The fact is that the making of the social worker, is contained
from the start within the multinational dimension. The recomposing processes
of the social worker, and their extraordinary acceleration at present. have
resulted from the multinational dimension. The effects of the new composition
are also reflected in the multinational dimension. how. it is true that the
high points of development permit a more articulated reading of the low points;
it is also true that this methodological assumption, which is valid for the
history of the developsant of capitalism, is useful in defining the category
of social worker and therefore applicable to the analysis of multinational
recomposition, but with some reservations. The more we explore in depth the
intensity of these concepts, and the more they become Operative essences, as
the transforming activity of revolutionary thought requires, the more the
analysis must adhere to the concreteness of proletarisn independence. never
before has it been so important as it is today-an the old third interna-
tional theories and Third World imperialism are leaking copiously—to concen-
trade intellectual and political work on this group of problems.

Also because, as we have said. from this point of view other elements of the
analysis can be clarified. Let us consider briefly the results of a study

of the crisis and of the management of the crisis; both on the production side
(salary relationships) and on the reproduction side (consmption-valorisation
relationships), syI-etries, proportions, and compatibility have disappeared.
One last tangential mediation seems to arise, only on the terrain of the world
government of money and, through this. on the terrain of the world government

46

MWUSIONLY
90l1lﬂﬂC1Al.USE|lVLV

of the productivity of leading industrial sectors. Lack of proportion and
inconpatibility, which are so very effective on the national terrain, would

be projected and dissolved in the distance and complexity of the multinational
arena. It is a question of understanding whether this is just an optical illu-
sion or if multinational nediation of capitalist development has already gone
so far as to resolve the destructive potential of the processes of self-
valoritation on this terrain. Re are faced with a classical Leninist problen,
and this is certainly not the place to go into its nerits. It is useful to
merely stress how far the capitalist initiative has gone in anticipation. But
we should not forget, either, the fact that, even if only at a regional level.
and still only partially, the first great experiences of the workers' struggle.
identifying the interests of the average proletariat between historical comp
position and diverse complexity. have begun to develop in the struggle. fro.
the point of view of the worker. this new horizon, this overall Vergleichung
of values of single national worker classes, this worker continental drift.
should be confronted centrally, both in theory and in looking forward to the
struggle. This will certainly not he the first time that a capitalist antici-
pation is shattered by worker initiative!

Chapter3: Figures of Capitalist Utopia

In the night of barbarianisn andfeudslisl.rsal relationships among men could
be destroyed, whole nations thrown into turmoil, justice coepletely corrupted;
but when the light began to shine it became necessary for gothic absurdities to
evaporate and take flight, for the rest of the old ferocity to disappear. This
is certain. Will we merely substitute one evil for another. or will the social
order, in all its beauty, replace the ancient disorder? Abee Sieyes. ”Qu'est-
ce que le Tiers Btst," [what is the third state], Chapter 6, Paragraph 3.

1. Control of the Refusal To Hark?

In the field of economics and production for profit. capitalisn. in its constant
attempts to organize for exploitation. in its constant but never decisive
restructuring of the cries it goes through, puts forward sons proposals. Two
of these proposals seen to us worth analyzing: the attenpt to control the
specific nature of crises and therefore restructure itself; and the attempt to
reorganize development by controlling (and preparing instruments of control
for) high levels of conflict. Let us consider these proposals separately and
judge to what extent they are realistic or utopisn. Evidently more utopia
than realism, if it is true that the emphatic apologia of the "third estate."
according to Sieyes, continues to doednate the scene. and it does this all

the more so that harder it is to reduce reality to aspire.

Let us look therefore at the first proposal. It is widely supported in the
political stratus of capitalist society. not just in Italy. He can call it

the neoliberalist line; it has a strong restorationist connotation and its

ail is to control the specific nature of crises, crises in the forn of labor's
refusal to work and the relative independence of the processes of self-valori-
ration. Its theoretical and practical pillars are as follows: control govern-
eent expenditures in ways ained at a general constriction of labor and there-
fore a global nobilizstion--diffuse and liberalist—-of the labor force on
diversified earkets; rely nainly on monetary control of develop-ant (both in

47

FOI‘O'IICIAI.IEII(INLY
terms of controlling the Ioney supply, and therefore inflation-deflation cycles,
and in terms of credit policy): flexible planning based mainly on a reduction
of social costs and a predetermination of instruments for constant control
(automatic, telematic) of all compatibilities; finally, a growing integration
of the national economic system in the multinational system, and adaptation of
that market and of control. The highly restorationist content of this politi-
cal-economic line lies in the fact that it requires, as a premise, the dissolv-
ing of the relationships based on force which have become consolidated in the
struggle between the two classes. It requires that, in the enterprise, all

the constraints which the trade unions had introduced be eliminated, that the
enterprise's risk be rewarded fiscally and by favorable market conditions,

that the economy be restored according to a liberalist statute. and that the
monocratic freedom of the entrepreneur be recognized; in other words, that the
whole system of the state-plan be suspended and the mechanisms of market
defense set up again.

This is an old and reationary picture! And yet, in this proposal there is 'n
aspect that should not be underestimated as to its political effectiveness:

the fact that the neoliberalist line inclues and distorts the productive

figure of the social worker. In other words, the crisis of the state-plan, in
all the aspects it has shown, is properly appreciated here. So collective
capitalism insists that it is necessary to restore a large network of exploita-
tion, break the rigidity inherent in the institutionalization of the workers'
struggle. pursue the refusal to work to the point where it becomes a need

for reproduction (if only autonomised) again, play on the productive recomposi-
tion of the working class and proletariat by pursuing its mobility and speci-
fic behavior. It is necessary, says collective capitalism. to reactivate the
overall productivity of the system, accepting that it be shifted free the
factory to the social complex of reproduction. The working class of great

mass struggles managed to form a flow f income from the factory to society.
from production to reproduction; now cae problem is to frame this flow in
productive terms, pushing production's capacity to absorb and control to the
limits. Constriction of labor and refusal in the factory should be recomposed
in society. 0n the connection between production and reproduction. The polit-
ical objective is not to negate the social worker but to restructure every-
thing around him; it is not to negate self-valorisetion, but to work beside

it. to reduce its substance and independence, and deny it the possibility of
becoming class self-determination. This is undoubtedly the maximum of capit-
alist intelligence in the crisis and exploitation. It is the present form of
the "reaction."

How real is this project? It is undoubtedly difficult to measure it in a
transitional phase, when it is faced with all the political difficulties which
usually mark the beginning of such operations. But it is not impossible if we
stick to the big problems which the design raises and defines.

The first problem is inherent in the very substance of the project: what
level of control and productivity can effectively be guaranteed in a relation-
ship with the social worker? Here the bold optimism of capitalist organizers
of 'black work", of widespread exploitation. of a submerged economy seem to
have reached the limit. In fact, this is a mined terrain where the forced

b8
FOIINﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NWLY
INDIIOF11CJAl.lﬂ§E,(ﬂILY

separation of labor markets and a first attempt to govern by undersystams have
been sustained only through the benign neglect of job security by the big
corporations. But how long will this be possible? How long can circulation
and equalization (within the class) of behavior. needs and struggles be inter-
rupted? when will this project be relegated to the sidelines again instead of
being taken as a solid foundation for capitalist recovery? These questions

can be raised legitimately if we bear in mind a few other conditions of the
capitalist production game in society and of the working class in its environ-
ment. The first observation we can make bears on the fact that beside the
diversification of labor markets. there is an intensive development of a unifi-
cation of the connections between production and reproduction, and consequently
pressure on public expenditures, on a further. progressive socialization of
services and on all the conditions of reproduction of the labor force. Given
this situation. productive ’ahor, separated from the market, tends to reform
tirelessly. It understands that average value is reconstitutef within the

set of relationships which link production and reproduction. Bat to say this
is to reaffirm the unity of the worker project of aelf—valorization and consider
how it tends tirelessly to subjectively take over its own deteruinations.
Recognizing this is saying that, in this social and global association of
production and reproduction, the push toward a reformation of the proletariat
is highly accelerated. whatever overdeterminations of control capitalism tries
to impose on the process.

Among these overdeterminations, one traditional one should be considered first,
and that is the administrative one. We know that the neoliberalist project

has a solid administrative basis horn of the administration of the state-crisis.
It would be a serious mistake to confuse this project--which is one that re-
stores up to the limits of political reaction-~with the old liberal design.
Here the accent is always placed on the administrative horizon. It is the
administration which must guarantee the flows of a system which is so decentra-
lized, and assure that--in real time-~they can be verified and constrained
within the framework of compatibility. But administrative flows, too, are
ambiguous at this level of the crisis. and do not lend themselves to unilater-
ial monocratic management. If they did. the consequence would be a blocking

of information, a blocking of the capitalist theft of the workers' knowledge,
all the more important. even essential. in view of the massive mechanisms

of self-valorization. 0n the other hand, if stress is placed above all on

the "indicator" (on its real consistence. on its participation in social
productive work and the latter's antagonisms), one runs the risk of blocking
the administrative mechanism or, still worse, of making it a means of proletar-
ian reformation.

The second important overdetermination of the neoliberallst project is the
multinational one. This is the mechanism through which values. tempos.
quantities and quality of production and reproduction are transferred from
outside to inside the national economic system, with a qualification and con-
trol which are overdetermined by the hierarchy of the multinational division
of labor. It is no use dwelling on the degree of pressure which is imposed

by this overdetermination. But in this case, too. ambiguity is at a maximum.
0n the one hand, the large quantities ordered by the multinational division

of labor are effective elements constraining labor; on the other hand. however,
the very external imperative nature of this control risks being, and is,
contradictory to capitalisa's attempt to pursue and control more and more the
socialist worker and his movements. Multinational overcetermination dramatizes
relationships and quantities. and induces-within the great transformations
being made on the aultinational horizon. and also in a revolutionary sense--
hysteria and new conflicts and tensions. Often capitalism accepts a deteri-
oration concerning the placing of a given country in the multinational hier-
archy of the division of labor so as to avoid bringing international over-
determinations directly into play. To block processes of circulation of
struggles induced by the multinational level.

If this is the picture, we see, therefore, that the level of realism that can
be attributed to the neoliberalist project is very low, if not irrelevant.

So in this connection we should speak not of reality but of utopia. The
neoliberalist project is based on utopia, a utopian and nostalgic restoration
of the enterprise and of its freedom and risk. Like all merchandise of this
type, the utopia is validated by the state through administrative overdetermina-
tion. In reality. the strength of the neoliberalist project lies merely in
seconding the workers' refusal to work and proposing a mystification for the
constraining of labor that is more appropriate than the present ones. This
utopia is very dangerous. During the brief period it has been tested. on the
snail terrain which the social worker allows it to be testtd, it has accumu-
lated a level of violence and greed for profit that we have not seen for a
long time in the direct capitalist stratum and in the political stratum of
capitalism. Because it touches the density of the processes of self-valoriza-
tion and is organized on their supposed marginality, hypothesizing the impos-
sibility of worker reformation (which, however, it does consider from close up
and foresees as near)—-becauae of this, the violence and the repression intro-
duced by utopia are at a maximum. Utopia becomes dirty. As a consequence of
its own precariousness, it tends to redefine itself in the general scheae of
social organization of exploitation. Maximum decentralisation must be guaran-
teed by maximum hierarchical structures and by maximum control. The dream of
a “second“ Republic goes through the heads of these ”utopians" more and sore
frequently and intensively. They have come close to a world whose hatred

they feel; they thought they could administer it and overdeteraine it; they
have accepted-to the extent that they have been pushed towards it-the logic
of war. All they can do is actively include it in their utopia. This becomes
a matter of survival for them. All they can do is fix it on the institutional
terrain as a guarantee for the safety of their commerce. They started by
trying to destroy the constraints which the state-plan imposed on them to limit
their freedom; to guarantee their profit, they are obliged to invent a state
which is much heavier and much crueler, administratively and politically.

2. Control High Levels of Conflict?

The neoliberalist line therefore begins by trying to pursue the movements of
the social worker, building on them a new structure of productivity and explo-
itation. It ends up by resorting to a new strengthening of the state, of its
capacity to intervene and divide the proletariat front, as the only weapon
that can prevent it from being completely swept away before the processes of
self-valorization. He should, however, not forget or underestimate the capit-
alist intelligence expressed in thisvainproject of restructuring of exploita-
tion.

50

FOI10lFKJAI.USIGMNLY
FNJI‘OIFICJAI.LEHE(MVLY

He say however, that this is an alternative of the light. It is supported

by entrepreneur circles, the capitalist brain as such, the new technocracy of
automation. These people are hard, and deaf to everything but direct capital-
ist interests. 0n the Left, once the mad illusion of a historical compromise
has dropped away, once the mystification of "autonomy of the political" has
been revealed, once light has been shed on the trick of a concept which is
still productionist, how do you respond to the challenge which has been raised
by the social worker, to the crisis determined by class night?

The path before the Left is probably very uncertain, but two points it probably
must pass should be mentioned. The first is a renewed contact with the new
class composition; the second is a radical revision of the technical and
political instruments which "autonomy of the political" has set in motion to
deter-ine a recovery of productivity. But we should be careful to remember
that the objective of a recovery of productivity remains fundamental for the
Left, because what it asks for is not so much a revolutionary inversion of the
line but simply a correction (in depth?) of the line carried forward in pre-
ceding periods, a line which ended up being confused with the "neoliberalist"
line. But is it possible to be receptive on the one hand, to a new relation-
ship with the social reality of the productive worker and at the same time
emphasise the problems of productivity and growth of productivity? This
matter is the narrow door for the Left which, faithful to its tradition, main-
tains the "great values" of "work" at the center of its ideology. 0n the other
hand, it must somehow be receptive if it does not want to cease to exist as

a great historical force and be reduced to merely representing corporative
interests of bands of the working class covered by guarantees (as has happened
in the case of American trade unions, or, partially. the French Com-unist
party!). "hat should this receptiveness or opening be? Is there a way other
than that of taking the exclusive central nature of the interests of the
social worker, in production and reproduction, as a nucleus of class strategy?

Before we come back to considering the problem as a whole, let us look at

one or two points which constitute the present impasse of the official workers'
movement. The first problea, which has become a central one, is that of re-
newing contacts with the new class composition. This problem is posed in the
following terms: is it possible to filter the new composition through the
party structure and bring it back to the channel of a deaocratic-constitutional
contract? This is a fundamental question, doubly fundamental because it
involves both the goal and the form of the operation. It seems to me that

both are impugned by a series of inadequatestructural elements because free

the point of view of the goal, there is still a goal-oriented coefficient,
perceived as exaltation of work and its productivity, which is not only reject-
ed in general, in the immediacy of the imagination and of collective behavior;
it is even in contradiction with the political form of the new class composi-
tion. This phenomenon arises not so much as sociological dispersion as
political separation: physical separation from the goals of capitalist develop-
ment. political independence from any mechanism mediating for profit. The
project of social diffusion of the form-party, so that through it the process
of exploitation can be reorganized, so that in it provision can be made for
participation in the capitalist economic system--all this is not only the
ultimate deception, it is also a belated and ineffectual solution of an

51

lilltlﬂﬂtlhl.lﬂl£(ldl¥
unsolvable problem! Unsolvable because, I repeat, the form of this formidable
new social class composition is not only that of diffusion but rather than of

a refusal to work, of self-valorization, of political independence. An attempt
is made here to carry out an astute operation, but it is only a dirty one.

These characteristics of marginality remain, and for a certain period of tune
the operation could become effective--and grant the official workers' movement
some breathing space--if the general conditions of development were different.
Thus we come to the second problem: that of the modification of the Left's
political economy line. The Left has never before been so much in need of
controlling the renewal of its relationship with the working class, in a
situation marked by margins of development and high levels of conflict. The
Left's utopia is the idea of being able to pay prices without changing its
program, containing without having to take on a completely new form consonant
with the new structure of the working class. The utopia of the Left is that
of "controlling" a high level of conflict. But this line has been completely
removed. The construction of a situation of high conflict and radical mass,
democratic political decentralization runs up against unsolvable rigidities.
Not only those--however fundamental--posed by capitalism: conditions which,
as we have already seen, arise from the multinational control of productivity,
from structures of the international division of labor, and go down to the
capitalist consolidation of labor markets, to capitalism's increasing lack of
tolerance for the political structure and administrative remains of the state-
plan. Not just against these: the Left's project also, and above all, runs
up against the nature and structure of the class movement. It can no longer
be reduced to mediation by the state. Radically, forcefully. It is a commun-
ist movement, consolidated around itself. It does not accept any dynamics that
do not start within it and return to it.

And yet. let us say so clearly, we are now in a situation in which one can
perhaps speak again of "proletarian and worker use" of institutions. I'll
explain. In the 1960's and later, around 1968, the revisionist spirit of

the movement spoke at length of "worker use" and of "a long march through
institutions." These mottos were derived from radically democratic positions
at the time, sometimes from radically reformist positions. Because the former
postulated the uninterrupted continuity of social democracy, the latter the
uninterrupted continuity of socialism-capitalism. But the situation has
changed today. If we start with a consolidation of the trend toward prole-
tarian independence, if we consider again the metaphor according to which

the capitalist order, due to crisis, is iamnrsed in a rich complex of the
social composition of the class, then "worker use of institutions" no longer
comes into play, in any way, as a treacherous transfiguration of capitalist
mediation of the workers' interest. It no longer appears as a basis for
illusory continuties; on the contrary, it emerges as a possible way of unhing-
ing the whole capitalist system and its institutions even more, as an
iuiative which is worthy of strategic evaluation (in relation to circulation
of struggles and in relation to processes of proletarian reappropriation).
When controversies are opened about government spending, affecting the terri-
torlal structure of the state, when there is struggle against the juridical
structure of the state in anti-repression battles, and one wins income in the
former case and freedom in the latter; when, in the context of the terrible

52

FORloiIWCIAl.US£(MULY
lNJI‘Of'lCJAI.lh§EZ(HVLV

subsunption of the state with respect to the adsinistration. it is discovered
that the adninistrstion, too, is affected by class struggle, and in this case
it is a question of directly political achievsnents-this is the "use of
izztitutions” that the force of the working class and proletariat can afford
t ay.

It is clear how different this is free any dress of control of high levels

of conflict, of governing through denocratic decentralization. Levels of
utopia and realise are neasured only in relationship to class strength,
dynamics, and structure, and it is this sassivs proletarian force which today
allows us to undertake an initiative entailing the con-unist use of institu-
tions, while liquidating any concept of "control of high levels of conflict"
for profit as utopian and alien to the columnist move-ant.

But let us dwell a little longer on the points we have raised, above all
because with then we begin to get into the nerits of the debate opened in the
progressive fractions of the columnist sovenent or-nore sinply-in its vital
forces. Stresaing this point, one thing is illediately clear and that is what
we have already partially defined and which is situation at the nonent of
insertion of the process of self-vslqrizatlon into the capitalist Iechanisn of
developsent. This nonent of insertion is a nonent of crisis for capitalism.
At the present level of the power relationship between classes there is no
homology, as we have seen, to be detersinsd at that accent. It is a paradoxi-
cal '$ite and fle" that self-valoriration, with its ontological dilensions,
deternines here. But this situation is not eternal. In the trend towards

a transition fro. self-valorization to class self-detersination. the relation-
ship with institutions should be considered with the overturning effects it
produces. Produce institutional crisis by using instituations, reappropriste
normative power for the working class by esptying institutions. Not a “party
of government and struggle," not a "control of high levels of conflict": this
is the party of cmlsunist transition, the connunist novenent in its host
determined figure.

But we will cone back to all this at length. what we want to demonstrate here
is rather the other pole of the arguaent: the utopia, the falseness, the
nyscification inherent in talk of controlling high levels of conflict. But
this argument reduces and linilizes a need which, at this point of the develop-
ment of self-valorization, is beginning to appear in the culnudst love-ant:
the need for worker use--a destructtive use-~of the institutions of capitalise.
And the power to achieve this. So we must cone back to this and dwell on it.

3. A Parenthesis on the Ghetto

The ghetto is a utopia. It is the parallel of the capitalist utopia of
neoliberalisn, the projection of this ideology on the side of worker society.
It is a block, attempted free within self-valorization, against the self—
valorizstion and independence of the proletariat.

it is not that the ghetto is not andhasnot been a physical and logical place

in the history of the "other workers' nova-eat." Pros this point of view it
is as important as the factory is in the history of the struggles of workers

53

FOI‘OFFICIAI.III!(HULY
and the proletariat, and it is all the more so the more, during the 1960's,
first in the U.S. and then in western capitalist countries, the center of
worker struggle and class composition has been at the intersection between
production and reproduction. Also from another point of view, this crucible
of the new class composition becomes fundamental because from the ghetto ,

in the complex of contradictions which aark it, the two principal terms of the
logic of war (independence of the subject and separation from the adversary)
become defining elements. In the ghetto the extreme dialectics of needs,

the radicalness of poverty and degradation with respect to dignity and the
force of insurrection, give a first crucial connotation to the logic of
antagonism. Thus gradually all the paths of dialectics and the internal needs
of the ghetto converge on anti-capitalist antagonism. The ghetto as the

logic of war, as independence and separation, vis-a-vis the outside; the
ghetto as the logic of war, as a polemic and continuous synthesis of all
movements of insubordination and their reording in an aggressive way, directed
inward. The ghetto as a red base.

This is the American ghetto of the 1930's, the 1950's, the 1960's, of the
great seasons of struggle and liberation. But in the history of the working
class the ghetto is diluted and disappears as the main place for the formation
of the communist consciousness of class struggle, when the figure of the social
worker becomes dominant globally. Ghettos proliferate: it is no longer just
harlen, but half of Manhattan that is a ghetto, a conglomeration of ghettos.
So it is no longer a ghetto but a new residence for a complex subject over
which capitalism throws the net of exploitation in a new way, but which
resists and occupies space: the city as the territory of self-valorization.
Proletarian pressure on public spending, capitalist cutting of spending,
blackout. plural and diffuse insurgence, flight of the bourgeoisie from the
city, and then a new sequence: an attempt to heal, a new proletarian insur-
gence. The ghetto no longer exists. There is a social relationship of the
proletariat with the city, with the territory, which marks the territory as
the arena of struggle: police cars do not observe and crawl spying, they flee
through this proletarian territory. The ghetto no longer exists. The figures
of worker self-valorization expand everywhere. All the great problems of the
transition from self-valorization to self-determination are posed openly on
this great stage, which neoliberalist attempts to penetrate barely touch.

But if this is the ghetto, separate and cut off from the probleas of transition--
of the proletarian government of territory and the transition to self-determin-
ation--if, therefore, within these historical determinants, the ghetto no
longer exists, why do we still talk of ghettos. why do we consider the ghetto

u pernicious utopia? Because wherever the ghetto reforms as such, as a place
(or the physical separation of strata of the proletariat from the rest of the
workers' and proletariat territory, pernicious ideologies exist; it is on

these points that capitalism develops pressure to reestablish the foundations
of the internal divisionof the proletariat. The expansive force of the pro-
letariat and the social worker must be isolated in its sepsrateness. It must
not be a platform from which to proceed forward, but rather a sack that it is
closed up in, on which capitalism tries the blackmail of imposing survial
through constraints on labor. It is on this residual concept of the ghetto
that capitalist mimicry if the new characteristics of the workers' productive
labor is brought to bear: it is on these sacks of degradation of the social

54

FOI‘OFFIJAI.U8£¢INLY
FOI‘0011CJAI.lENI(HVLY

worker pressing on class unity that the subnerged econoly. and diffuse exploita-
tion. operate. Then there's ideology. There is the ideology of defeat and of
resistance; there is a continuous becoming sore barbarous of the conditions of
reproduction—theorized in this residual ghetto through the exaltation of

its sarginality, the use of heavy drugs, the search for an individual poetry
of life, religion and ngic. It is not that there are no elements of affine-
tion of needs and values of use in all this. It is not that, with the workers'
understanding. it is not possible or desirable to twist this insistence on

the originality of conceiving life, in the project of liberation. But here
the eneey wins despite all good intentions. The essay wins because the values
of use. dipped in the bitterness of defeat and the isolation of privation. find
no other way to express the-selves than through the sediation of the values of
exchange. Conplete comercialisation of proletarien life overturning of the
associate thrust in evasive organisation. reclassification of free tine as
spectacle. The ghetto wants suicide. I search for isolation nong Iy fslily.
deternination as sarginality, I dip it in the vast soup of a public opinion
coupleley reconstructed by capitalist sass media, I an exhausted in contnpt.
in the awareness of the usurping of the host intisate sovenents and actives of
my desire for liberation, ny very will to live. Thus the German ghetto is
born and operates after 1968, as a sign and symbol of the defeat of s genera-
tion of revolutionaries. Thus in sany "eaten and Eastern European countries.
after great struggles, an experiment ends!

that a difference! 0n the one hand we have a worker beconing socialized and
winning who destroys the ghetto. turning the city into ghetto. 0n the other
hand we have a worker who refuses his own socialization, and recover it only
under the sign of defeat. reforminga ghetto. The difference lies in the fact
that on the one hand the point of departure is a political projecting of the
value of use. whereas on the other this projection is rejected and one drsass
of the disappearance of the political as a category. As though nan could
becone a wild animal again and thus lose that characteristic of social produc-
tivity which absolutely guarantees his liberation-«s if Ian could turn his-
self into a worn!

The final transition is froa the "Ger-nan" to the "Polish" ghetto, to the K.2.
Froa the "autononous" dissolution of the heritage of the struggles and the
interiorization of defeat to an "autononous" predisposition to exploitation
and self-destruction--anything to conserve the illusion of independence. This
final transition. which denatures all passion and denounces the nature of the
marginalized ghetto beyond any ideological uystification, this final place

of poverty without hope, is also the internal trend of the develop-ent of

the ghetto. He could say that free this standpoint there are also soae posi-
tive points to be gleaned from this latter using the instruents of old
dialectics. by noting that the self-destructive precipitation of the ghetto's
ideology anticipates and precipitates the tunes of its functional utilization
for the liberal utopia of exploitation and an adequate reclassification of
the labor sarket as a function of diffuse exploitation. This self-destructive
precipitation constitutes an isportant accent in the critique of the utopia

of the ghetto as a desperate facade of the dirty neoliberalist ideology of
production.

55

I'OIO'FICIALUSIONLY
Let us cone back to our central theme. The capitalist project, however it is
posed. can only be .ituated before the fundamental transition which the prole-
tarian constitution is forced to propose today because of its internal dynamics:
the transition from self-valorisation to self-determination. This transition
rests on a secure foundation: the social worker's tendency to affirm his
independence. Therefore to determine the emptying of every relationship
homologous with development. Therefore to set in motion and keep in action

a very deep antagonistic causality which is effective against capitalist devel-
opment. Of course every time proletarian self-valorisation moves in the area
of intersection of capitalist valorisation, while it determines a crisis, it
offers another opportunity for capitalist intervention: opportunities for
provocation, attempts to utilize and reabsorb marginal fringes of the process
of proletarian self-valorization. But this sucking in, this mimicry do not
constitute continuity, they can have no continuity. with an end to homology
there is also an end to all illusion of continuity. 0n the workers' side,

the progression of independence has passed beyond the threshold of the rela-
tionship. 0n the capitalist side every development is only implosion: mimicry.
being moved by the struggle. are nostsligic reminiscences for capitalism.

The separation is radical and deep. Given this separation, even the problem

of revolution is no longer important: what is important is transition, the
development of independence and of separation. The logic of war should be
applied completely to thinking about the transition. Capitalist utopia has
already assumed the logic of war as the axis of its srgusent: an argment
which intends to wrest small tactical victories from the self-vslorization of
the worker. But this is a small logic. a utopia that does not even know how

to nourishitself with mystification or exalt the functional efficiency of
programmed mystification.

The logic of war which reigns on the workers' side has a very different scope.
It is a game that develops in terms of conquest of territories. It relies

on the expansion of its own strength more than on the weakness of the enemy.
By now the capitalist crisis is just a tactical victory in the development of
proletarian strategy. Capitalism is still in crisis. But according to the
logic of war. of separation, it does not even know how to nourish itself
through the crisis. Failure to recognize the causes of the crisis (and the
consequent adequate mystification) once enabled capitalism to overcome it and
develop again, incorporating new needs, new forms of association, new behaviors
of the labor of the worker and proletarian composition. This is no longer the
case today. Here the development of the proletariat is the destruction of

the adversary. immediately. His emptying, a destructive use of him timetable.
The capitalist project of recovery. however it takes shape, is always utopia
and emptiness. The worker project is independence and full power.

4. Problems Still Open

There are at least three major unresolved problems around which an extremely
relevant body of thought has already collected. three major problems for
which we have identified some possibilities of solution, some hypotheses of
labor, but they naturally remain completely open to investigation.

The first problem is that of new typologies of social and political control.
Control is always something acting on something else, force is on one side,
but the qualification is a relationship, an organizational relationship,

56
FOIiofFKJAl.UGE(l‘LY
FOILOFFVCIAI.IEIE(HILY

this was the scheae which once defined the subject of control. But now the
situation has changed. Fron the point of view of capitalise the problem of
control can no longer be hypothesized in terns of global containment of a
detersined situation. of observation, infornstion and domination of a definite
picture. The problea of control is simply indefinite now. It is necessary

to control, but the other end of the control does not exist except as s linit.
So then one can invent s nethodology of successive exesplifications, of
approaches bordering on reality, on the capitalist constitution of a relation-
ship of control. But all this is sore a representation of power than function-
al control. Control requires s relationship, but when social relationships
are dominated by the logic of war, what relationships can there be? The sub-
ject of control becoees note and more a question of the indicator. still swept
away, however. by this paradox: the heaviness of control can only be based

on the fluidity and flexibility of the indicator. Every element which must
fix rigidity is sobile. So all attention. from the capitalist standpoint.
should be turned to the nobility of the indicator. How carefully it is
nurtured, how it is approached cautiously and with a certain functional deli-
cacy! It looks like a hunting scene! which takes into account the savage
nature of the target! And yet this target is only a marginal apex of the body
of social subversion organized as the proletariat. It emerges at the linit

of intersection-never determined by precise relations homologous to a
totalityo-of power with self-valoriration. The point of intersection is as
abscure as it is uncertain. For capitalise a science of the working class no
longer exists, if it ever did. Sociology has replaced political economy in
the teaching of the capitalist theory of knowledge; this substitution marked
a not insignificant crisis, the criteria of knowledge were distributed over a
categorial fabric which had as its foundation not laws but indications of
credibility. Today sociology, too. seems to have difficulty raising its price
enough to be considered a factor of production-that is, a factor of knowledge
for production. Control becomes more and sore an art. In other words, alnost
nothing. In practical terms control is just a provocation now. a prevention.
we nust become familiar with and study its dynamics. and strongly attack all
attespts to make it "scientific," to try to restore to it any dignity beyond
that--which is important and significant even though distorted--of being simply
an irrational hypothesis of power.

The second problea concerns the fundaaentsl terms of political economy today.
It has certainly becoee a second«class science. That means that it refers
more to adninistration than to power. Power is reduced to s nere exercise

of force, political econony is strongly sucked in by it but does not have the
ability to insert itself in it, for a single but weighty reason: its supposed-
ly scientific status. If the capitalist con-and is denied a science of the
working class, the science of econonics sust pretend to be this science. Thus
it pursues. in adsinistrstive sequences, a last flicker of concreteness and
reality. The history of economic science is strange; it was born. when the
weakness of the social presence of the working class nade it impossible to
seasure value, between the 17th and 18th century, as an administrative science
(Poliseiwissenschaft), and was then changed (both its internal fore and its
external power) Oinultantously with the developeent of the working class and
a balanced relationship between the working class and society; it returned to
a position subordinated to public administration when the enorsous development
of the working class prevented it from exercising a function of nedistion. It

57
FOI‘OFFKJII.UEE(I1LY
continues to imagine itself a science of value; in this area it can even
imagine socialism as the utopia of equality of value; it has been practically
reduced to a science of compatibility, to a balanced administration of sub-

the exclusion of the category of working class sciences. or sciences which

can be used by the cosmunist project. to the point where political economy

is placed in the class of employer sciences for control, a class which includes
theolosy. various philosophies, philosophical specialisations. etc. This does
not mean a denial of the importance of political economy for power; who would
deny that theology has equal importance? The fact is that the ontological con-
tent of political economy has disappeared: it no longer addresses itself to
the mystification of value or power relationships between classes. It is
nourished by power. directed and protected by power. like a goat by a shepherd.
It is no accident that the most revolutionary among those who still call them-
selves economists are socialists! Value, equality, socialism: Proudhon
deserves the place which opportunism has given him in history. and it would be
hard for the revolutionary economist to be more than Proudhonian. The destiny
of economists who accept the workers' terrain. and operate on it. is different;
for them the issue is undoubtedly a critique of the state. It becomes that

of the militant revolutionary, of those who participate in the self-valoriza-
tion of proletarian knowledge. But where to go, what to do? This, too, is a
problem which is still open; the only thing that is important is to walk on
this path.

There is a third problem relating to the subjects which have been raised so far.
This is a different problem but it is no less relevant for the subject matter
of control. This is the problem of control. as it were, reversed, considered
not from the point of view of its effectiveness but from the standpoint of the
subjective ground it has covered. in the view of proletarian subjectivity.
Approached this way, the problem explodes as a crisis of participation but
above all of a critique of politics. The real foundation of the critique of
politics and of the crisis of participation is proletarian independence, a
separation of the paths of self-valorization. It is the heaviness of ontologi-
cal determination. It is of fundamental important to rediscover it and bring
it back to this foundation from the infinite subjective individual expressions
of proletarian action. But there are many difficulties, because in this area
we are touching on the effectiveness of capitalist provocation for control. on
those mechanisms which absorb the marginal materialness of certian proletarian
behaviors and attempt to transform them into laws and transfer them into con-
crete proposals that can be acted upon. Here capitalism acts in only one way:
eliminate antagonism, determine the linear continuity of partial behaviors,
exemplify them attributing significant force to them. Of course the lack of a
real substrate-of values--makes this operation a sham; the lack of determina-
tion. effective however marginal. makes these operations temporarily irrele-
vent. So they tend to turn more and more inward, and be more and more moralis-
tic: 'khe personal in political" in thedistortedacceptance of those who use
it not so much to achieve their ends but rather to exalt its strategic impor-
tance. But this is not what counts. "hat should be clarified is the mystify-
ing role all these theories have in this area of the "pathways of subjectivity".
all the roles, all the philosophies which accentuate the nonantagonistic

58

FOI10'FKJA1.USIGMVLY
POI OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

aspects of the process. Every position. every subjective pathway which is
prevented in the plane of linear pheno-snology is false. Every objectivity
that does not rid itself of fidelity to itself. to its own continuity. is

nyat! tying. If the situation. fros which subjective pathways nay lead away.

is in the area where the force of proletarian self—valorirstion crosses the
horizon of capitalist power. every subjective pathway is narlted by the logic

of war which doninates that transition. A critique of politics is possible
only as an application of the logic of war. Any irenian is as pathetic as he
is false. The isolation of the individual is as abstract as possible. it is
as unrelated as possible vis-a-vis the collective organized in self-valoriration
Sclf-vaiorization expresses itself only as collectivity. Individual abstraction
ends in individual catastrophe when it denies that its own ansrgenca occurs

at the linit of the crisis. crisis as the deter-ination of an effect of pro-
letarian night on a capitalist power structure.

But here. too. we are speaking of problem which are still open. They are open
and will rennin so until we have excavated the whole terrain and understood how
to reintroduce than not only into the conpsct picture of rself-valorization (this
is always possible, including positively and excluding negatively). but in the
horizon of the articulations of worker independence. which is richnbecause it
is co-nnisnu-in individual pathways.

Chapter U The Problen of Bar and the Theory of Value

The nind strives to isagine that which excludes the existence of things which
dininish or hinder the body's power to act; in other words. it strives to
inagina that which excludes the existence of things it hates. For this reason.
the isage of the thing which excludes the existence of that which the Mind
hates seconds this effort nde by the Mind, nanely it sakes the hind reel
happiness. Those who insgine that what they hate has been destroyed will
rejoice. Spinoza, Ethics, 3, 20.

1. Between Adan Snith and Vladinir Ilich Lenin

The critique of the classical theory of value, the identification-om the
Harriet theory of added value-of the root of a radical delystification and
therefore paradoxical rediscovery. in the theory of Ada- Snith and in the
practice of socialise. of the inperative content of the theory of value. seen
to be elusnts which have a solid place in the thinking of the co-unist nove-
sent. having said that. we have said very little, however. because, opposed
to the theory of value-co-and, to the lucide perception of the political and
organisational consequences of the crisis of the law of value, the theory of
needs is also alive in the novensnt. The insertion of this latter theory into.
and its intersection with. the theory of value as co-and have detersined a
radical inpasse in the analysis. This intersection has led to a series of
disastrous effects. Either the assent of insurrection was a privileged one,
in other words the i-ediate shortcircuiting of the contents of one theory with
behaviors brought out by the other; or a line of continuity has appeared which
accepted as effectual but ineffective the transforlstion of the nature of
capitalist co-snd while relying on the linear develop-ant of behavior alluded
to by the theory of needs. He should bear in wind that in denouncing this

59

MWLWMV
sterilization of the analysis there is certainly no nostalgia for a resolving
(with words) dialectics on my part. And it also seems to me that I have been
clear enough in radically excluding every deduction. flatly adequate to the
dualism defined. of a theory of the two functions of organization. one desta-
bilizing and the other destructuring. (h the contrary, it is at odds with the
dialectic residues of other phases of the movement proceding it. So? So it is
time to tackle this argtnent head on and point out the only way out of the
impasse in an analysis based on the intersection of this relationship which

makes use of the rich logic. the rational and practical wealth of this inter-
section.

Of course, the paradoxical nature of the project I am presenting is due to
the fact that this intersection is between something full and something eqty:
the fullness of proletarian behavior and the entiness of the rationality of
power. In the second place, and consequently. this relationship cannot contain
a homologous link. let alone a dialectical one. So intersection is the wrong
word, it is not a proper index for an action which no geometrical figure can
describe. Because here among these forces (and note that the emptiness of
the rationality of power has a high level of existence, as is true in general
of mystification, which is no less effective because it is mystification),

the intersection is savage in its objectivity, and it is only directed and
conscious from the viewpoint of the genesis of the forces that constitute it,
from the viewpoint of their subjectivity. This is a clear explicit expression

of the logic of war, and only this can enable us to access the figure of
intersection.

Now. looking from the viewpoint of the proletarian class, we know our problem
is that of giving expansive rationality and strong extension to the particular,
outside of the possibility of mediation and presmtion of the universal.
until a horizon of totality is reconstructed. (And we also know that this
totality does not dialectically contain any concept of universality.) And

we know that this rationality. this expansion. this power emerge from the
halting of the class, from the process of its independent consolidation, from
the development of self-valorization. "hen this development of self-valorization
comes into contact with the power structure, this contact cannot occur a glo-
bal dimension which involves the totality of the process of the making of the
proletarate, because the latter has by now given itself a law of motion which
lies in its own independence, because the dialectic connection between capita-
list development and class valorization is broken. The contact exists only on
narginal terrain. in logical terms. marginal to the norms of the development
of class. not nsrginal, however and important, from the point of view of the
historic vicissitudes of the movement of capital and class. Because these
intersections dramatize the whole development and accentuate its crisis and
violence. as we have seen.

But there is another element which needs to be taken into account: the fact
that within the relationship described by the logic of war there is lack of
proportion. This consists of the fact that capital is forced, because of its
own def inition, to insist on class composition because without this approach
it cannot produce valorizstion. And this happens while the processes of the
formation of the working class become more and more independent. In the

60

roe WI. US! ONLY
FOR OHIO“; US! ONLY

second place. capitalist attack can never go beyond a certain limit. This means
that it does not have a destructive device to use on the proletariat; it can-
not deter-ins the proletariat's catastrophe. wereas the proletariat. in the
development of its totalizing independence, must determine the catastrophe of
capitalism.

At this point we must go back over the terrain of war from the point of view

of the worker and the proletariat. free the point of view of the power of for-
sation. The two most realistic syntheses. which bourgeois thought has given

us with Adan Smith and socialist thought with Vladimir Ilich Lenin, that of
value as command and that of con-end as value. that of value as autonomy and
that of the autonomy of politics, are no longer realistic. For this reason it
is not a question of going beyond these definitions. but of completely shift-
ing the analysis. And capitalist control and worker proletarian self-valorira-
tion are to be seen as ends of the logic of war.

2. Beyond the Theory of Value?

However you approach it, the theory of value is a dialectical theory. It can
be emptied. reduced to a skeleton or to pure for: and it will be the form of

a dialectical process. By now there is no economist or critic of political
econoey-—from the narginalist discipline or the experience of conflictuslism.
working in the terrain of neo-marginalise of the liberalist proposal or that
of the theory of conpatibility-who has not come to grips in a definitive

way with the theory of value; and yet they are all sucked in by dialectics.
The theory of value, destroyed. rejected as to its normative content, is
restored in its formal value as dialectical nor-stivity. All that has been
predicated against the theory of value is dug up again in the sense of dialec-
tics. "by? because the econoeist cannot break the homology between capitalist
control and the sequences of development. His science is the affirmation of
this homology, not of the quality of the relationship but of the relationship
itself. So the breaking of the relationship of value as the substance of
capitalism. and the formal assumption of the relationship of control. does not
affect the relationship of capitalism except in the sense of transferring the
nodel of scientific consideration from the plane of synthesis to that of
analysis: thus synthesis will cone afterward, but it will come. In fact it
will be constantly contrived in and by analysis. The irrationality of the
content of value-command is thus predisposed to overcome itself: the planned
sequence--point of view of the analysiso-reforss itself into synthesis. The
state. the overall reproduction of capitalismpdwhatever it is called-the
dialectical conclusion of the sequence reforms value. It reforms the illusion
of the homology of the parts, of the factors of capitalist development. So
far. nothing has been given beyond the theory of value.

This is true of our search. too. In fact, the dissolution of the rational
content of capitalist coemsnd postulated functions of worker science which
were reversed by corresponded. Capitalism as organization was opposed by

the point of view of deetructuring, and capitalism as control--all the more

so the more this was irrational--was opposed by the point of view of destabili-

zation. The correspondence was there, reversed but real. Foucault is right
when he sees in these relationships-«however inverted and rebellious they may
be--a betrayal of the analysis of reality. of its totality-when a device is

61

I‘lltlﬂﬂtlAl.UllllULY

I
seen which is tyrannical. And it is the dialectic law of value in its infinite
novenents which creates and recreates this device.. Destroying it, however,

is not an act of the sdnd. It begins to be one when reality shows separation
as a real sass experience. Only then, only today, consonant with the growth

of a subjective class and mass eoveasnt, does the possibility begin to exist \
of a revolutionary theory which goes beyond the theory of value and the dialec-
ticai valence of its critique.

The general dislocation of revolutionary analysis is a deeply felt require-est.
And it should be said that sees theoretical experiments have tried to proceed
forcefully to this innovation. With what results? To answer this question we
should trace what I consider the lost significant experiences. They can all
be gathered around a few fundamental points which can be briefly rendered as
follows:

i. The dissolution of the links of the organization of capitalist value
between state-plan and state-crisis involves an accentiation of the links of
the state's coercive organization for the reproduction of relationships of
doninstion;

2. This accentuation of the links of coercive organisation of the state is a
structural whole which includes all of society and shapes it in a coercive
and functional way;

3. Valoriretion occurs in these new dimensions set by social initiative. and
in particular is achieved through the capacity of the state to reorganize the
nobility of social labor, to suck in again the social synergy of labor.

Now that we have posed the problea in these terns, it scene that an effective
attenpt at dislocation has been sade. But is this dislocation real? I do not
think so. In fact, for its basis a unitarian image of the relationship between
state, society, and valoriration is constantly proposed. The coercive links
and organizational links, although they go beyond the traditional terrain of
legitieization, nevertheless rest on the ends of the valorization of social
labor. The law of value is aade to function as a low of social capital, even
when political nediation of coamand has becoee essential to the formation of
the concept of capital. This is what I do not accept: the fact that the
insertion of political overdeterminstion maintains the possibility of a concept
of capital. Of course capital continues to exist as structure and subject,

but not as a mediated and always unified relationship. insertion of political
overdetersination dissolve the concept of capital as a relationship between

the two classes. It reduces capitalise to one pole, and only one. of the
relationship. It reduces it to a subject. Now, the law of value is not

just dialectic when it brings the quantities of the analytical process of
valorization to unity; it is dialectics above all when it negates the indepen-
dent nature of the poles of the process. when it denies the subjective quality
of both poles in order to deny the subjective emergence of the "working class
and proletariat" pole, i.e., the comaunist aovement. If the theory reestablish-
es the capitalist link, however, it restores the law of value; but in this

case it can do so only desperately, interioriring the political dimension,
coslnnd, is not in the concept of capital, as the scientific experience allows
us to know it today, but on the contrary: it is because the political, making

62
F!Il¢)lli€1hl.lﬂﬂE(VWL3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

making capitalise subjective, destroys it as potentiality and actuality of
social synthesis. In other words, the transforaation of the law of value into
a structural law of co-and cannot help but surreptioualy restore the dialec-
tic rules of the relationship, and it cannot propose a new level of capitalist
developeent starting with a strengthening of the concept of capital. 0n the
contrary, it shows the subjective nature of capitalisn within the logic of war.
It shows it involved by now not in dialectics but in an antagonists.

Attenpts to dislocate revolutionary analysis through the concept of the
political as an attribute of capitalisn merely express the need (implicit,
unconscious, not expressed) to radically redefine the dislocation operation.
The same can be said for those theories which, leaving the law of value out of
consideration, attack the proqu inediately from a political point of view.
This is that school of thought which is labeled "autonony of the political"
(in original terns, in other words without presupposing any classical ascen-
dancies). Now what is there to be said about this? First, that silence is
not enough to avoid the problen of class analysis. Second, that a projecting
theory of politics can be renoved fro. the alternative of a break in the
relationship of capital still less than every theory of value-co-snd,' because
political projecting, once the capitalist relationship has been subjectively
polarized, is on one side or the other. The indeterninate nature of the pro-
ject cannot win over the deteninate nature of the break. The theory of
"autonony of the political" is suspended in the evanescence of an unexplicit
inplicit, of an untouched indeterminate. Hhereas in this situation the radi-
cal nature of the break, material, of class, is the fundanental element. Par
fron dislocating the analysiu, the theory of autnoqy is politics blurs its
boundaries.

There is only one point of view, in recent revolutionary scientific research,
which helps us go beyond the residue of dialectics which the theory of value-
colnand entails and proceed on the path of a real problenatical dislocation.
This point of view is that of the history of the "other" workers' novel-ant.
Let us be clear. In this case too there is a lot of dialectical dross, but

to what extent, since the potential of real dislocation has exploded only
within the historical vicissitudes of the working leases? But if this is true,
it is also true that the point of view of the "other" workers’ nova-lent, note
than a historical approach. is historical linicry, an apologetic essaplication
of conunisn in past history. Having said this it is nevertheless a fact that
the history of the "other" workers' noveaent is i-portant above all in its
specificity of global history: in other words when it does not just take as
its subject labor as a force, nor does it six-ply take struggle; instead it
makes a figure expressing the overall physiology of the working class out of
both of these. It should be added that without the history of the "other"
working class novenent, of the taking of the working class, the very idea of
self-valorization would have had difficulty becoaing that couple: concept, that
vital articulation, that synthesis which does not flatten but rather exalts
the differences of the nova-eat. It is this richness, it is this energenca of
the novenent of value of use and its struggles which goes against the abstract
violence of the value of exchange and the resistible power of the law of value.
0n the basis of the richness which it nanagas to reach, the history of the
"other" workers' novenent does not explain the past so such as it shows us

63
mammowu
the future. It is an ideology which works. Perhaps the only one today. At
any rate it is the only one that allows us to consolidate the project of
dislocation of the terrain of analysis beyond the effective aporia of the law
of value, really opening up our problematical point of view.

Thus we see clearly that the problem of dislocation cannot be delayed, in the
potentiality of its project, it cannot be further blocked on the terrain of
theoretical analysis, or on that complex and elusive one of the theoretical
analysis of the law of value, of its crisis, of the sequences, of the effects,
of the figures of its crisis. The analysis must again touch the real fabric.
How is this reality made, which with its very existence goes beyond the concept
of dialectics? How does the making of proletarian independence take place?

How does this self-valoriztng separateness intersect with the articulations of
capitalist valorization? And finally, again, given this picture, how can

we describe this fabric of conflicting relations which--within the logic of
war--conserve and develop the revolutionary potential of the communist movement
of reality?

3. The Problem of Resetabliahnent

The crisis of the law of value leaves us before the massive emergence and
unresolvable presence of the movement of the value of use. The destructive
nature of the movement of the value of use is certainly not derived from an
analysis of its essence: it has always nurtured the synthesis of capitalism
as such. Its destructive nature is existential, ontological: it consists

of its historical separation, its independence, its determined refusal via—a-
via the synthesis of capitalism. Hence the destructive effects determined by
the movement of the value of use: ismediately, against any approach of capit-
alism, throughout the working day, to recompose the process of valorization,
mediating, against the permanence and the stability of the social structure

of capitalist valorization, in which worker power can be described, depending
on one's point of view, as an octopus, a cancer which erodes its connections
and values, or a depth which capitalism cannot reach, in which freedom lives
differentiated from self-vslorization. But these two images are threshold ones,
extreme prospects of the occasional urgency of one or the other sides in the
game in describing its own existence. Just as from the point of view of the
wc'Fers and the proletariat, the distinction between the two functions of
stabilization and destructuring is abstract and at a limit. This distinction,
from the point of view of analysis, should be criticized.

if you start with the ontological consistence of the communist movement, from
the assumption of its autonomy and independence, you immediately discover the
conceptual poverty of these two categories: they are defined in negative
terms, in fact, as elements of a relationship. But the relationship, this
type of relationship at least, implies homology; but, as we have seen, the
fundasental requirement of searching, in going back to the plane of reality,
is rather that of denying any possibility of homology.

So the use of the categories of destabilization and destructuring is at least

misleading. It is possible that they can be reinstated. But at the present
stage of the search, they should be put aside. The analysis should be placed

66
INDI<091HCIA1.IIHI(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USEONLV

outside of the terrain of the relationship between the working class and
capitalisn, and intervene directly fron the onotological substrate which is
defined by the independence of the co-uniet novensnt of the value of use.

Saying this means tackling once more, always sore closely and sore rigorously.
the problen of the naking of the proletariat. This leans tackling three
subjects:

1. Quantity and quality of the value of use;
2. Dyna-ice of the noveeent of the value of use; .
3. Structural logic of the taking of the working class and the proletariat.

The first subject entails an evaluation of fora. of the figure in which the
value of use is expressed with reference to global dineneione, so the proble-
can be brought down to criteria of leasureaent. Naturally this reference to
globality runs the risk of being indefinite. So we should fix a series of
dineneions which are adequate for our heuristic intention. These dilensione
are the working day and its phases. we think these are significant in the
logic of the investigation. By working day we seen the average social working
tine extored fro. the working class by capitalise. from the free tine saved
by the class. i.e.. the average of the added value extorted socially and the
social work necessary for the reproduction of the working class and the prole-
tariat. In this picture, before the social working day, the mm of the
use of value is the love-eat of reapproprietion of wealth which the working
and proletarian subject develop. It is not difficult to quantify this: the
proportion of added value extorted lust bend before the growth of the quantity
of necessary work. And since all this can be neaeured in working tine, we
can say that the 'Iaeasurenent of the value of use is a favorable proportion of
the working tine which is refused with respect to tine worked. He know well
that these relationships are not guaranteed. in themselves, fro. falling into
the dialectics of the honology of the functions of value: that in the abstract
the value of exchange could very well cover these relationships. but only in
the abstract. In fact, the new formula because valid only when a certain
threshold has been passed: when this destabilization of relationships of
exploitation has reached a structural level (of destructuring of the control
of the value of exchange) so as to render the relationship subjectively effec-
tive and irreversible.

Thus fro. a new paint of view the division between the two functions, destabili-
zation and destructuring, is shown to he erroneous; on the contrary it is

only their syabiosis which enables us to epproxinate the category of the
asking of the working class and the proletariat. By asking of the working
class and proletariat we mean. in the first place. that eovenent of the value
of use which, throughout the social working day. is for-ed as liberation of
tine subtracted fro. capitalise. and therefore open to the happiness of not
being exploited. This tins could. in purely abstract tens. be poverty; but
historically it is wealth. In fact the working class and the proletariat turns
here, with increasing sppropiration and satisfaction, to a world where wealth
is consolidated, where unliaited resources replace-definition—the process of
enrich-eat based on the exploitation of nan. It is no accident that capitalise

65

summon“
complains increasingly about the limits of supply side factors of production!
This complaint is simply blackmail, it is an attempt to block the socially
given sense of wealth. Blindly, before the expansion of free time, capitalism
deepens exploitation and proposes an appropriate restructuring of the working
day: as though there were no longer unlimited wealth and the human power to
make this wealth! it must not exist, says the employer, because in reality
capitalism would not exist anymore within this continuity of pressure!

Let us go on to the second point of the definition of the movement of the value
of use: its dynamics. Now, the process of making does not just occupy a space,
as we see when we define it from the perspective of the working day and reappro-
prietion of time. This space must be qualified, endowed with its own internal
dynamic determination. The subjectivity of the making of the class begins to
emerge only from this first synthesis. In reality, in this case, too, the
problem posed in the abstract runs the risk of just confusing the concept.
Because what would be the meaning of "freed" time if it were not a determined
qualification of the process of making? When we say liberation we are speaking
about a quality and a dynamics, insofar as we say movement of quality. To be
free means to constitute oneself freely. It means attributing to the individu-
al proletarian the consecrationlafdifference and multiplicity. It means bring-
ing the "irrationality" of the break of capitalist synthesis (the break, in the
logic of capitalism, can only be irrational) to bear on the task of rebuilding
a liberated worker's rationality.

It does not borther me that the problem of the making of the proletariat
presents itself at this point as an ethical problem too. Political economy
presented itself as a solution of an ethical problem, too. originally: that
of the maximum happiness for the greatest number of people. But the.libera1
solution of classical economics is false. The problem remains: as an ethical
problem. as a problem of civilization and happiness. Communism, therefore,
proposes a condition of liberation from work that, as such, approximates the
solution of the problem of happiness for men as they are.

But we are still midway in our path. The dynamics of liberation bring ethics
into vhe world of production. It is here that the problem of making verifies
its real independence. Because we have making in the full sense only when

the process of liberation brings the hegemony of the value of use inside the
process of production and reproduction. Only when the force-labor, which

has become the working class and the proletariat, conquers all of production
and reproduction, placing itself, liberated, within this connection. Produc-
tion is an ontological dimension of making. But what production? The meaning
of a possible resolving argument is marked on the one hand by the present
development of the productive force of the proletariat, and blocked on the
other hand by the relationships of force between classes. 0n the one hand it
is formed from the enormous accumulation of inventive force, the transforming
intellectual force which t-e domination of capitalism tries to reduce to
itself or destroy; on the other hand, in fact this is the block which is
determined. So the process of the independent making of the working class

and proletariat has an urge to mainfest itself. What production therefore?
Certainly not an abstractly alternative production. Do not think of a differ-
ent absoluteness. Instead. production organized so as to free the maximum
intellectual energy, making the value of use of life the basis of production.

66

Ftﬂlflﬂﬂ(1hl.lﬂﬂi(lﬂlY
FtMICHWWCJAL USIICHULV

The value of use is radically different free, and antogonistic to, the value
of exchange, froa vork reduced to the value of exchange, but not free produc-
tion. It is the synthesis between the value of use and production that the
constitutive process prepares, proceeding in its own autonoay. It is the
value of use restored to its central position and removed free the value of
exchange that coanunisa wants as the dynaaic center of production. When the
value of use of work is freed from the iaaediate aercification which it is
subjected to and enters the productive process, a different synthesis is
for-ed: that of the value of use as a source of wealth, as a free aatrix of
production. All this occurs at the level of the productive force of labor
which the revolution of the factors of production of capitalise has produced:
the force-labor presents itself. therefore, as an intellectual force, as a
force which is repressed in its aost intiaate and foraidable nature. The
process of the asking of the proletariat occurs to this rhytha. The potential
of the intellectual force that is produced deterring the dynaaics of liberation
and moments of struggle.

After insisting on the independence and separateness of the constitutive
process we aust bear in mind its potentiality, its nature. The connection of
quantity, quality, and dynaaics of the asking of the working class and prole-
tariat thus begins to appear as the basis for overbearing subjectivity. The
analysis must therefore approach this last qualification. The logical struc-
ture of the asking of the working class and the proletariat is based on all
these connections.

a. Hat. Between laagination and Reason

At this point the uncoupling of the theory of value is attained. This aeans
that we are faced with a situation in which two poles are separated and redi-
cally opposed as independence. He also know that the connection between these
two entities exists in an indistinct, alaost adiaphorous zone: the zone of
intersection of valorization as a synthesis of residues, as aarginslity with
respect to the development of proletarian selfbvalorization. He also know

that in this zone of intersection a logic cf war, of crisis, of incursion
dominates. to organize the residue of capitalist valorization. Capitaliea
has shrunk, and on that its state has reshaped itself into an organizer of
war, a sanctionof an unresolvable state of war.

What should be avoided now is opposing to the crisis of capitalise and the
definition of valorization as the valoritation of the crisis, a world of

the asking of the working class and the proletariat which is depicted as a
beautiful alternative, a ready-made utopia. If, in the preceding paragraph,
we tried to define the formal concept of the making of the working class,

and in the foraal concept we included a dynaaic provision, now we lust clarify
this better so that the real tension of the constitutive process is not
abstractly conceived or hypostasized.

The notion is not irrelevant, because it touches on a fundaaental point:

the concept of war. Now, this concept has appeared as an alaoet exclusively
negative essence so far. in other words, it has seeaed to characterize the
logic of the crisis, the logic of the intersection between the spheres of
capitalist valorization and worker self-valorization, therefore defining

67

lilitlﬂﬂClAI.llﬂE(lULY
an essentially antagonistic space. But this condition does not define the
statute of the concept of war: on the contrary, it impoverishes it, it strips
it of its overtones. It prevents it from applying itself, as a logical scheme,
to the problem of constitution. So it is this that we must see: the positive
essence of theconceptof war, and we must see it in such a way as to enable us
to consider it within the overall complexity of its attributions and modal-
ities. So first of all the positive essence, and then how it develops with
multiple valences.

Let us descend to the concrete in the process of self-valorization. It appears
as difference, as diversity of places. But it is also a process of making.
From multiplicity to unity? From the particular to the universal? A typical
dialectical process? Definitely not. There is a constitutive practice which by
definition refuses to lend itself to the universal or to any form of mediation.
the Constitutive process is from the particular to the particular, to globality
of the particular. No active function traces this phenomenological link. The
horizon of the constitutive process is completely materialistic. So how does
this process occur? "by do we want to use the concept of war within it, too,
as an exclusive key to its reading? I think our common experience enables us
to come close to a solution to the problem. The coach experience is experience
of conflict and solidarity, of socialization and organization. The particular
develops in increasingly complex forms through its socializing accumulation.
When we say that war, that the logic of war governs this process which is
occurring within the collective process of formation of the particular, we say
this analysing the complex of strategies, tensions, and developments inherent
in this picture. There areamillion projected essences confronting each

other, confronting their particularity in different projects. The mechanism
of selection is that of the disarticulation of interests as divided particular-
ities. of the articulation of interests in a composite particularlity with
various valences. The mechanism of selection therefore becomes a mechanism

of addition. determination in overdetermination. Another dialectical residue?
No, not if you bear in mind the fact that this complex of functions operates
according to complex interconnections and measures which formal analysis of

the concept of asking has shown us. It operatesbringingto the movement of
every proletarian essence the sense of rejection of capitalistic work, the
dimension of productivity understood as the destruction of work and the libera-
tion of inventive power. The logic of war has this essential aspect: it
organizes not only the globelity, but the whole, compact and articulate, of
subjects in the globality in the direction of the destruction of the enemy.

it is this direction, developed in the class body, that determines that superior
form of productivity of labor which alone can destroy capitalist labor. In
the process of the making of the proletariat, in the constitutive practice
developed here, the logic of war exercises a function which is in no way pro-
ductive. The process put into action, according to the logic of war, is
coercive but linear. It is linear but not organic, because conflicts are not
resolved according to mechanisms of subsumption and hypostasis, but according
to physical mechanisms of exclusion, differentiation, projecting and accumula-
tion. The measures are quantiative, the motives are interests, the end is
happiness--namely, escape from capitalist labor and reappropristion of the
world of the production of wealth.

68

INJI‘OIINCJAI.IIIE(NILY
FOR‘OFFKJAJ.USEINULY

Thus we touch another characteristic of the logic of war. If the aoveaent of
value of use reaches a high level of constitution according to these processes,
it appears as absolute rationality. The logic of war is the only rational
horizon that can be traveled along. But this rationality is not aerely foraal.
It is also the negation of all irrational behavior. Not just, and not so such.
on the tactical terrain where war presents itself, on the spaces of intersec-
tion with capitalist valorization, as plain irrationality, as irrationality of
the crisis which is necessarily induced by capitalisa because of its own repro-
duction. But above all on the strategic terrain of the develop-ant of the
constitutive process: because here the reconstituting process destroys the
irrationalisa which reaains in every conception of reason as non-collective
initiative, as self-justifying and self-legitimizing autonaay-in every concep-
tion of reason, of politics. of projecting as the detached essence of the
process of collective practice. This in the first place. But in the second
place. the absolute rationalise of the logic of war also destroys the irration-
alisn of any conception of need which does not know how to and cannot-in the
irresoluteness of the aetsphysical detach-eat it presupposes-lead back to the
collective project of the destruction of capitalist labor and therefore of
liberation.

Having said this, we have cone to the heart of the latter. The logic of war
operates within the process of the asking of the working class and the proletar-
iat as logic of dislocation. As rationality of continuous dislocation of the
particular to higher levels of naterialiaation of a selective solidarity. and
against the doaination of capitalist labor. This process of dislocation occurs
between reason and the collective iasginstion: the iasge of coaauniea. Seas-
thing iaaginary like the projected isolation of the present struggle, of the
iaaedlacy of the particular project. of its global relevance. Revolutionary
logic opens on the abyss of a reality whose future is unknown, except as

an ispulse to be overcoae, to destroy exploitation. But in the process of
making this horrible past is not aerely hatred and desire for destruction,
although it is that, too, all the way. But above all. and sore and sore, it

is an increase in the particular productivity of the revolutionary subject

and therefore an iasgined project of this productivity. The abyss of the
unknown future is prefigured in the present wealth of the subject's productivity.
Reason iaagines a future consonant with its own productive force. This is

not a utopia but a scientific and rational iaagining. It is projection. It

is constant dislocation of an intellectual force which has been consolidating
itself in the asking of the proletariat.

But here again, between reason and imagination. the logic of war arises. Again
as the negation of all dialectics. Because the transition free the real to

the iasginary to the real, although founded on productivity. on the rich coa-
plexity of projected diaensions of the subject. aust once again find its own
conparison to the space and force of destruction before it, as capitalist
doainstion. The independence of the asking of the proletariat clashes with

the aaterial solidity of the structure of capital at the level of collective
class imagination. This does not deny the independence of the asking of the
proletariat. It just opens it up to a new set of probleas. those of the
transition. But we will speak of this shortly. here we are aerely suaaing

up what we have said. The process of the asking of the proletariat, which we
saw developing foraslly in the independence of the aoveaent of the value of use,

69

FOI‘O'IICIAI.IEIB(IULY
according to the modality and measure of the destruction of work, with the
potentiality of a new production consonant with the revolutionary productivity
of human labor. interiorizes the logic of war inasmuch as only this is able to
describe the material process of accumulation of proletarian particularities.
Because it is able to capture the articulations and movements towards a more
complex determination of the particular, in that it is subversive. Because it
is able to organize this process rationally, against every abstract sutonomiza-
tion of its parts. But this is not enough. The logic of war also shows some
structural characteristics of the process of constitution: it accentuates the
characteristics of the collective projection of the proletarian subject and
inclines subversive reason toward the imagination of communism. It shows
communism as a future project while it organises the logic of its present
becoming. It fixes it in a project and extends it to the future. Once again
the logic of this transition, to the extent to which it becomes real. to the
extent to which the transition becomes a process. and therefore logic of war.
Between critical reason and imagination there is a new reality: the logic of
war. Not for a new order but for a new being.

5. To Eliminate the Problem

What is the headache of the transition? It lies in the fact that what was
given as a process of erupting spontaneity in the tradition of the classics
(almost the opposite of the market) has never presented itself historically

or been theoretically motivated in any form except that of overdetermination.
Socialist overdetermination which oppose-in a situation of exhaustion and
crisis of the market—-capitalist overdetermination of the state-plan. So the
transition seems to become dispersed, as the object of the analysis, and

becole confused in a mechanism more or less homologous to the socialist
restructuring of the market and its planned organization, similar to the
reformulation of the capitalist project of the state-project. of imperative
socialist mediation. At this point, rigorously. if we want to avoid ruining
the problem in an overdetermination. the transition became a headache insofar
as from the spontaneity of the process of self-valorization one was not able

to derive the source of new rules. But the same intense headache is found
throughout the development of the subject of organization; always the relation-
ship between real movement and party, between movement of the value of use

and the vanguard process, between destructuring force and destabilizing force,
between trade union functions and autonomy of the political, between proletarian
might and worker dictatorship. so always all that has been given on valences
that tend to separate the unified essence of the problem and hypostatize it
into an unsolvable alternative. Of course the headache has its appropriate
mystification: dialectics. forced mediation-this anticommunit philosophy

of command. this antimaterialiat practice of the solution. Now, is it possible,
on the basis of the logic of war, to overcome this headache and repose the
problem of the transition? Is it possible to get rid of the headache of the
transition on the basis of the logic of separation?

 

e
\ .J I

On the basis of what we have said so far, it seems to me that the solution to
the problem can be theoretically approximated, although it remains true that
the level of an adequate practice does not seem to be very near yet. But
theoretically, it seems that the synthesis between work and politics-between

 

70

FllltlﬂﬂCIAl.Uﬁl(INLV
IIIICNNHEJAI.USE(MVLY

the sovesent of the value of use and the asking of the working class. between
the tendency toward the refusal to work and the process of the extinction of
the state--should not develop within the radical differences which the tradi-
tion of the classics and real experience of socialise left. Because it is rise
to see col-unist norsativity develop in a way that is precisely linked to the
particularity of the anvenent of the proletarian subject. The develop-ant
iron the particular to the general of con-and aust occur within the process

of self-valorization. itnuat be considered a constitutive process. Proletarian
control is an aspect of that logic of war which consititutes the reality of
the subject. Nornativity is not a separate eleeent. distinct fro. proletarian
institutionality. Nor is it a question, at this point of solving the proble-
by leveling its nany aspects to unity--flattening it allost as though the

two functions were not really different. The problem is not one of denying
their difference but rather of squeezing this difference into unity in a
process which leaves no alternative. The problee can be said to be solved
when nor-ativity is constructed as behavior of the sociality of living work,
to the extent that this arises. and ferns and shapes itself as a subject. as
independence, as separation. The logic of war should be stressed as s recon-
posing and innediately normative logic. The split which has always been
inherent in bourgeois dialectics. and which by definition is fixed between

the emergence of subjects and their reconposing ability. and between this and
their noraative capacity, should be rejected as an infinite bad: the infinate
bad of powerful systification.

In the reality of self-valorization,ofconstitution, there is no such separa-
tion. There are just quantities according to which the nor-stive illediacy
arises: quantities of a divided unconnected reality of the social labor

force which, as such, is subsuled in capital to nourish it with productivity;
or quantities of subjective force that. in becosing independent, develop an
alternative--it, too. immediately norsative--to capitalist developnent. Quan-
tity becoeea quality in crossing a certain threshold of internal division
within the class. This threshold of division is not crossed through an opera-
tion of mediation within the class. but rather through a sechaniaa of acculu-
lation. of development of subjective particularities. At this level, noraativ-
ity natures as an adequate expression of the crossing of the threshold of
subjectivity, as a for: of existence. The noraativity is the operation of

the existence of collective subjectivity. It is one of the figures the logic
of war takes on within the process of the asking of the class. or before
becoming a model of its expansiveness. So then we have this cell of the pro-
ccss of transition; we have before our eyes. in the unified for- which the
existence of the subject and its operativity cannot help but have, in the
productive forn which coaeunisa offers for the synthesis between work and
politics.

it is clear, from this point of departure. that the headache of the transition
is born directly in its negative fern. free the position of the problen of
revolution as a problea of stages of develop-ant. The transition is described
by the classics as a transition to socialise. Levels of capitalist develop-
lent arise, in a different way and according to a progressive line, in going
free one level to the next. The probles of the state is posed in the sale

way: as an envelope containing this develop-est. having a positive sign
according to a progressive rhythm. from the fading of the functions of the

socialist quasistate to the extinction of the state in cal-unisl. He know

71
FOI‘OIIICIAI.UBEGIVLY
what the monstrous consequences of this doctrine have been! And we know how
much the masses have suffered due to the paradox of a state which, contrary

to expectations, became a heavier and heavier exploitsr. They suffered not
only materially but also politically, as every revolutionary prospect was
dialed. "as all this necessary? Unfortunately. historical necessity cannot
be problematized, and what has been done cannot be undone, even by a moral
interrogative. But all this is unnecessary now! This is important to empha-
size. It is unnecessary because the cmmmuust movement has freed its own
reproduction from an inevitable link with capitalist development, because the
communist movement has created a capacity for production which must destroy the
capitalist organisation of society as it is now; as a crisis tending towards
barbarity. Because, finally and above all, the process of the making of self-
valorization already contains the synthesis of work and politics, in other
words of communist existence and revolutionary normativity. It is based on
this unified cell, and on this process of transition now occurring. that the
headache will finally be liquidated. From the point of view of collective
revolutionary practice, the process of transition appears as immediacy. No
overdetermination is thinkable anymore, no homology with capitalist transitions
is presented anymore. no compromise, no mediation, no dialectics. In his
progressive sociality, the worker subject makes the transition to a maturity
within which the break with capitalist development guarantees him the ability
to express his own existence as adequate normativity.

As we said in the beginning, the headache of the transition reverberates
directly in the problematics of communist organization. It is an insufficient
appreciation of unity and of the level of development of the constitutive
process which leads, in the classical tradition, to a division of organization-
ai functions, to a distinction between tactical and strategic moments, to a
disarticulation of phases of the struggle. The separate bureaucratic struc-
ture of the party is what remains of this tradition, with its disastrous
consequences. Has all this necessary? In this case the history 01 the
resistance of the "other" workers' movement to this party-form seems to give

a negative answer. Negative and tragic: because the weight of the party's
successive defeats led more and more to division, disarticulation, destruction,
within the class. Today the mere memory of these experiences is avoided.

And in this we may perhaps find the basis of a full and articulated reformula-
tion of the theory of the party--starting with the use of the logic of war,

of particularlity, within the constitutive process. and of the logic of
separation within the process of transition. But more of this later.

For now it is enough to emphasize the transition depicted in this paragraph.

It consists in making the premises explicit, and, as it were, reconquering

the productivity of materialiss. Of a naterialiss which assumes the ontological
horizon of the making of the proletariat as an exclusive one, and bases commun-
ist projecting on this alone. This basis for reasoning, this whole assumption
of the critical methodology ofmaterialisn, this ability to call things only by
their real names, refusing dialectics and all other similar infiltrations of

the capitalist state into class theory; these are elements which are difficult
to reconquer. Many of the errors committed, both theoretically and practically,
were the result of the pernicious influence of dialectics. Selfcriticism is

not enough to free oneself from its unless it is accompanied by a rigorous
definition of a new analytical fabric, a new theoretical point of view. But

72

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
IIHICNHRCIAI.USEZCN'LY

this. too, can be evanescent if it is not based in its turn on a new reality.
And this reality, again. is simply the proletarian process of building commun-
ism. A sort of mental regeneration intervenes in contact with this reality,
in the articulation of this subjectivity. Because with this one liquidates
not only the headache of the transition. This is, in fact, a real headache.
and it was based on a tragic rhythm which involved not only revolutionary
thought but revolutionary practice as well and the revolutions of the composi-
tion of the class. Also eliminated are all squalid paradoxes which the theory
of the organization of the traditional workers' movement has presented to us
and imposed on us. Because the functional (?) division between organization
and command, within the party-form, and of party-form and the movement as

a whole, outside, is merely a paradox which repeats the tragic nature of the
headache, but with petty functions of pure sociology of power. Our image of
communism, therefore, cannot help but be a formidable weapon for the destruc-
tion of every ideology of the organization which is not alive in the immediate
experience of communism.

6. Other (2) Problems

If we go back to the thought process which was behind the arguments in this
chapter, we must stress the fact that there are some passages in it which we
must return to. because these are theoretical elements of great importance
which were only touched on insofar as they were involved in the arguments
being presented. But it is also equally clear that these "other" problems,
given their complexity. cannot be dealt with adequately by one author; only
their central position at the heart of the collective interests of the comrades
can make it possible to proceed with the analysis. This is why I just want

to bring them up here; just as 1 have perceived some problems, and I have used
some theoretical themes, I pass them on to the movement.

0ften--and 1 think this is the first problem--there has been talk of the need
to shift the formation of the categories of capitalism to the social level,

in other words of the need to describe and found the category of social capital-
ism not as the result and limit of the market movement but as its subject.

But. as we have seen in this chapter, once the analysis has proceeded to this
point, the subjectivity of capitalism no longer appears as a relationship;

the category of capitalism no longer presents itself as an inclusive tension
but rather as an exclusive tension. This means that the analysis of the state-
crisis implicitly contains a redefinition of capitalism. whose potential

of presenting itself as a relationship is being gradually eroded. This erosion
of the concept of capital as a relationship is behind the crisis of political
economy. So it is no longer a question of a critique of political economy,

but of moving the analysis.from the terrain of economics to that of politics.
And this further confirms the disillusion of the concept of capitalism as a
relationship, because when political control becomes the fundamental key of

the process of valorization, all the categories of relationship are gone, not
only in their spontaneity (as is logical, given the crisis of the market) but
in their adequacy (as appears evident in the loss of the meaning of the law

of value).

From the theoretical point of view. this hypothesis seems widespread now.
From the developments of Keynesian throughtheresults of the Frankfurt school,
to the most recent successes of the search for currents which I would call

73

FOIIOIiNCJAI.UGIIOIﬂJV
Foucaultian, this affirmation of a single voice of capitalism as command, this
exclusiveness of its power, seems to me to have become almost commonplace, a
fundamental topos of the theory of our time. "hat I think has been only par-
ticaily solved, however, is the correlated problem of the consequences of this
assumption. In other words, faced with the subjective nature of capitalism

and the extinction of its image as a relationship. and therefore its dialecti-
cal nature, the "test" has difficulty becoming a cohesive element and deter-
mined existence. One does not know where to put the "rest" if not within
capitalism. Hhile one criticizes the ability of the the God-capital to "create"
the world, as though in a final bad version of some gnostic theory, the

rest appears as residue, as chaos, as something fallen from stellar heights.
The consequence of antagonism is not drawn from the goal of the dislectics.
"by? Because it seems, I think, that the determination of a precise antagonism
determines an excessive homology, and thus a sort of inverse reproduction of
that capitalistworidone wants to destroy. The terrible dream of the mystifi-
cation of real socialism follows critical philosophy here. But it seems to me
that the opposite is true: only a materialist definition of the proletarian
subject makes it possible to definitively liquidate the concept of capitalism
as a relationship. Because it is only the alternative of the founding and
identification of individual laws for the making of the proletarian subject
that can finally win against the state-plan, the general crisis of the scienti-
fic and practical horizon the domination of capitalism. As i have tried to
explain. the laws of the making of the antagonistic subject can be founded on
absolute and radical independecne. I would ask those who wish to criticize me
to do so by insisting on the inadequacy of this separation, not is unreality.
It should be done by researching the matrixes of the formative practice, their
original legislation. It should be done, as I tried to do it, by radicalising
the initial separation in a real epochs. I do not believe in the theory of

the beginning, I do not believe in the effectiveness of a radicalizstion of the
break with the past of the theory, with its viscosity of connections and ten-
sions. I think that all this can happen, materialistically only through a

real recasting of the subject. The residuals that the capitalist command
determines, the "rest" vis-a-vis the compactness of the imposed relationship,
is alive. This practical vitality is a conglomeration of retroactively
operative strategies whose constitutive devices of subjectivity are being con-
structured. And these paths have the collective intensity which the radical
nature of the project requires and the logical dimension which the development
of history as the history of class struggle has determined. The insertion of
the subjectivity of the worker in the global historic dimension is not an
exploit of faithfulness and continuity of tradition, of Marxism and the workers'
movement; it is rather an affirmationof the real correspondence of the crisis
In its theoretical, practical, critical and historical aspects. It is the

need to rework not the totality of mediation but the particularlity of the
project.

So we go from the crisis of the theory of value to the crisis of the theory

of capitalism to the crisis of the theory of the working class. But at the
same time there is a recasting of this latter category within the process,

and according to the materialistic methodology of formation. Here the theme
of war comes into play in its entirety and with great theoretical relevance.
it is only the subject of war which makes it possible to grasp the ontological
solidity of the limit and, beyond the limit raqualify the relationship--every
rclationship--outside of every dialectical reminiscence. This means that the

7b

Itﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAL|lNE(H‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢MVLY

Inglc 0! war translates the logic of antagonism into a logic of particularity.
The logic of war destroys every illusion of mediation at the outset. every
idealistic and universalistic mystification. The logic of war brings together
the horizon of antagonism and that of particularlity, making it possible to

so back to the foundation of every process to identify its physical nature,
its unresolvable particularity. It is a new horizon that is opening. a horizon
on which understanding the crisis does not mean having to cone to terms with
dialectical ideologies; understanding the pathways of the particular does not
seen yielding to organistic thought, to idealistic fictions. Nothing acts for
anything on the critical terrain we have chosen. Nothing is juxtaposed over
the particular except the physical and material process of recasting. Subjec-
tivity is born within this process as a functionof struggle, preordsined by
the quantiative dinensions of operating. of antagonisn against the figures one
is freeing oneself from. These are, in the case of the proletarisn subject,
those of capitalist exploitation and the internal division of the proletariat.

Hlth that, in this context, the fundamental theory is therefore opened which

i have raised in these pages. That is the question of the dimensions of
collective operations. of the normative tension which is foraing in then.

Again there is another fundamental objective of materialistic criticism to

be reached here: that of the negation of the division between existence and
its practical overdeterlination. between being and having to be. But it is
clear that only starting fro. a consolidated concept of collective subjectivity
is this possible. The problems are interwoven. each with its own special sub-
ject matter, like in an atonal music. The discontinuity of the process of
thought is appropriate for the dramatic nature of the reality the thought is
describing. But nevertheless this disorder in seeking, this necessary disorder,,
these laborious approximations, nevertheless try to offer a point of reference
for the collective enterprise of seeking. Thus the subjects 1 have dealt with
in my search appear for what they are, and if my research is not conclusive-
and it is not-~these subjects too, remain open for study and further explore-
tion of the sequences of problems they generate.

Chapter 5: Communisn and Organization

One needs no special sharpness of wit to understand that starting. for example,
from free labor or salaried labor, derived iron the dissolution of the slavery
of serfs, machines can be born only in antithesis to living work, as the pro-
perty of someone else and a hostile power opposed to living work; in other words.
they should be opposed like capitalism. But it is equally easy to understand
that machines will not cease to be the agents of social production when, for
example. they become the property of the associated workers. In the first case.
however. their distribution, the fact that they do not belong to the worker.

is a condition of the manner of production based on salaried labor. In the
second case. a modified distribution would be based on a modified. new
production which would have energed iron the historical process. K Marx,
Grundrisse. II.

75
IIIICIHNC1A1.USIGHNLY
I. The form of self-valorization

0n the territory of the proletariat. There is a point from which we must begin,
not hypothetically but as from a real premise: from inside the processes of
aelt-vulurization. The whole spectacle of power is outside of and opposed to
this internal point of view of the worker. So let us radicalize this percep-
tion, let us build on this solid foundation. This operation concerns the class
in its separateness. It is unthinkable that the problems of communism, of
organization and the problem of their realization, could initially.be posed
outside of this independent connection. Obviously it is necessary to observe
that the relat ionshipnand never the utopian identity--of cos-unis- and organi-
zation is the fundamental subject we wish to explore. But having said this,
the point of departure remains firmly grounded in its independence, and can
never dissolve in the relationship. If proletarian independence formed-inten-
tionally--outside the relationship of capitalism, there is no reason to con-
fuse it with any other relationship. If there is a relationship between
communism and organization, it cannot be other than within communism.

Self-valorizationisdeotructuring of the enemy power as a whole. Self-valorisa-
tion is the process through which the class removes itself from the relation-
ship of capitalist valorization, the process within which the very concept of
capitalism as a relationship of exploitation is negated. The proletariat
covers the whole fabric of capitalist valorization; the mechanism of destruc-
turing is thus extended against the whole articulation of capitalist command.
of course there are certain ambiguities, zones of chiaroscuro, all the more

so the more capitalism tries to maneuver, to modernise its command of society:
when it tries to enter the arena of selfdvalorisation, recalibrating the subject
of command either in neoliberslist terms-thus perhaps following the articula-
thnnofproletarian self-valorization--or in terms of governing a high level of
conflict-othus trying to make the articulated heaviness of the proletarian
attack "compatible." but proletarian self-valorizationhasalready taken over
this capitalist approach and has it adequately under control. This ambiguity
determined by capitalist initiative must be destroyed. Self-valorization
recomposes class unity as an unstoppable trend above and beyond, and also with-
in, the scenarios capitalism is constantly producing, but in an increasingly
inefficient and illusory way. The operation of destructuring is thus a complex
articulated process, many-sidedo-it, too, has its scenarios, its variations,
and when the wind changes we must be good sailors and adjust the sails.

But are we not admitting, this way, that the processesofaelf—valorization are
subject to the form of the process of capitalist valorization? With this does
not the independence of the class disappear, just when it must prove itself
independent? Is not the class's independence really only thinkable as a limit?
Outside of the relationship? Does not destructuring necessarily lead to a
homology with the structure of capitalism? These are reasonable objections.
but they lose sight of the fact that this threshold of homology has been
crossed by the present class composition. This is given by definition. But
this does not mean that the class acts blindly, it does not mean that prole-
tarian initiative is any less destructuring. In fact, the class organizes
itself recognizing. in destructuring of the enemy's power, the key for the
destruction of its own internal separations. Indeed, by destroying its own
Internal separations the class destructures the enemy. Just moving around

the problem of its own independence, concentrating on its own recognition,

76
F084OFFKJAI.USIIONLY
FOI'OI‘ICIALIJEEIM'LV

just developing this positiveness, the proletariat not only attacks and
destroys capitalism's structural project, it also strikes it in its specific
articulations. The threshold of proletarisn independence is the other side

of the class's interest--it is the purely negative relationship (negative in
absolute terns, not dialectical terms) which the proletariat fixes with the
structure of the domination of capitalise. So politically it is a question

of noving through collective subjects and inpressing anxiet- circulation on

the objectives of destructuring. within the proletariat and its stratifications.
of the articulations of command which are still present within the proletariat.

What we are saying seems very philosophical. In fact it is just an abstract
simulation of the experience of the proletariat'a daily struggle. Let us

look at the situation of the new worker, the social worker. between factory

and society. What independent prospects does his struggle have? How is self-
valorization born? It is born through the destruction of the coercion that
imposes a certain determined organisational scheme on the working day: 8 hours
in the factory, if not 10; 6 hours traveling time to and from the factory;

and a stupefying hours in front of the television. He finds these things
within hi- and it is by working on his body that he destroys thse constraints
on his work: 8 hours in a factory? No. And, No to all the rest. Self-valori-
ration is therefore not what has been subtracted from the working day imposed
by capitalism. Self-valorisation is the logic which the social worker sou-es
for himself. It is a logic for; only secondarily is it a logic against. And
it is because it is “secondary" that it is so strongly aggressive vis-a-vis
capitalism. because it is a fact by new, a material composition of behavior,

a threshold that has been crossed. The social worker will thus move, individu-
ally and collectively (but the two figures are homogeneous) between the factory
and welfare. trying to and succeeding in building a new rhythm for the working
day. based on not working and the undertaking to free his own inventive force,
his own happiness.

And one could continue giving example. taking a look at all the important
social figures which are emerging: women, young people. etc. And we will
always have this situation: attention to destroying the immediacy of the
relationship of subjugation as a rational and logical example of liberation.
These subjects cannot have the general nature of the relationship which coerces
them and whichthey free themselves from; but by this liberation, the general
power of the enemy is struck. The relationship is not posed by the proletariat.
The proletariat frees itself free it. But the process of the proletariat's
liberation is the same process of their destruction.

But we have also mentioned a new ambiguity induced on the class territory of
the adversary's initiative and we have stressed the specificity of the effects
of self-valorization. Now, it is clear that faced with the New Deal policies
of capitalism-owhere these existo-the destructuring sctionof self-valorisstion
presses on. and exasperates..the terms of the dynamic control of capitalism.
Faced with neoliberalist policy-«where this exists--on the other hand, the
destructuring initiative mainly affects compartmentslization, against the
productive segmentation of society imposed by capitalism. The specificity of
capitalist control is not indifferent. In any case, however,self-Valorizgtion
is determined at a first homogeneous level having special class interests:

77
FOIIOIINCIAI.IIII(IULY
interest in unity, interest in freedom to set the dimensions of the working
day. interest in controlling--from the class point of view-the circulation
of shares of labor expropriated and shares of labor freed.

So emphasis on the form of working class and proletarian self-valorization is
emphasis on a first elementary but fundamental quality of worker subjectivity.
It is discovering a break in the relationship of the domination of capitalism
and fixing its effect at a first level of independent expression of revolution-
ary initiative. Only starting from this first level from the materially and
collectively rooted urge to destroy the working day in its spatial compart-
ments and in its temporaral «giants-does it become possible to speak of
organization, conunist organization, as such. In fact it is only based on
this liberation that subjective organization, as a continuity of power, can
express itself. Organizational subjectivity is mass subjectivity. The old
third internationalist concept recognized this subjectivity in the masses

only at times of insurrection. The rest of the time, it delegated power to
itself as a substitute of subjectivity. Here, on the other hand, mass sub-
jectivity is a subject in itself. Self-valorization characterizes it as not
reducible to capitalist dialectics, as unbreakable and irreversible before

the more astute tactics of division and formalization. These tactics, further-
more, may be complex, but they are inefficient and unable to penetrate an
overly rigid fabric. The subjective co-unist organization of the proletariat,
mass organization for cousunism begins here. It opens on the whole social
gal-Ia of exploitation, but it reaches this totality only negatively, for now,
simply insisting on itself. Bach moment of aelf-valorization wins extension
only by working in intensity. The stratifications of the proletariat are
dominated by means of the intensive destruction of their segmentation and/or
compartmentaliaation. The first form of organised subjectivity, the form of

self-valorization. is the threshold, mini-1m but defined, of coamunist organi-
zation.

Summing up: in the new situation determined by the growth and definitive
consolidation of the self-valorization of the proletariat, destructuring is a
sure and negative effect of the initiative the proletariat undertakes to free
itself from the bonds of work. This initiative is deeply creative and ration-
ally adquate. This initiative is continuous and penetrating, and characterized
essentially by the intensity of its action. On this terrain and with these
characteristics, on this basis, on this threshold which has been crossed,

the problem of comunist organization as a problem of the development of a

mass collective subjectivity is beginning to be determined. The fundamental
conditions of the problem and of its solution in commist terms have been
noted: from the outset. the form of self-valorizagion 1s radically destructuring.
But it is also something more: it is behind the logic of power, it is the
expression of a first irreducible level of unity. A unity that is the key

to the circulation of the practiceof self-valorization within the proletariat.
And there is no homology with the structure of capitalist domination of society.
No homology, but rather independence and liberation.

2. The Form of Self-determination

in speaking of autonomy at length, besides the functions of destructuring, we
have seen those which can be called destabilizing. It is theoretically correct
to always hear in mind this scheme, which shows the autonomy of capitalist

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

politics, the irrationality of power, and requires adequate functions to coebst
it on the part of the proletariat. But it is also true-and this should be
eephasized hereuthat the eore the processes of self-valorization and indepen-
dence of the proletarian easses affire the-selves, the eore these destabilizing
functions becoee central to the class itself , and becoee eore and ears part of
the process of self-valorization. This is the knot to be untangled, a knot
which a long past of approxieationa and attempts has tangled excessively, but
which it any be possible to undo today. At this level of the process of self-
vnlorization of the working class and proletariat, it is perhaps possible to
begin to consider the function of the destabilization of the power of the ens-y
as a nonent within the sass eoveeent when a higher grade of hoeogeneity and
centralization of the process of self-valorisation are consolidated.

He call this level class self-determination.

what is self-determination? Pros the viewpoint of its saturation within the
conplex processes of the asking of the proletariat, self-determination has nona-
tive fore. It is a eoeent, elementary but fundaeental, of expression of
control. he have seen the power of the processof self-valorisstion act to

the point where it determines a presupposed unity, the eeerging figure of the
proletarian subject. Here the subject begins to express hieself, to give
conscious continuity to his life as part of the easses: on the edges of the
process of valorization. where the long shadows of capitalist co-and extend
aggressively in opposition to class autonoey; but also, and above all. within
the class the subject begins to appear as legislation, as the conscious expres-
sion of a trend, as nornativity of the co-unist nova-ant. The function of
destabilizing the adversary finds power and cal-nus at the sale tine. There
is an end to the erratic presence within the level of hoeology with the state,
which sees it indefinitely sucked back in by the nature of the power of the
state; but at the sane tiee the function of destabilizing accentuates its
destructive characteristics because it has a easaive effect on the capitalist
relationship as such, on the heart of the category of capitalise. Deatabili-
zing is no longer a fetish of globality: on the contrary, it is a refusal of
all eediation, a constant and continuous force which nullifies every capitalist
sounding in the class to extract value free it. A defensive function? I would
not say so, because this rejection of capitalise leans control; it is nor-ea-
tive expression, it is giving a definitively victorious shape to the struggle
against work and the state.

Self—dctcrniination is an open and conscious passage to the transition phase to
comunisn. The proletariat here knows itself and knows itself independent.

It deatructures capitalise because it exists in the fore of self-valorization;
it destabilizes it in a fundamental way because it takes the foreof self-determ-
inat ion. Self-determination becoees the force which, depriving capitalise of
the possibility of expressing power, as power in the proper sense of the word
and as valorization--in this project it presses on every capitalist atteept to
reachleve equilibriue.

Whenever capitalise thinks it has come out of the crisis, at that ties an even
deeper crisis opens before it, consandsd and ieposed by a new attack produced
by the class. Because the fullness of class constantly occupies the eqtiness

79

momcuiussoutv
uf capitalist power. Because self-determination means the ability to fix class

conposition at a higher level of attack, the level due to tension, to the
quality of the clash. to the quantity of power that can be expressed. Self-
determination therefore represents a moment when the working class becomes a
Subjective organization. The subjective organization is a collective unity

in the interest of the proletariat which becomesanormative ability, internal
and external. External normative ability: as increasingly heavy and implac-‘
able emptying of power of the capitalist structures. Internal normative
capacity: as the ability to consciously and collectively unify, at the highest
level, the power of self-vslorization.

At the high points of the struggle, self-determinationofthe working class and
the proletariat has the ability to exemplify itself. Let us consider what is
happening in the energy crisis. Energy is the basis of capitalist production.
As Marx would say, it is basic to it more as a tone than as a substance.
Energy is the envelope which, dominates development. To dominate energy is

to dominate. So in the general need to restore balance to the partnerships

of world controls, metropolitan capitalist strata are forced to yield to other
capitalists part of their conrol of energy sources. That is the world crisis.
Capitalism, as always in such cases, becomes.populist: austerity; everyone
must sacrifice, in fact energy is everything, it is a envelope containing
everything, it is a global moment in the function of ruling for valorization.
But the proletariat says No: it says No to sacrifices and austerity because
it wants to and must maintain itsownself-valorization; but above all it
immediately adds a No to the quality of that control. Because the proletariat
demystifies the totalizing quality of the energy dimension; it looks to see
what it is. And then we see a scenario of destruction, death and fascism
arising. The nuclear state! Austerity and sacrifices: it says No! But that
is not enough; capitalism wants austerity and sacrifices, it wants to push
back the frontiers of the independence of the working class and proletariat
and transform class austerity and sacrifices into a basic for its further
process of accumulation, of restructuring of control, of production of war.

At this point a process ofciassself-determination necessarily begins. This
means that a refusal to make the transition to the nuclear state becomes the
expression of a global alternative, of struggle and power, of quality of life
and legitimization of command. It is not just a questiontofdenying a determin-
ed mediation, it is a question of denying every possibility of mediation. The
working class and proletarian force which is unleased in antinuclear campaigns
is not defense but attack, it is not resistance but an alternative. The result
of such a struggle, beyond all delays and compromises, does not appear except
in terms of war. Not wanting to die is a material determination of the process
of self—valuriéationwhlchtakes the form of an alternative, in command against
capital, in a process of transition which is taking place.

But this happens not only around the cardinal questions of life and death. It
also happens within the experienceczfself—valorization, as an constant. This
means that the tendencytoself-determination is constant. There is no worker
and proletarain struggle that is not going towards an alternative of develop-
ment. towards a recasting of the distribtuion of wealth, towards an attack on
the distribution of income which is an act of power in itself. To live this
trend as a subjective tension of the struggle is to appreciate the nature of
the passge fronnsclf-valorization to self-determination. In the generalized

80

EINICINHC1A1.lElB(MUlY
FIHI(HNWC1AI.USE(HVLY

crisis of the processes of legitimization of capital, it seems that only
emptiness exists beside self-valorization. 30! thi' 18 “DC true; there 10 an
evolution of anticapitalist trends rising from the level of class reproduction
in strong terms. Some authors have thought they could read in it the develop-
ment of a radical and offensive democracy of the masses against capitalism,
above all in the United States. I do not think this is the case. and in fact
there is such scorn for politics, it would be difficult for even democratic
politics to be accepted. In reality, these symptomatic movements are prelim-
inary enormous normative thrusts which emanate from proletarian independence
on the trend to self—valorization. They are mass impusles which go through the
masses and occupy the holes of the legitiaization of capitalism in an aggres-
sive way in alternative terms. And they dig other holes. The normative
nature of these movements is, although not clear, indicatively very significant.
It marks the maturation of the masses and their passage from a making of the
working class and proletariat based on the defense and deepening of the pro-
cessesc:fself-valorization to the expression of normative behavior.

So here every ideology residual of a mere refusal, or resistence begins to
fail. Certain high functions of class struggle. functions of attack, of
destabilizing the enemy power, become figures, and blood and flesh, of the
mass movement. The intelligence and innovation which participate in the move-
ment of the value of use begin to move vertically. The destructuring of the
enemy power is consolidated in normative terms. It is therefore from a criti-
que of politics and from its negation around the determinations of the making
of the class intheself-valorization phase--it is therefore from here and only
from here that a concept of "political" worker can arise. Only when every
autonomy of the political is dissolved, down to its deepest roots, only when
every concept of legitimization has been reduced to a critique of valoriza-
tion--only when politics has been radically criticized, does the worker and
the proletarian project reappear. In its new material foundation. So it is
no longer the party that asks for independence from the class, it is proletari-
an independence, matured to formidable levels, which expresses innovative con-
tents, radically different, in a normative form. A worker and proletarian
politics is this time a totalitarian function. but it is built on the full
complexity of the articulationsofself-valorization and on the cautious and
progressive tendency toward self-determination. A politics as a mass construc-
tion of the communist alternative. A politics as the subject of a transition
to be built in collective terms globally. It is at this point that another
magic work of the communist movement can be brought into play: the plan.

But we bring this word into play only to deprive it of its magic. Within the
density of the processes which we have been describing. the problem of organi-
zation and the problem of the plan are not different elements. they are at one
with the problem of constitution and production. They represent different
levels of this process. but this diversity of levels is reached through and
within the mass movement. Organization and plan are put at different logical
levels of a continuous ontological process. From self-valorization to self-
dctcrmination: the form of this final expression of class movement frees
itself in the project which is continually making itself. Givingto self-valori-
zation. to its compact reality, seasure form limit way of expression. But it
is tne same subject thus maturing and refining its own intelligence. It is
within the tensions internal and external toself-valorization that a new
rationality brings forth a new connection between constitution and production.

e1

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB¢NVLY
He have come to the heart of the problem of transition. It becomes solvable
only to the extent that it is completely projected by a subject which under-
stands the before and after.

0n the edges of this transformation there is war. The constant guerrilla
warfare capitalism tries to wage in order to block a rich process which has
already matured with a qualitative jump. Self-determination is the seal of
this passage, it is the final form of the massified subjectivity of the
proletariat.

3. The Form of the Organization

If the problem of communism and the problem of organization are parallel,

there is a basis--perhaps not an exclusive one. but an important one--for the
problem of organization. It is a question of making explicit what the
communist theory of organization has always understood as its implicit utopia.
It is a question of passing, on the terrain of the theory of organization,

from utopia to science. Obviously because, according to the canons of histori-
cal materialism. the conditions of knowledge have natured to a point where this
possibility has become real.

In the communist tradition of the theory of organization, utopia is inherent

in the concept of class consciousness. In fact. it is this category that
mediates organization within the class and translates it into the delegated

form of organization outside of the class. But this is a utopian category.
Utopian because it sets an imaginary place as the point of synthesis of contra-
dictions within the class. As in every utopia, contradictions are not per-
ceived as such but overcome by transferral toward that ideal place which can

be called party. In fact. the party is a utopian place only insofar as it is

an effective place: but the relationship between effectiveness and utopia is
always doubtful. often antagonistic undoubtedly, and in any case mystified.
Because only the rules of force makes utopia true. Only the historically given
party determines the internal function and the specificity of articulation

of the proletarian consciousness. In the theory of organization founded on
class consciousness there is no paradox in the maxim: "There is a contradiction
between party and class: let the class change!" The theory of class conscious-
ness therefore founds the theory of organization only in the form of expropri-
ation and transfer, of delegation and mystificstion.

We can go beyond the theory of class consciousness only by going deeper into
the subject matter of class compositon. Utopia, however, generous and attrac-
tive it may have been. should be broken up and reinvented here, aaterislly
rcfound. as behavior. as a tendency. within the concrete history of class
struggle. The theory of organization is no other than the analysis of the
communist behavior of the masses. It is not the organization which imposes
communism on the masses. on the contrary it is the communist behavior of the
masses which organize. Of course many poetic aspects of communist imagination
will thus be punished and constrained by a lesson of history; but have we not
already been punished enough by a century of victories and achievements of
soclalism? So to reduce consciousness to material class composition is
theoretically necessary and politically correct.

82

IllltﬂﬂﬂClAl.USE(NVLY
lNDR 001NCJAL USIZCﬂHLY

The reader will olject that the problem of organization is not just a problem
of identification of the relationship between class and formal organization
(and its guide), it is above all a problem of efficiency, of operation. Of
centralization. Now, on the basis of the restoration of the problem on the
basis of class composition, how can the problems of centralization and effici-
ency be solved? To answer this question we must bear in mind a long series of
achievements which the theory of composition has expressed so far, and in par-
ticular the definition of class independence and of the progressive articula-
tion of class self-valorization and self-determination in it. Because centrali-
zation and efficiency occur above all within internal class processes, grafted
onto them and occurring with them. In the state of war brought forth by the
crisis of the capitalist theory of value and the processes of valorization,
class separation becomes the main element, and the class's attention to itself
is the main link. The form of organization is therefore the form in which a
working class and a proletariat which have reached a high level of composition
centralize and articulate this composition within the class. The form taken
by organization is a fundamental determination of the making of the class.

It can be its simulation, but not in the sense of a simulated lanaguage that
becomes more and more remote and formalized with respect to reality, but rather
in the sense of a faithful reduction to procedures and resonstruction to proce-
dures.

And this is the point. Organization is the democracy of communism. There is
no communism without democracy: organization is the determination, within

the class, of the procedures of reforming, of the constant development of
proletarian and worker unity, of centralization. The working class destroys
bourgeois law to the extent that it regulates the processes of selfdetermina-
tion for itself and within itself. The subjective organization of the working
class is the continuity and the guaranteeand the strengthening of the continu-
ity and development of the processes ofclassaelf-valorization and self-determ-
ination. All this is within proletarian independence: because if there is no
communism without democracy, there is certainly no continuity, and still less
democratic continuity, between capitalism and communism. But the problems are
different and cannot be resolved except by means of the logic of separation.

Let us be careful: here we should not take up anyone's flag or proclaim that
communist democracy will be the highest and the most perfect. We know well,
in fact, that here homologies do not apply, nor does a linear concept of
progress. And the ideology has never had a history. We know well that we are
forced to speak in improper and only allusive terms, to move on this plane
with merely indicative linguistic instruments. Having said this, we come back
to the substance: and the substance is that communist liberty organizes
itself within the constitutive process and seeks its political form, always
more really homogeneous and substantively unified, through the guarantee of
maximum pluralism and articulation. In the communist class composition, in
the mov.ment of the value of use, in the process which matures self-valoriza-
tion into fully unfurled self-determination.

However, we know that this organizational growth of the proletarian social
individual occurs within a framework dominated by the irrationality of the
action of capitalist war. Stretching the question of organization on the

83

FINICIWNCIAI.IIIB¢NNLY
lung wave of class composition seems to be avoiding the specificity and
dcterminateness of the organizational problems which arise on the margins of
the process of class self-valorization. Above all when the ferocity of capital-
ist war intensifies its attempts to reconquer conditions of valorization.

Above all when the repetition and deepening of economic cycles forces capital-
ism to attack laboriously. But this direction is secondary too. Accepting

it would mean, if only in a negative way, accepting that a homologous connec-
tion, a parallelism, an albeit formal correlation can exist between the two
poles of the relations between the classes. But this relationship has been
broken down by definition. The critique of the law of value must produce its
most extreme effects where. There is no theoretical or practical possibility
of fixing any correlation. The split is radical. But then what: a state of
war? What does this mean? Even war provides for a relationship, however
negative, one may object. But we should answer that this ontological situation
becomes historically real only when the relationships of war are seen to
revolve around the functions of valorization. And here there certainly is

war: there is the daily war of the struggle in factories in its visible and
invisible forms; there is the permanent clash in the social relationships of
reproduction; there is the totality of the capitalist offensive force on

the margins of the process of self-valorization. This war exists and it must

be fought. But in the perspective of a process which wants to and must fix
itself on the transition, so within the proletariat, so with an absolute
privilege of the maturation of proletarian self-determination. This war is
ferocious and obscure; it is the war of the every day and in the every day.

It is the war fought by an enormous people against a clique of despots. It

is really a “Chinese" war where the infinite power of the proletariat extends
to the point where it takes all space away from the adversary, quitely and
continuously. Is there a hypothesis of a desperate and destructive deadly and
open war waged by capitalism against the C1888? Is there at this point, within
this consolidation of power relationships, an extreme ferocious capitalist
initiative counterattscking? We can look in this direction and perhaps

foresee a solution along these lines. But, once again, within this last limit,
too, what can be expected other than the resumption and deepening of a class
organization initiative which can express the whole power of constitution?

what has been said so far should in any case determine the basis of any talk
about organization. of course, what we have said here is not exhaustive,

and there will be infinite specific forms that organization will assume
historically. But it can call itself organization only to the extent that it
accepts their terrain of constitution as the complex fabric it clothes itself
in. Only within these material processes can it be determined as organiza-
tion. So on this basis we have the discriminant between what is communist
and what is not communist, between what is outside and what is inside the
class. Organization for communism outside the state, inside the class.

4. Beyond War, for Communism

A time will come when the logic of separation will reach its maximum power.
This totality of action, from the point of view of class, means overcoming
every obstacle to the development of proletarian fullness. In the crisis of
capitalism, structure and command for valorization now appear only as obstacles
and barriers; in the developmentof'self-valorization, communism appears as

84

FOI‘OFHKJA1.USE(MULY
POI OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

the extinction of the barrier and the obstacle. Of this barrier and this
obstacle. Utopia? why? “he knows what will be the new contradictions, but
they will be different. and certainly not harder to overcone than the present
ones. In fact, with communism man is beginning to walk in an erect position.
he may stumble, of course, and the terrain will remain rough and full of
pitfalls; but now he is walking erect. he has overcome the stage of the ape,
he has progressed. He has entered history, that history in which the real
dominates, without being expropriated. He has gone beyond the contradictions
he could not overcome until recently. He has conquered the reasons for his
present unhappiness. He has gone beyond that horizon of war where capitalism
in its crisis forced him to walk painfully.

In the fullness of the process of transition, worker self-determinationappears
as control of the making of the proletariat. Making, organization, plan are
all one and normative. Material consciousness is directly mass control.
Communist constitution is thus increasingly deep struggle against work. It

is a struggle against work as the exasperated refusal of every value of
exchange, and maximum dilation of the appropriation of the value of use.
Production bows to this necessity. Communist society produces wealth in
abundance, but consciously directed to the satisfaction of basic needs: the
basic. elementary needs of a social individual who has grown up spiritually

and is so alien to the suspicion of poverty and sacrifice that the very concept
of distribution fails here. One does not distribute, one appropriates. There
can be a phase in which we will still witness a struggle about distribution
(above all regarding the relationship between directly productive consumption
and not directly productive consulption), but soon even this type of problem
will have to be overcome, because reproductive accumulation becomes a problem
which is as easily solved as the putting aside of seeds by ancient civilizations
which cultivated grain. The problem of production/reproduction/distribution
gives way to the fundamental law which begins to reign: the law of not working,
the general refusal of the constraint of work. In the phase that leads to

the generalization of this law and to its ascendancy, everyone's work is
reduced to a minimum. To reproduce this shitty world it is possible to work

a couple of hours if everybody works. But this is a miserable basis. because
the problen is not just imposing a minimum time. it's not just a question of
proceeding to the immediate reduction of time spent working, it is rather
articulating the general reorganization of the working day on the basis of
refusing to work and of the liberation of labor-force in the plane of innova-
tion, of the discovery of a peaceful collective existence, happy and creative.
The working day includes increasingly short (even if gradually imposed) frac-
tions of compulsory work; it includes larger and larger segments dedicated to
study, to the development of science. to the building of inventions and auto-
nation, to the enjoyment of superior pleasures. And to the administration

of the commune. Everyone studying, everybody in the administration. Within

a general and immediate collectivization of all goods, production, innovation
and administration are interwoven to such a point it is difficult to identify
individual places for the management of one or the other. These in fact--
production, innovation, administration--become the powers of communist society.
And they cannot subsist except as an interwoven whole which acts on the organi-
zation of the working day of every proletarian. And they cannot be legitimized
except as the expression of the power of the proletariat in its totality.

85

Ftﬂl(lﬂﬂ(lhl.ustiﬂﬂl¥
In this picture we can think of an incredible technical and scientific expan-
sion because it is no longer founded on capitalise and its operations: it
rests, rather, on the organisation of all of society and it sees the wealth
and happiness of everyone as its own product, directly. The communist
reorganization<>fthe working day sees scientific work as the axis of the
activity of the cos-moist. Politically motivated scientific work, immediately
linked to the production of happiness for all; values of use in abundance, time
to compulsory labor reduced more and more sassively, approaching zero. The
making of conditions for the liberation of the maximum innovative potential of
the proletarisn masses is a fundamental passage. But we should stress that
the times of the transition are extraordinarily shortened by the massive inten-
sity with which the enormous potentialities have been accumulated by this
time. and with which the process will therefore develop. He can think realis-
tically about the process of transition as characterized by a very pronounced
initial acceleration, because it is like freeing a prisoner in the beginning!
Nor can one thf k of side slipping or errors, except those that could be
derived by not considering the refusal to work as the fundamental imperative
measure of the process. It is not a question of being optimistic or pessimis-
tic, but rather of acting bearing in mind what the process of self-valorization
is at this historic level of power and at the connections between production,
organization/administration and innovation, which the social worker already
possesses in the crisis of capitalism. Naturally there are priorities which
must be imposed in this passage. They, too, are determined by the logic of
the refusal to work, therefore by the logic of the maximum recuperation of the
productive force of the proletariat. The weakest people. those who have been
made so by capitalist development, children, women, old people, the sick,
people on the margins of society, outcasts: those who have will give more,
all these will be restored to social productivity, to productive control for
non-work. These are priorities founded on the economy of liberation and
equality, on the refusal of work and inequality, sickness and unhappiness.
There is a total dignity of work that is to be liberated, and this can happen
only as a regime of freedom, only as a proposal made to everyone's intelligence,
to innovate, to be equal to others, to participate in the administration of
the commune. The priority of the refusal of inequality naturally or histori-
cally imposed is perfectly consistent with the logic of liberation from work.
But these priorities are internal to the complex and ordinary flow of commun-
ist administration: the administration here is none other than the great
options relative to the self-valorization of the masses. The administration is
the mass procedural yielding of proletarian self-determination. In this
picture another priority goal of the co-nunist plan appears: the law of the
liquidation of any continuity of exploitation of man by man, or between sexes
or races. or in the mind. It is the guarantee of all freedoms. But we stress
the fact that all this can only happen with an interweaving of administration,
production, and innovation, all this happens within the expression of an
articulate mass power, which carefully guarantees all its most elementary
subjects and is unitarian and systematic. The making of the proletariat,
legitimized by the unity of functions it develops, applies all possible pro-
cedures to guarantee individual and group happiness within the mass adminis-
tration by the proletariat. Hence the destruction of any separate power figure.
the disappearance from the scene (and if possible from the historical memory
of aankind) of all the special organs of capitalist repression. After the
communist destruction of the Bastille there will be no more prisons ever,

86

Fillflﬂﬂtlal.l£iB(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not one! Nor will there be a specialised power that is not subordinate to the
collective knowledge and the egalitarian circulation of the values of use.
Shall we call this society radically democratic? Let us call it that. but let
us not forget that democracy implies a plurality of classes and mediation of
classes. Here, however, the main and decisive element is the overcoming of
classes and of the idea of command, of legitimisation as mediation. Of course
there will still be mediation and diversity to mediate, but on the basis of

a unity of class substrate which, alone, makes possible and realistic, and not
utopian, the management of society by the masses.

A dress? No. In the contemporary world there is only one utopia in circulation
and that is the capitalist one which claims control in a situation of war

which capitalism, with its unresolvable crisis, has created. This savage situ-
ation imposed by capitalism has, however, reached a limit of monstrous imbecile
ity. It must be destroyed: the utopia together with war. The conmmmist
subject is present with all his power in this situation. And this subject,

and all the conditions within which he has been produced, and which he can
reappropriate for himself, are preparing to overturn capitalise. The relation-
ship between the social worker and social production has no other mystification
than that of col-sand: a cot-and which only organises co-and. This mystifica-
tion, this incredibely empty legitimacy of capitalism in command, cannot help
but be destroyed. Shown up for what it is, a useless iapediment to the develop-
ment of the productive force of the proletariat. A proletariat which in

its social existence, in the ontological wealth of its qualifications, is

by now able to lead society. It has in its blood the revolutionary passion

of science and innovation; it has in its body the ability to produce, and
therefore hatred for work; it has in the social complexity of its relationships
the intelligence and subverting understanding of the working day. It is only

a step away: link production, innovation, and administration, in the logic

of liberation from work. In hope, in a happiness which is near. It is only

a step away: let us take that step.

COPYRIGHT: Giangiacomo Feltrinelli Editore Hilano 1980

9855
C80: 6100/0002
ETA CWIQUB T0 BASQUE PEOPLE
Unknown zuzm in Spanish Jul 81 pp 1-10
[Text] Introduction

we have recently narked 6 years since the holding of the elections of 15 June 1977,
the first held with universal suffrage in the Spanish State since 1936.

The date has passed with nore sadness than glory, virtually without celebrations
of any kind, and with the parliamentary political parties fearful of calling for
"festivity." This distressed mood is in contrast to the one which prevailed at
the celebration of the preceding years. Nevertheless, it is not difficult to find
the reason for the difference: Between this 16 June and the previous ones, 23
February occurred. Those who still believed that there was democracy (“without

ad jectives," as they liked to proclaim) in the Spanish State had to resign then-
selves to acknowledging the existence of a "guarded democracy," or at least a
"democracy on guard." The adjective in this case is actually an accessory, because
it is difficult to imagine the existence of a democracy when the president of the
governnent (Suarez) is forced to resin under the direct threat of pistols by
four lieutenant generals in collusion with the king (significantly, the self-
styled denocratic and liberal news nedia which apply their harshest descriptions
to less serious actions. in this instance referred to the incident through the
silence of an scconplice); or when the entire parliamentary political group,
headed by the refornist left, feels that its action has been hanpered because of
fear of inciting the nilitary.

With the euphoria of 15 June 1977 gone, the waters have returned to their channel:
The nilitary have adnitted the possibility of a civilian government (the one headed
by Calvo Sorelo) as a final attempt before the formation of a government led by a
member of the military whose priority goal would be to solve the so-called "Basque
problem." .

Strangely enough. it is among certain sectors of the Basque people that disappoint-
ment has replaced the triumphalism shown by leader of BB [Basque Left] and PIN
[Basque Nationalist Party] after the approval of the Statute of Autonomy for the
Basque Country (October 1979), giving way to an increasing narked disenchantment.
The atatenents by the m's high-ranking leaders were euphoric when their action
was taking place in the realm of words; when it was necessary to proceed to deeds,
negotiating the transfers, the representatives of the Basque govern-sat and their
followers have perceived the slight value of these transfers, and their limited
scope, as well as the difficulty, or more appropriately, the virtual impossibility
of making rose for Navarre in the basque Statute. And they have said that they
feel deceived. and that there have been frequent sudden halts in the transfer of
authority, citing the grudgingness and changeablenees of the Madrid government.
Their counts are filled with unadulterated pessimism, in sharp contrast to the
triumphalism of the recent past. It is possible that PNV and 22 have been deceived
by Hadrid, but the fact is that the greatest deception comes from their own poli-
tical blindness, which prevented them (we do not think that it does any longer)
from seeing beyond the pseudo-democratic veil placed over their eyes, and from
realizing that the reins were and continue to be in the hands of the Francoist
Army, which has always controlled the reform process, forcing all those who were
willing to participate in the game started on 15 June to accept all of its terms.
Today, the image shown by the PNV leaders, and even more so by those of BB, is
ridiculous, attempting to justify the acceptance of the Spanish Constitution which
they considered anti-Basque in 1978, and which precluded the attainment of a
minimal level of self-government, allowing a "satisfactory self-government" in
October 1979 (they will explain how, if no change has been made in the constitu-
tional text). which will soon be sworn in, with great solesnity, to its elected
offices, in an act that will be the culmination of one of the greatest frauds
committed against the Basque people.

In contrast to this faltering policy of the cliques heading PNV and BE, there is
our alternative of a rupture, accepted increasingly by broader sectors of PTV
[basque working People]. [Hords nissing from text] It was just another step
toward the consolidation of the military power, through a change of mask, that was
essential for them owing to the loss of prestige reached by the France regime both
internally and externally. and the fact that the establishment of democracy in the
state would occur only through a process of rupture with the dictatorial regime
that would make the achievement of the points contained in the KAS [Patriotic
Socialist Coordination] tactical alternative possible. Those who at the time
predicted its political demise and glady accepted the crumbs from the fascist
military have failed or refused to understand that the letter, as they have proven
repeatedly. are incompatible,with and opposing with all the means at their disposal
the establishment of a true democracy which, among other things, would enable PTV
to become endowed with the levels of self-government that it freely decides upon,
on the path toward the social and national liberation of Buskadi.

Eushadi, June 1981.

Communique Prom ETA [basque Fatherland and Liberty Group] to the Basque People
ETA,theBasqueaevolutionsry Socialist Organization for National Liberation, takes
credit for the explosion of the high-tension tower located on the grounds of the
San Miguel de Arslar School (former seminary), carried out on 16 June in Iruina.
Our arned action is related to the context of the people's struggle waged after

the death of the child Agustin Ocana, who was electrocuted at that same tower on
27 Hay of this year. while playing with other companions.

89
Students, parents and teachers from the aforenentioned school, as well as represen-
tat ives of other educational centers in Iruine, have been holding ease-bliss and
neetings to discuss the case in question and the overall probles represented by

the presence of these high-tension towers in recreational areas and traffic zones
easily accessible to children. In these meetings, there was a denunciation of
lberduero, Inc, as the one responsible for the death of the child Agustin Deans;

and a densnd for the i-ediate adoption of security neasures and a change in the
transfer of electrical conduction lines.

in view of the seriousness of the latter, and realizing the disdainful attitude
that Iberduero, Inc, has been assuming toward the people's coaplaints. ETA has
proceeded to intervene with arned struggle, to prevent further possible misfortunes,
and as an act of intinidation toward the nonopolistic coqany, with respect to the
group of neasures requested by the colbined educational centers' love-ant.

Cora Euskadi Askatutal

Gora Euskadi Sozialistal

Euskadi, 18 June 1981.

Euskadi Ta Askatasuna

ETA.

Comunique From an to the Basque People

ETA, the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organization for National Liberation. takes
credit for the blowing up, with explosive charges, of a large portion of the base-
nents and lower rooas of the OPUS University. carried out on 26 June in Iruina.

On one occasion, just as it did approxinately a year ago, ETA has chosen as a
target of its attack in N .farroa the OPUS University; because, after all, it is
the location of this "sacrosanct" sanctuary of the reactionary, anti-Basque ideo-
logy on the basis of which the OPUS technocratic, centralist class empowers its
plans for differences among the Basques and its anti-privilege policy.

At the present tine, Nafarroa is experiencing a strategic situation related to the
reconstruction of its specific historical personality in the general context
represented by the Basque people. In their tine, Hartin Villa and Del Burgo .
invented a legal and political for-ula for institutionalizing the territorial and
political dis-embernent between the Navarra people and the rest of Southern
Euskadi: the iaprove-ent of the privilege. It is a for-11a which is still
continuing today, the definitive negotiation of which between UCD [Democratic
Center Union lu-UPNIUnion of the People of Navarre] and "CD of Madrid will result
in the establishment of a new differentiated regionalist entity. However, the
seriousness of the situation reaches extreme limits when one notes the reality of
a law aimed at completely ahrogating the final regulation itself, as well as
turning the historical privileged institutions into Iere tentacles adhering to
Spanish centralian.

90
It is this gene of econonic and political interests that we met denounce and
oppose with all our strength and with all our means. Our slogan mat be. ”There
is no Basque people without Nafarroa; Buahadi Nafsrroa dal" With this objective,
ETA will continue its armed intervention in Nafarros. favoring the people's
aspirations and combating those who seek our disappearance as a people.

Gore Buskadi Askatuta!

Gore Bushadi Sozialista!

Buskadi, 26 June 1981.

Buskadi Ta Ashatesuna

ETA.

Co-Iunique Bron ETA to the Basque People

B‘l‘A,the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organisation for National Liberation, assumes
responsibility for the armed occupation carried out on 12 July at the Central
Building of the OPUS University in ﬂsvarrs. and the subsequent destruction. by
explosive charges, of part of its presises, noteworthy aeong which are the data
processing center and the Great Hall.

ETA considers this arr-ed action to be one of the most significant blows against
those in Befarros who constitute the mainstay of the oppressive domination: Opus
Dei. a secret, reactionary,despotic sect dedicated to the service of financial

and landholding capital, under the concealing cloak of a false philosophical
hunanism and religious apostolate. OPUS. a combination of select tentacles infil-
trated on the cultural. political. economic and military level within the society.
night well be described as a state within the state itself. And. as s culminating
achievenent of this omipotent political power group, the University of Navarre,
an institution established in Iruina thanks to Ielix lluarte, a supernumerery
associate of OPUS and vice-president of the privileged chenber of deputies, with
the cooperation of traitors who occupied the town hall, and savings institutions.
through the expropriation of far-era and municipal terms. Carrero blenco.
extrenely willing, signed the decree for its founding.

Since then, the OPUS University in Navarre has become set up as the spiritual-
political and spiritual-economic center iron which the deception concerning our
history has been fostered, from which the knowledge of our language, culture and
custons has been concealed, and from which the memory of our most fundansntal
traditions and our privileged realities has been insulted. Its goal is to under-
sine. destroy or. at least, hide everything that the recognition of the struggle
of our ancestors and the present participation in the national liberation struggle
could provide to the Navarrens and all of us Basques in Southern Buskadi.

For this reason, we have struck at the sacrosanct heart of OPUS. not as an attack
upon ”culture" and "reason," but as a defensive act againt the counter-culture
and injustice to which all of us Basques, and especially Naterroa. have been
subjected by this sect of political bosses. bankers and fanatics. for years.

91
Today. OPUS, through its powerful resources and through tricks to which this
obscurantist organization has accustomed us. is striving assiduously to prevent
Nafarroa from recovering its own personality in the social group that comprises
Basque society in Southern Euskadi. Navarrism, false privileged status and the
defense of regional economic interests are the arguments that it has been using

to separate the Navarran people froa their own Basque national and historical
essence. The only truth is that the Navarran people, like the Gipuzkoana, Bizkaino
and Alaves people. outside of the territorial, political and economic framework
that makes up Southern Buskadi. will never be able to achieve their real develop-

ment as such a people, nor to attain the goal of liberation in keeping with their
sociopolitical aspirations.

ETA is of the opinion that the four historical regions comprising Southern Euskadi
should proceed together, and on equal terms, toward the pursuit of the democratic
and autonomous framework that will retrieve the immediate national liberties and
rights manifested in the present struggle of PTV.

Therefore, ETA will. insofar as it is able, favor making the defense of these
minimal rights and demands a consistent task of a common policy on the national
level for the four historical regions of Southern Buskadi, in the form of a
rupture-oriented struggle against the reform, wherein the organisation and self-
organization of the people based on an entity with counteracting power, such as
Buskal herriko Batzarre Nasionala, will be the focal point for participation and
leadership in our people's movement of resistance and reconstruction. hence, ETA
will also back with armed struggle initiatives such as these, and will fight
relentlessly those who, like OPUS, engage in activity as a declared enemy of
democracy and the Basque liberties.

Cora Euskadi Askatutal

Cora Euskadi Sozialista!

Euskadi. 16 July 1980.

Euskadi Ta Askatasuna

ETA

OPUS Kanpora

Communique Prom ETA to the Basque People

ETA. the Basque Revolutionary Socialist Organisation for National Liberation, takes
credit for the execution of Luis de la Parra Urbaneja, an infantry colonel belong-
log to the war Disabled Corps, which took place on 22 June in Iron.

Among the data that should be cited to explain the reasons which prompted us to
intervene against Col Luis de la Parra, his affiliation on the infrastructural

level with the military intelligence services operating in Southern Buskadi and
his activist link with parallel groups of ultrafascist ideology are noteworthy.

92
His anti-basque hatred was reflected in demented acts which ranged from the
destruction of posters with Abertzale [patriotic] slogans on the street to the
destruction of tires on cars, for the simple reason that they bore the "E" of
Euskadi with the ikurrina. As a finaldeuail showing his actual status as an

agent of oppression. there is the meeting which he held on 23 February with
several Army and Civil Guard officers, preparing lists of members of the Abertzale
Movement and a program of repressive intervention in the event that orders should
arrive from the military headquarters to take action against the Basque population.

In view of the negative effect represented by Colonel De la Parra's active presence,
ETA did not hesitate for an instant to take action; and, henceforth, it will continue
to apply revolutionary justice, with all stringency. against anyone who, in either
an official or a covert manner, is associated with the oppressive and repressive
strategy of the Spanish State toward the PTV.

Our organization has always demonstrated an obvious desire to achieve a political
framework and one of normalization of the citizenry that will make further blood—
shed unnecessary, and for this purpose it has repeatedly formulated a solution of
compromise to prevent the taking of measures against the legion of confidantes,
infiltrated persons, torturers and hired assassins of the repression who invade
Southern Euskadi: Let then leave!

If they place before their personal security the extra pay or the meager guarantees
of survival offered them by the regime of the oligarchy. it should come as no
surprise when ETA undertakes the "punishment of the guilty," which the people's
outcry demands. Buskadi has clearly proven that it is filled with undesirable
eleaents and that it is willing to fight in one way or another until it succeeds

in driving them out.

Finally, ETA takes the opportunity afforded by this communique to assume, as well,
the responsibility for the armed confrontation which occurred on 16 June in
Zarautz. between members of our organisation and many police forces. resulting

in the death of the inspector of the General Police Corps. Maria Jose Garcia

Sanchez. a member of the Central Intelligence Brigade especially assigned to
Southern Euskadi to perform tasks related to the anti-guerrilla battle.

Gora Euskadi Askatuta !
Cora Euskadi Sorialista!
Euskadi, 23 June 1981.
Euskadi Ta Aakatasuna

ETA.

2909
C50: 6000/0027 END

93