APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBBOROOO‘i00020024-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8279

15 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publicetione contein information primarily from foreign
newspepers. periodicals end books. but elso from news agency
trensmissions end broedcests. Heteriels from foreign-lenguege
sources ere trsnsleted; those from Bnglish-lsnguege sources
ere trenecribod or reprinted, with the originel phrasing end
other cherecteristics reteined.

llesdlines, editoriel reports. end materiel enclosed in breckets
[] ere supplied by JPRS. Processing indicetors such es [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of eech item, or following the
lest line of s brief, indicete how the originsl information wes
processed. Hhers no processing indicetor is given, the infor-
metion wss sumsriud or extrscted.

Unfsmilier nemes rendered phoneticelly or trsnelitersted re
enclosed in perenthsses. words or nemes preceded by s ques-
tion merit end enclosed in psrentheses were not cleer in the
originel but heve been supplied es sppropriete in context.
Other unettributed perentheticel notes within the body of en
item originste with the source. tines within items ~ere ss
given by source.

The contents of this publicetion in no wey represent the poli-
cies. views or ettitudes of. the 11.8. Government.

COPYRIGW MRS AND REGULATIONS MINING WRSKIP 0P
MTBRIALS ”PMDUC- 113nm REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINAI‘ION
0P TRIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED MWICIAL USE ONLY.
°tﬁiuocamuc om I- "rt-nu Na- 2. a. u.- mm'. mm“... .\.._

“If“ ”as l./82 79

. T:-’I-":l "Jinn—n— __ . liq-m ".m-
TRANHM'I'IONS on ussu - POLITICAL mu socunuucm. AFFAIRS 15 Feb!“ 1979
(F000 2/79) '

I. lL-ILH- ‘— — .— L’nlm-m‘ thuniuum K. [1.
ﬂ.

9. WAN“. l0. u~om/r...umn um x...
Joint I'ublicotiona Roaoatch Sorvica —
l000 North Globe Road 11. comm/5,... Nu.
Arlington. Virginia 22201 -

l2. \p-mwnw Ivan-Imm- Nam- an-I Aaldltn I). Type 9! Rel-cu a Pct-ml
Comcd
A: above

  

 

 

 

 

lb. \l- 4:4. It

'nw report cuntnlns Information on government and party structure. policy and
problem. law and social regulation. education. and cultural and social aspects
of SUVlL‘L life, trade union and Konsonol activities.

 

. ht I'm-h .an I‘m mm Aulynis. 170. Dene-into“
USSR

Political Science

Sociology

Govern-en:

Cumulus:-

hm: (Jurinprudcncc)

Htlm'nl ion

Culturr (Social Sciences)

Ink. l-I- unlu r. "In-n I "Ila-J INM\

IIc.cmHII..I.I/¢....... 50. 5F, 5K

 

II. .h “Ill-d". Van-nu II

For Official Usv Only. Limited .. " - ' 60
Number of Copies Available Fro- JPRS Wm

. .u-u nus u nu 1 nun THIS '0.“ "AV ”E KEVIOWCE" memo: nun-p"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/827

15 Pobruer

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(F000 2/79)

CONTENTS
INTERNATIONAL

Petrovskiy Discusses Soviet-v.8. Relations
(V. F. Petrovskiy; VOPROSY lSTORIl. Oct 78).............

USSR Indochina Strategy Analyzed
(Tskio Yannznki; GUNJI KBNKYU. Jan 79)

soooooossssoosooso

Pedoseyev Addresses Socialist Countries' Theoretical Conferhnce

(L. S. Yagodovskiy; VBSTNIK AKADEHII NAUK SSSR.
No 11, 1978)............................................

NATIONAL

Socio-Philosophicsl Problels of Law Enforce-en:
(N. A. Shchelokov; VOPROSY PILOSOFII, Nov 78)...........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAJ

PETROVSKIY DISCUSSES SOVIET-0.8. RELATIONS
Moscow VOPROSY ISTORII in Russian No 10, Oct 78 pp 79-96

[Article by V. F. Petrovskiy: "The Role and Place of Soviet-American
Relations in the Modern Horld"]

[Text] The Great October Socialist Revolution fundamentally change the world
system of states and the structure of international relations that conformed

to it. The appearance on the world scene of the first socialist state

marked the end of the undivided dominance of imperialism. The historic
conflict, the competition between socialism and capitalism, became the

basic content of international relations. 'The mutual relations among

peoples, the entire world system of states," V. I. Lenin emphasized in 1918,
"are determined by the struggle by a small group of imperialist nations against
the Soviet movement and the Soviet states which are headed by Soviet Russia"1.

The new system of international relations that arose as a result of the
October Revolution has not remained unchanged. The relationship of forces
within the framework of that system has been steadily changing in favor of
socialism. whereas, after the victory of the revolution, the Soviet state
was encircled by the capitalist countries, the combined forces of which con-
siderably surpassed the might of the Soviet state, at the present time imperi-
alism not only has ceased to be the undividedly dominating force: it is
opposed by the community of socialist countries. the national-liberation
movement that has grown up. and the organizational force of the working class
and all the workers. On this basis there has been a thorough reorganization
of the entire structure of international relations in conformity with the
principle of the peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems.

A decisive role in the transformation of international relations has been
played by the Soviet Union and the socialist community as a whole. Their
growing international authority and prestige, the steady reinforcement of
the economic and military potential, and the relationship of forces which

is changing in their favor are being used by the socialist countries for the
sake of the reinforcement of world peace and security.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opposing social'Y9t0‘9-countriss the relations between which are substan-
tially important for each of the sides, which inevitably reflect and, to

a considerable degree. exert an influence upon the condition and tendencies
in the development of international relations as a whole.

The recognition of the historical inevitability of the class struggle between
the two social worlds, a struggle having an antagonistic nature and therefore
precluding any ideological reconciliation or coalescence (as is asserted in
the West by adherents of the theory of ”convergence" and ”ideological
disarmament"), by no means presupposes the inevitable waging of that struggle
in forms of military force and does not necessitate any acuity of inter-
national crises and conflicts that would be greater than previously. This
situation has been repeatedly explained in documents issued by the CPS" and
the Soviet government. Extreme means of coercion (war. aggression, coloni-
zation) as forms of the struggle between states were legalized in world
politics by the social system that was based on private ownership and exploi-
tation. But with the arrival of socialism on the world scene. there was an
unprecedented expansion of the opportunities to eliminate those forms
completely from international life, to achieve the true consolidation of
peace on our planet, and to eliminate the threat of war. Guiding the con-
flict between the two systems into the channels of peaceful competition in
the name of the elimination of the threat of war - that is the task that

the party views as one of the most important ones. The CPSU, General
Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee L. l. Brezhnev said. strives to

see that the historically inevitable class struggle between the two systems
-- the capitalist and the socialist -- in the sphere of economies, politics,
and. obviously. ideology "is directed into channels that do not threaten

any wars. dangerous conflicts, or uncontrollable armaments rsce"2. The
creation of the optimal conditions for the contest between the two systems
within the framework of peaceful coexistence and cooperation for purposes

of preventing a global catastrophe and discontinuing the arms race is
inseparably linked with the nature of the relations between the USSR and

the United States.

The opportunity for the development of Soviet-American relations along the
path of business cooperation manifested itself in sharp relief as early as
the birth of the Soviet state. On instructions given by Lenin, the Foreign
Trade Commission attached to the Economic Policy Committee of the VSNKh

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Supreme Council of the USSR National Economy] in Hay 1918 prepared a
detailed concrete plan for the development of economic relations between
Soviet Russia and the United States. Distinguished by its realistic
approach. that plan stipulated reliable uarantees assuring the completely
equal nature of the Soviet-American tics . with the head of the Red Cross
mission in Soviet Russia. Colonel R. Robins. acting an intermediary. the

plan was made known to u. s. President w. wnson“. And if the Soviet-
American relations, despite the existence in late 1917 and early 1918 of the
prerequisites for their development on a businesslike constructive basis.
took an unfavorable turn in mid-1918 and the United States became an active
participant in the armed intervention into Soviet Russian, the responsibility
for that is borne by‘the_American ruling circles. among which the persons

who got the upper hand were those who were attempting to resolve the "Russian
question" by military means. If one speaks not about the ideological dif-
ferences evolving from the differences betwen the social systems, but.
rather. about relations between states. we do not see any contradictions.

any conflict of national interests, that would make impossible the maintain-
ing of normal relations between the USSR and the United States. Throughout
the history of the joint existence of both states. there have never been any
were between them, with the exception of the U. S. participation in the foreign
intervention against Soviet Russia in 1918-1920. which was undertaken for

the sake of stifling the socialist revolution, that is, for ideological,
class reasons. and by no means for reasons of U. S. national interests.

The main lesson in Soviet-American relations consists in the fact that,

in our age, there does not exist any other realistic basis for the maintenance
and development of relations between the USSR and the United States than

the principle of peaceful coexistence. To the extent that Soviet-American re-
lationscorrespondedto thatabsolutely fundamental principle, they benefited
the peoples of both countries and the welfare of international peace. The
most important and most brilliant example of Soviet-American cooperation was
the participation of both states in the anti-Hitler coalition, when their
common interests and the interests of world peace were determined by the task
of defeating fascism. In our day. such a key task is the prevention of
nuclear war and the elimination of the threat that such a war could arise.
This is the chief goal, but, obviously. it is not the sole one. and it is

not isolated from the other constructive tasks of international policy,

such as the complete development of mutually advantageous and fruitful
cooperation in the economic, scientific-technical, cultural. and other areas.

The history of Soviet-Aacrican relations teaches us that the platform of
peaceful coexistence requires not the rejection of the ideological struggle.
but the introduction of propagandistic activities into definite framework.
which precludes falsification and slander. the incitement of hatred and
distrust, the use of subversive means and methods of "psychological warfare."
With the establishment of diplomatic relations between the USSR and the
United States in 1933, both states (on the initiative of the American side!)
pledged that they would not only refrain frmn interfering in each other's
internal affairs, but would also abstain thatselves and restrain all persons
and organizations under their "direct or indirect control. including

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizations receiving financial aid free then. fron co-itting any

overt or covert not capable in any way of den-aging the rain. welfare,
order, or security” of the other side (in this regard, direct nention was
also aade of ”agitation and propaganda”)5. That ogre-eat, fornnlated
through the exchange of letters between M. Di. Litvinov and P. D. Roosevelt.
rcnains in force to this very day.

Soviet-Anerican relations traveled a difficult path free the intervention
and the 16 years of U. 8-. nonrecognition of the Soviet state to the
situation when. in the American political establisllent there are now, in
essence. very few who deny the inportance of the naintainiog of peaceful
relations between the USSR and the United States. the inportance of the
reduction of the danger of a nilitary confrontation between then. A large
anount of credit in this regard belongs to the fir- and consistent foreign-
policy line of the Soviet state. which, using the objective processes in
international develop-eat and the nsjor shifts in the place-eat of the
world's political forces. has been striving consistently to recognise

not only in words, but also in deeds, the principle of peaceful coexistence.

The fundamental views of the Soviet Union on the question of relations

with the United States were contained in the ideas and practical activity

of the founder of our state. V. I. Lenin. Pro. the very nonent of its

birth the Soviet authority, in addition to the rebuff given to the aggressive
reactionary circles of inperialisn. proclained its readiness to develop
nornal relations with the countries of differenz social syatn. Lenin,
fornulating the concept of peaceful coexistence , aphasized that socialisn,
by his very nature as the social syst- expressing the funds-eats].

interests of the working class and all the workers, has a self-interestedness
in preserving peace between peoples and states7. The principle of peaceful
coexistence which was fornulated by Lenin expressed the essence of the con-
sistently depocratic progru for the developaent of international relations
vith which the the country of the first victorious socialist revolution
arrived on the world scene. The Soviet Union has never excluded the

United States free the sphere of its policy that was ained at the carrying out
of that principle. horeover. Lenin's nunerous statements on this question
attest to the fact that even then he attached special inportance to relations
with the United States as the cost highly developed and nest typical country
of nodern capitaliu.

The ideological isplacahility' with respect to imperialism did not prevent
Lenin fro. asking a realistic evaluation of the place and role of the United
States in the world systa of states. In his "Letter to the Anerican
workers," which contains a politically acute description of inperialian,
Lenin at that time noted that "Anerice has occupied first place anong the
free and formed countries with regard to the high level of develop-ent of
the productive forces of tween united labor, and to the application of
nachines and all the wonders of nodern technology“. his approach to the
problen of Soviet-Anerican relations was profoundly scientific and dialectic.
In the conplicated set of questions pertaining to Soviet-Anerican relations

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he treated economic ties as a completely separate entity. In October 1919,
in reply to a question asked by a correspondent of the American newspaper,
TUE CHICAGO DAILY NEWS. "Hhat is the position of the Soviet government with
respect to a state of agreement with America?". Lenin gave the following
precise and unambiguous answer: "We are decidedly in favor of a state of
agreement with America -- with all countries, but especially with America"9.
Later, on 18 February 1920, in an interview granted to (K. Higend). a
correspondent with Universal Service, an American information agency, in
response to the question "Is Russia ready to enter into business relations
with America?", Lenin again stated, "of course Russia is ready, just as with
all other countries"lo. Lenin attached much greater importance to the
economic ties with the United States, in that, in addition to their mutual
ndvsntageousness, he saw in them a stable basis for developing relations of
peace and cooperation between the two countriesll.

At the same time Lenin came out decisively against U. S. attempts to use
the negotiations with Soviet Russia for the purpone of interfering in its
internal affairs, for the purpose of gaining unilateral advantages. In
connection with the negotiations between the representative of the RSPSR,
H. H. Litvinov. and the representative of ARA, an American aid administration,
(U. Brown) relative to the practical implementation of the food assistance
promised by the ARA to the areas of Soviet Russia that were encompassed by
starvation, Lenin warned against attempts on the part of definite U. S.
circles to use the economic difficulties of the Soviet state in order to
interfere in its internal affairs and to force upon the Soviet state
unacceptable aid conditions. "Be on guard. keep trying to discern their

intentions, don't let them get too cocky." Lenin telegraphed to Rigs on
11 August 192112.

The Leninist approach lay at the basis of the unceasing efforts on the part
of Soviet diplomacy during the 1920s and the early 1930s to normalize the
relations with the United States. The Soviet position, in expanded form,
was set forth in connection with a note from the U. S.Secretary of State

5. Colby. dated 10 August 1920, to the Italian ambassador in Washington, in
which the U. 8. government categorically rejected the recognition of the
Soviet state and which in essence, represented a manifesto that had as its
aim the implementation of a policy of hatred and boycott with respect to
Soviet Russia. In reply to Colby's note. the RSPSR People's Comaissar of
Foreign Affairs, 6. V. Chicherin, on 10 September 1920, sent a telegram to
Soviet plenipotentiary representatives abroad. In it he stated, 'Iiister
Colby has made a serious mistake if he assumes that it is only with the
proviso that the capitalist system dominates in Russia that it possible for
normal relations to exist between it and North America. We feel, on the
contrary, that it is in the interests both of Russia and of North America
to establish between them even now, despite the opposition of'their social
and political systems, the completely correct and loyal peaceful, friendly
relations which are necessary for the developaent of commodity exchange
between them and for the satisfying of the economic needs of both sides”13.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Carrying out the Leninist line for the establishment of normal relations
with the United States. the Soviet government inevitably took into considera-
tion the international aspect of those relations. As can be seen from the
foreign-policy documents of that period, the Soviet Union proceeded from

the praise that "the restoration of relations would serve to the benefit
not only of both countries, but also, to a considerable degree, would con-

tribute to the restoration of the economy of Europe as a whole, as well as
to universal disarmamentu".

The importance of the establishent of Soviet-American relations from the point
of view of raising the chances of the preservation of peace (and that took
on particular importance under the conditions of the centers of aggression
that had sprung up in the Far East and in Europe) was especially stipulated
in the exchange of notes between the U. S. president and the USSR People's
Coamissar of Foreign Affairs on 16 November 1933. Those notes substantiated
the jointly shared conviction that "from this day on, our nations will be
able to cooperate for our mutual advantage and for the protection of
universal peace"15. A very typical fact is that, in the course of the first
meeting with U. S. Ambassador H. Bullitt on 15 December 1933, the Chairman
of the USSR Council of People's Cot-issars V. H. Molotov persistently
conveyed the idea that "the most important area in which the Soviet-American
cooperation should operate is the matter of the consolidation of the peace."
"‘No such countries as the USSR and the United States," the head of the
Soviet government emphasized, "can do much to preserve the peace, and can,
to a considerable degree, paralyze the efforts that are directed against

the cause of peace"1 .

The Leninist principles pertaining to peaceful coexistence. even after the
establishment of diploaatic relations between the USSR and the United
States. continued to constitute the basis of the political line of the
Comonist Party and the Soviet goverment with respect to the United States.
Consistently adhering to that line, the 23rd and 210th CPSU Congresses posed
as their task the combination of the firm rebuffing of the tentative but
aggressive efforts of imperialism. and the consistent, constructive course
aimed at the confirmation of the principle of peaceful coexistence and lack
of compromise in ideological struggle, with a readiness to develop mutually
advantageous relations with states of an opposing social system, including
the United States. The 210th CPSU Congress, in advancing its Peace Program,
formulated the task of normalizing the relations with the United States in
the broad context of the international policy of the Soviet Union, as an
organic and extremely important part of foreign-policy activities aimed at
the fundamental reorganization of the entire systtm of international relations.

The recognition by the United States of the principles of peaceful coexistence
would create the conditions for putting an end to the Cold liar, to its
pernicious effect both upon the relations between the USSR and the United
States and upon the international situation. Constructive Soviet-American
cooperation in all spheres, but particularly in the solution of vitally
important world problmaa, has been called upon to give additional impetus

to the policy of detente, in which a substantial role is played by Soviet-French

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cooperation, the new nature of the relations between PRC [the Federal
Republic of Genaany -— West Germany] mu] the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries. In the long-term view the Soviet-American cooperation
would contribute to assuring that the procesu of detente takes on a global
irreversible nature.

At the same time the CPSU also took into consideration the substantial im-
portance of the normalization of Soviet-American relations in the bilateral
View, inasmuch as the matter at hand was the ties between two powers

possessing highly developed scientific-research potential and highly trained
scientific-technical personnel.

In order to complete the decisive turn toward the normalization of Soviet-
knerican relations, the Soviet Union did not have to change its foreign-policy
course. But in order for the political leadership of the United States to
make the transition from the Cold War policy to negotiations with the USSR,
it was necessary for them to make a rather radical re-evaluation of their
foreign policy. which, after Horld War II, had been oriented at a confronts-
tion with the USSR. A factor of decisive importance in the re-evaluation of
values was the recognition by the U. S. ruling circles of the lack of
prospects and the lack of sense in relying upon nuclear force. And. of
course, the fact of the matter is not in that these means of conducting
warfare proved to be excessive for the attainment of foreign-policy goals.
The history of the United States convincingly attests to the fact that
imperialism never stops before the application of force in the name of
implementing its plans. The political leadership of the United States
arrived at the idea of the necessity of reducing the danger of nuclear war
as a result of their recognition of the fact that the same nuclear force
that the United States has is also possessed by the Soviet Union, which,

in the United States, is considered at the present time and for the fore-
seeable future to be the "chief opponent" in all respects - political,
military. economic, and ideological.

The USSR and the United States, H. Kissinger said on 12 May 1975, in a

speech at the International Relations Council in St. Louis, Missouri.

"are confronted by a problem that has had no precedent in history: each of
these powers has armaments that are capable of destroyed civilized life.
Therefore, no matter how we may compete with one another and no getter how
we may ideologically oppose one another. no one of the two powers can attempt
to force its will upon the other one without taking an inadmissible risk"17.
Also linked with the recognition of the danger 0! a mutually annihilating
nuclear war is another important conclusion -- the conclusion that it is
necessary to preserve the strategic equilibrium between the USSR and the
United States. Speaking before the conference oi producers of raw materials
and food products in Binaingham, Alabama, on 14 August 1975, about the

fact that "never before in history have the weapons of war been so stupendous,
so dangerous, and at the same time so unsuitable for promoting the achieve-
ment of political goals," H. Kissinger emphasized, "we have no more important
task than the maintaining of the strategic equilibrium, since we would

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

otherwise be threatening our own survival"18. The realistically-minded

wing of the American politicians did not limit themselves to stating the

fact of strategic balance. They made a much more far-reaching conclusion

to the effect that any attempts to destroy that balance would fail to have a '
significant, or, more importantly, any long-lasting effect. In the event

at its being disturbed, the balance would inevitably be restored. but only

at a higher level of development of nuclear weapons.

The recognition of the existence. in the person of the Soviet Union, of a
force that was ailitnrily and economically the equal of the United States.
caused the re-evnluation of the views concerning the place and role of Soviet-
American relations in the system of the foreign-policy priorities of the
United States. A considerable number of the realistically-minded Aaerican
bourgeois theoreticians have taken the position of recognizing the primacy,
in U. 9. foreign policy. of relations with the USSR. it is extremely syapto-
matic that. in addition to well-known figures of liberal persuasion (H.
Shulman, c. Yoot, (R. Hillsnnn), a. Rosecmnce, (J. Hertz), A. Rsppsport)

and the "revisionists," persons who began to come forth in favor of the
prhsacy of the Soviet-American relations in the early 1970s also included
representatives of the conservative wing ((5. Gavin, U. Kintner)) , and. to

a certain degree. H. Kuhn) who. in the past had been known for their
skeptical attitude with regard to the possibilities of cooperation between
the USSR and the United State. Business considerations and political

realism forced those individuals. despite their political objections.

to take into consideration the importance for the United States itself of

the changes in Soviet-American relations and the renunciation of the

heritage of the Cold War.

Considering the Soviet Union and the United States to be the mightiest
powers in the modern world and recognizing the great influence of the
relations between them upon the state of the international situation as a
whole, American bourgeois theoreticians frequently write about the two
"superpowers." It is telling that the term "superpower," which was intro-
duced into the U. 8. political lexicon in 1943 by the current director of

the Institute of War and Peace, at Columbia University. H. Fox, was

used until recently only as applicable to the United States. thus
emphasizing the notorious "American exclusiveness." The introduction of

the concept "two superpowers" meant the renunciation of the traditional ideas
concerning the "exclusiveaess"of the United States and the recognition of the
fact that the Soviet Union is capable of succeaslully opposing the United
States. At the same time. in promoting the concept of "superpowers." the
American authors, by virtue of the class nature cf their political philosophy.
do not make any distinction between the socioecoromic systems in the USSR

and in the United States and, in effect. equate them.

Currently the wide use in American bourgeois literature of the terminology
that was mentioned obviously plays into the hands of Peking and its efforts
to slander the Soviet Union and its foreign policy. In its foreign-policy
documents the Soviet government has repeatedly emphasized that the
recognition of the special responsibility borne by the USSR and the United

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL iiSi-i ONLY

Staten for the guaranteeing of wcrid pence dnen not have anything in

uummon with negotiation" concerning a particular kind or compact or
condominium between the two "uuperpoweruﬂ' 'ﬁdmre are a few people."

I.. I. Itrezhnev said at a meeting in Hashington with Aaerican senators in
June 197]. "who call our countriea 'tmperpowera.‘ putting a upecific leaning
into those words: as though none kind of compact is being arranged. at the
expenue of the lntereatn of other countries. . . But are we really to

think that what wan achieved by the ntnte of agreement in Moscow and what

we are discussing today harms. in eVen the slighteut way. any other
countries? 0n the contrary. the positive shifts in Soviet-Alerican relations
have the moat favorahle effect upon the overall ultuation. improve the
international climate. and ntrengthen the peace and international security"19.

The recognition of the new situation in the world. in particular the increase
in the authority and might of the Soviet state. represents a long and
painful procesa in the foreign-policy thinking of the U. S. ruling class.
and was accompanied by a modification of the foreign-policy doctrines and
concepts that were created during the Cold "or nzriod. Having come to the
conninaion that the aodern world is politiCaliy nultipolar and Iilitarily
bipolar. American bourgeois foreign-policy thinkers. instead of plans for
the reorganization or the world in accordance with the American model

(an Americana) and the creation. for this purpone. of a "world government."
have begun to propose plans [or an "internationu; structure“ based on
concepts of "interdependence" and a "trilateral col-unity" of the United
States. Western Europe. and Japan. instead of guardianship over the allies.
these concepts atipnlate a partnership based on the "division of responsibi-
lity." instead of the Cold War and "containment" with respect to the

Soviet Union. they stipulate competitive coexistence and "regulated
rivalry." in addition to military force, factorn that were announced as
important components of state night are scientific-technical potential.
ideolnrv. and diploaacy. The United States' new foreign-policy doctrine.
which was proclaimed in 1969 and which is known as the Nixon-Kissinger
noctrine. on the one hand. preserved as a basic task the guaranteeing for
the United Staten of the leading position in the capitalist world. the pro-
tection of the interests of Anerican capital. "whenever and wherever they
are threatened. in any place on esrth"20. and. on the other, proceeded

from the premiae that. under the conditions of the new placement of forces
in the world and the arising of approximately nuclear parity. the period of
the confrontation by force between the two world social systems should

give way to a period of negotiations between then. and the complete
dominance of the United States in the capitalist world should give way to
the "division of responsibility" with its allies in various blocs.

The appearance, at the beginning of the 19709. oi realistic principles in

the foreign-policy thinking of the United States did not signify. by any
means. their auto-stic extension to the entire American system of foreign-
policy concepts and principles. Remaining basically class-oriented and
ilperialistic. the U. S. foreign-policy ideology provides no opportunity

for bringing U. 8. foreign policy into complete conformity with the real-life
siteatlon. It causes inconsistency and a zigzagging in the foreign-policy

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OII‘HCMI. USE ONLY

course of the United States with respect to states with a different social
system. At the same time the transition of the U. S. political leadership
to positions of a realistic approach toward relations with the Soviet

Union. the recognition of the fact that the natural situation is not the
balancing on the brink of war. but. rather. negotiations concerning questions
of dispute. served as one of the prerequisites for naJor shifts in Soviet-
American relations.

In 1972-1976. important work was done to reorganize evict-American relations.
As a result of four Soviet-Alerican sumait neetings2 s solid political and
legal basis was laid for the development of mutually advantageous cooperation
between the USSR and the United States on principles or peaceful coexistence.
The system of Soviet-American treaties, agreements. and other documents

which was created at that time, reduced. to a considerable degree. the

danger that a nuclear war would arise and created the necessary prerequisites
for further efforts to lessen. and in the long view to completely eliminate.
the danger of a new world war.

A document of fundamental importance. which continues to maintain its full
force at the present time. is the "Principles of the Interrelationships
between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America." which were signed by the General Secrezary of the CPSU Central
Omittee and the U. 5. President on 29 Hay 1972. As can be seen fro. the
vary name of the document. it contains a formula :ion and consolidation

of the main principles that should guide both countries in their interrela-
tionships. The primary attention in the docuent was doncentrated on the
problems of peace and the elimination of the thrust of war. The key
situation in the “Principles of the Interrelationships" is the state of
agreement to the effect that the USSR and the United States "will proceed
from the cannon conviction that, during the Nuclear Age. there does not
exist any other basis for the maintaining of the relations between them,
than peaceful coexistence." The consolidation of that principle in the
document represents a great political achievement. The "Principles of the
interrelationships" are the first joint Soviet-American document in treaty
law in which that principles found its official recognition on the part of
the United States. Another principle of fundamental importance that was
substantiated in the "Principles of the Interrelationships" is the one
that states that the USSR and the United States "will do everything possible
to avoid military confrontations and to prevent :he arising of a nuclear
war." Those words contain the formulation simultaneously both of the very
important mutual pledge and the goal of the constant joint efforts in the
aajor area of Soviet-American relations.

The importance of the document "Principles of the interrelationships

between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America" is not limited to these important principles. They also formlate
such a critically important principle of interrelations between the two
countries as the principle of identical security. “The recognition of the
interests of the security of the two sides. which is based on the principle
of equality," is viewed in the document as a necessary prerequisite for the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"maintaining and the consolidation between the USSR and the United States

of relations of peace." There is an exceptionally great amount of practical
significance in the principle of identical security [or the successful
solution of the specific questions or limiting and discontinuing the arms
race and the other questions that arise in the course of the corresponding
Soviet-American contacts. The "Principles of the Interrelationships"
stipulate that the USSR and the United States will continue steps for the
purponeot limiting armaments both on a bilateral and a multilateral basis.
and will undertake special efforts to limit strategic arms. concluding.
when such becomes possible. the concrete agreements. A substantial aspect
of the "Principles of Interrelationships" is the confirmation in that
document of the duty borne by the USSR and the United States. as permanent
members of the Security Council. to do everything that they can possibly do
to prevent the arising of conflicts or situations that are capable

of increasing the International tension. and to promote a situation in

which all the countries will live under conditions of peace and security.
without being subjected to interference in their domestic affairs from
without.

These and other principles contained in the "Principles of the interrelation-
ships betwecn the USSR and the United States" characterize it as a document
of great political Importance. which combines within itself both a codifi-
cation of the fundamental rules governing the interrelationships between

the two great powers and a long-term program for joint activities in the
interests of world peace and security.

The signing of the "Principles of the Interrelationships" by the highest
leaders of the two countries laid a path for another very important

document of detente -— the Agreement between the USSR and the United

States Concerning the Prevention of Nuclear "or. That agreement was signed
on 22 June l973 during a visit by h. l. Brezhnev to the United States

and it was aimed at assuring the maximum reduction in the danger of the
application of the most destructive of all existing types of weapons. The
agreement went into effect from the moment it was signed. and has no date

of expiration. The Soviet Union and the United States solemnly agreed

that the elimination of the danger of nuclear war and the use of nuclear
weapons is the aim of—their policy. The agreement stipulates that both
states will act to prevent the arising of situations capable of causing

a dangerous aggravation of their relations. to avoid military confrontations.
and preclude the arising of a nuclear war between them. or between each of
them and any other countries. in the execution of that aim. the USSR and
the United States pledge to refrain from using the threat of force or its
application against the other side, against the allies of the other side, or
against any other countries in circumstances which could threaten the
international peace and security. The USSR and the United States asserted
that they would be guided by these considerations when formulating their
foreign policy and in their actions in the field of international relations.
The agreement stipulated that. ii there should arise any circumstances

that might look as though they were involving the risk of a nuclear conflict.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the USSR and the United States would hnnedlately begin urgent consultations
with one another and would undertake all efforts to prevent that risk.

An important peculiarity of the agreement consists in that it stipulates
the pledges on the part of the USSR and the United States to develop their
relations with other countries on the basis of the aims of peace. The
agreement realistically lessens the threaten of a nuclear confrontation.
and is aimed at the consolidation of the relations of peace between the
USSR and the United States. and at the creation of the additional prerequi-
sites for assuring that Soviet-American relations will act. to a greater and
greater degree. as a factor for the consolidation of international security.

The document "Principles of the interrelationships between the USSR and the
United States" and the Agreement Concerning the Prevention of Nuclear War
occupy the central place in the chain of measures directed at the elimination
of the threat of war from the relations between states. Coming very close

to them. in particular. is the Agreement between the USSR and the United
States concerning the prevention of incidents on the open sea. Signed in
Moscow in 1972. it has the purpose of creating the conditions that lessen

the possibility of any unintentional conflict between the armed forces of

the two countries.

In Soviet-American relations. an important place belongs to the problem of
restraining the arms race. of limiting and reducting the nuclear-missile
arsenals of both countries. And this is understandable: the detente in
the political area cannot be lasting. stable. or effective if it is not
supported by measures of military detente. by concrete steps to lessen
the military tension. Trust between states. upon which. in the final
analysis. so much depends in the plan for the prevention of the threat of
the arising of a war. requires realistic and considerable proofs of the
mutual readiness to tone to an agreement about the limitation of the cost
terrible means of conducting warfare and about the intention to fulfill
honestly and completely the agreements that have been achieved.

For the Soviet state and its diplomacy it has always been clear that. during
the Nuclear Age. the path to the reinforcement of the relations of peace
between the USSR and the United States lies. to a greater degree. through the
search for mutually acceptable solutions for the lbmitation of strategic
arms. in turn. the shifts among the U. S. ruling circles in the direction

of realism and the recognition of the desirability of negotiations with the
USSR for purposes of lessening the military threat opened up the opportunities
for a mutual dialogue on p:oblems of strategic arms. That dialogue began

in the autumn of 1969 and. if one disregards uhort interruptions. it has been
since then a constant element in Soviet-American relations. At the present
thee. tht following are in effect in the field of strategic arms limitation:
the Treaty on Limitation of Antimissile Defense Systems; the Protocol to that
treaty; and the Provisional Agreement on Certain Measures in the Area of
Limiting Strategic offensive Arms.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Treaty on Limitation of Antleisuile Defense IAND: Russian abbreviation PRO]
Systems was concluded by the USSR and the United States in 1972 and has no

expiration date. The essence of this treaty consists in that the USSR and
the United States have mutually pledged to limit sharply the development in
their countries of AND means so as to prevent the extension of the arms race
into that area. By the tine that that Treaty was concluded. the United
States not only had in existence, but also had begun to implement an extensiVe
plan for constructing on the country's territory a network of antimissile
complexes (the so-called Safeguard System) , which, in particular. were supposed
to provide cover for thenreas where America's strategic offensive missiles
located. It is understandable the carrying out of that plan could have
far-reaching consequences. and could sharply incite the strategic arms

race. both for defensive and offensive arms. hot to mention the many

billions of dollar» that would be swallowed up by the contruction of the All!)
systems. the extension of these systems on a broad scale could lead to a
dangerous destabilization of the international strategic situation. The
competition between the USSR and the United Stated in the area of creation

of AMD systems threatened to aggravate the arms race even more. Therefore.

an act of great state wisdom was the joint decision by the USSR and the
United States to discontinue this channel in the anus race. The Treaty
authorized each of the sides to have only two AND complexes each. with the
number of antimiosile launch units in each of them not to exceed a definite
quantity. In 1974 the Protocol to the Treaty on AHD was signed. By that
Protocol. the number of Complexes stipulated in the Treaty as being authorized
for each side was reduced to one.

The Provisional Agreement on Certain Measures in the Area of Limiting
Strategic Offensive Arms was signed in 1972 during the first Soviet-American
summit meeting, alter prolonged and complicated negotiations. The chief idea
of the Provisional Agreement consists in that it prohibited the construction
of additional fixed launch units for intercontinental ballistic missiles
based on the ground and limited the launched units of submarine ballistic
missiles. as well as modern submarines with ballistic missiles. to the amber
in coabat strength and those in the stage of construction as of the date of
signing of the Provisional Agreement. Expressing it in flxnratIVe tones. it
"froze" the arsenal of ground-based and submarine-based offensive strategic
weapons that had been created in both Countries in the quantities that the
USSR and the United States had at their disposal in the sun-er of l972. The
pledges taken by the two sides in the Provisional Agreement were a major

step forward in the restraining of the arms race.

The MD Treaty and the Provisional Agreement affect the very core of the
military might of both countries. They firmly establish the equilibrium of
the strategic forces of the USSR and the United States and create definite
obstacles for the intensification of their nuclear opposition. The importance
of these two acts of treaty law is not limited. however. to the framework

of the purely military categeries. The AND Treaty and Provisional Agreement
are acts of a great amount of political force, which cenvincingly demonstrate
that the USSR and the United States not only must. but can jointly undertake
concrete steps to lessen the military danger. The 25th CPSU Congress included

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the strategic arms limitation agreements concluded between the USSR and

the United States among the most important Joint Soviet-American docusents.
Their chief importance. the Report of the Central Committee emphasizes.
consists in that. taken together with the "Principles of the Interrelationships
between the USSR and the United States" and the Agreement on the Prevention
of Nuclear Nar. they "laid a solid political and legal basis for the develop-
ment of mutually advantageous cooperation between the USSR and the United
States on principle: of peaceful coexistence. To a definite degree they

have reduced the danger that a nuclear war can arise. It is precisely in
that aspect that we see the basic result of the development of Soviet-
American relations during the past five years"22.

The AMD Treaty and the Provisional Agreement went into effect simultaneously
-- on 3 October 1972. Whereas the former of these acts has no date of termina-
tion specified. the latter. as is obvious from its very name. does have a
limited effective period. stipulating. however. the pledge by both sides "to
continue active negotiations concerning the limitation of strategic offensive
arms." Their goal is to develop a new. longer-term. and more comprehensive
treaty act which is supposed to replace the Provisional Agreement. The
overall parameters of the future understanding were defined during the Vladi-
vostok Soviet-American summit meeting in November 1976. As evolves from the
joint decisions that were made at that tﬂae, the new treaty. unlike the
Provisional Agreement. is supposed to touch upon not only the quantitative.
but also the qualitative aspect of the offensive strategic arms.

The Provisional Agreement. as is well known. limits only the launch units

of ground-based and submarine-based strategic missiles and does not pertain
to the operational features of the warheads of the missiles themselves.

And yet the appearance of rockets equipped with warheads that can separate
and be individually guided [NIRVs] (such a missile is capable of striking

not just one target. but a number of them) made very important the task of
introducing definite "ceilings" for the number that each side could have.
Correspondingly. a state of agreement was reached in Vladivostok to the
effect that the Soviet Union and the United States would each have 2400
carriers or strategic weapons. including 1320 missiles each with separable
warheads. Another important decision at that meeting was the state of agree-
ment to the effect that the new treaty would deal not only with missile arms.
but also such a component of strategic forces as strategic aircraft. which.
in the Provisional Agreement. was not quantitatively limited at all. It was
also agreed that the new treaty would be in effect until 1985 and that the
USSR and the United States. before the expiration of that deadline. would
begin negotiations dealing with the question of further limitations and the

possible reduction of strategic arms.

in the new foundation of Soviet-American relations that was created in the
process of detente. an important place is occupied also by the understandings
dealing with other aspects of the problem of limiting the arms race and

of disarmament (the 3 July 1976 treaty limiting underwater tests of nuclear
weapons; the 28 Nay 1976 treaty concerning underground nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes: the Convention which went into effect in Narch 1975.

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

banning the developing. production. and stockpiling of reserves of
bacteriological (biological) and toxic weapons and their destruction; etc.).
In addition to the specific measures aimed at restraining the arms race.

the two countries have concluded a considerable number of agreements dealing
with bilateral ties, particularly ll agreements in such arena as science and
technology. space research. public health. the protection of the environment.
and housing construction. In conformity with these agreements. at the present
time 80 working groups are in operation. engaging in 300 projects. As a
whole. the approximately 60 agreements that were achieved during the indicated
period have created a definite infrasttrtture of relations between the two
states. and have sectioned off the spheres where their interests coincide.
prhmnrily in the area of the reduction of the danger of a new war. At the
price of a large amount of labor. efforts. and patience. the two countries
have created a base of antual trust that is necessary for the consolidation

of the peace. the curtailment of the nuns race. and the further development
or detente.

in jointly adopted Soviet-American documents and in the statements made by
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee. Chairman of the Presidium of
the USSR Supreme Soviet h. l. Brezhnev. there is a formulation of the concept
of the role and place of Soviet-American relations in the modern world. The
basic elements of that concept can be summed up as follows. First of all.
the state of Soviet-American relations. despite the certain shifts in the
international system of states. continues to be an important factor that
greatly influences both the situation in the world as a whole and the degree
of danger that a global conflict will arise. Secondly. the serious importance
that is attached to the condition of and the prospects for Soviet-American
relations does not signify, by any means. that the USSR and the United States
will have any special rights or advantages over any other peoples. Thirdly.
the relations between the USSR and the United States are based on the strict
observance of the legal rights and interests of "third countries." irrespective
of whether they are small or large. The Soviet Union proceeds from the
premise that all states. irrespective of their political and social system,
cost huiid their interrelations on the basis of the unconditional recognition
of and respect for national independence. sovereignty. territorial inviolabi-
iity. and the equal rights of all states. and must adhere strictly to the
principle of nonintorforence. Fourthly. the USSR and the United States bear
a special responsibility for the preservation and consolidation of international
peace and security. That responsibility reflects the realistic position of
the USSR and the United States as the most powerful and most influential powers
of modern times. They have definite legal powers which evolve from the
pledges taken by the powers who had been Allies and then the victors in
World "or II. as well as those rights with which they were endowed as permanent
members of the Security Council. Pifthly. detente places additional duties
on the USSR and the United States. It presupposes the existence. in the
relations between the two countries. of a definite level of trust and mutual
understanding. and requires the manifestation of restraint in interrelationships
and the readiness to conduct negotiations. to regulate discrepancies by
peaceful means. and to observe strictly the principle of rejection of the
use of force or the threat to use force. either by means of nuclear weapons
or by means of conventional arms.

is

FOR OFFIUIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The concept formulated in 1972-197h concerning the place and role of Soviet-
American relations in the modern world has deprived of any Justifications
the speculations being made by Peking propaganda concerning a ”compact
between the two superpowers" and was set with understanding in the other
countries of the world. The First Secreta' of the Central Conaittec

of the Polish United workers Party. E. Gietts, said, ”We consider the

key factor in the process of detentc to be the relations between the United
States and the USSR. The dialogue between those two powers currently
detenaincs the overall atlosphere of international relations. and the

saving of mankind from the catastrophe of a nuclear war. That is why

both countries bear a special responsibility for peace throughout the world"23.

The practice of Soviet-American relations under the conditions of detente
convincingly demonstrates that in those instances when, as a result of con-
structive negotiations with the participation of the USSR and the United
States. it was possible to find a sutuslly acceptable balance of interests,
the opportunity was opened up for the conclusion of important international
agreements, including those linked with the solution of the most vitally
important tasks in uodern tines -- the tasks of the curtaihsent of the

arms race and of disarmament. As a positive example one can cite the
cooperation between the USSR and the United States in the negotiations for
the nonproliferation of nuclear ores and the ban on tests of nuclear area.
The consideration in the Disansanent Committee, with the active participation
of the USSR and the United States, of the ban on oilitsry and any other
hostile use of means for affecting the environment was coopletcd by the
signing in May 1977 of the corresponding Convention. representing a

concrete stepthich. to a definite degree, narrows the sphere of preparation
for a new war . Also of constructive ilportance was the interaction between
the USSR and the United States at various stages of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Another hnportant situation is that the detente, to a considerable degree,

has contributed to the peaceful normalization of acute armed conflicts.

in October 1973, because of the lack of an political serialization in the

Near East, the fourth Arah-lsraeli war flared up. The conflict took on an
extre-ely fierce and acute nature and the sides participating in it suffered
large losses of materiel and personnel. Success in extinguishing the oilitary
conflagration was to no small degree achieved as a result of the joint

actions by the USSR and the United States. On 21 October discussions were
held in Moscow between L. i. Brezhnev and A. A. Gronyko, on the Soviet side.
and U. 5. Secretary of State U. Kissinger. On 22 October the United Nations
Security Council. at an urgency session called at the request of the USSR and
the United States, adopted by lb votes (the representative of the People's
Republic of China did not participate in the voting) Resolution 338, which

had been proposed by the Soviet Union and the United States and which con-
trihnted to the cessation of nilitary actions in the Near East. In late

l971 a mechanism was creative for nonoallziug the conflict - the Geneva Peace
Coniervnce on the Near East (its co-chairuen. the USSR and the United States).

The major turn in Soviet-Ancrican relations in the early 1970s, the successes
in the policy of detentc obviously could not fail to cause resistance on the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE I)N|.Y

part of those forces in the United Slates that do not want to reconcile
themselves to the reorganization of relations with the USSR. to the detente,
or to the necessity of taking into consideration the real—life situation in
the modern world. In their mind's eye. the reorganization of international
relations on the principles of peaceful coexistence. a reorganization that
had been begun by means of the detente. meant not a constant process. but
only a temporary phenomenon that the United States had been forced to
resort to by virtueofthestaggeringvvents that had overtaken it. Having
sensed a certain easing up after Vietnam, Watergate, the scandalous

exposes of the activities of the CIA and other governmental institutions,
and the economic crisis of 1973-1975. the rightist forces, during the

1976 electoral campaign. increased their activities. They unleashed noisy
propaganda campaigns around the so-cailed "Soviet threat" and "human
rights," which campaigns were intended to force a new round in the arms

race. to slow down the rates of development of relations with the Soviet Union.
and provide unilateral advantages for the United States.

In the course of disputes about detente which were extremely widespread in
the United States. there arose the acute question of the place and hmportance
of Soviet-American relations in the system of the foreign-policy priorities
of the United States. The forces that were attempting to undermine the
detente. to adjust it in the direction of unilateral advantage for the
United States. and to turn the world toward unrestrained military rivalry,
began intensively to emphasize the necessity of "rallying" the capitalist
countries in the face of the social changes that were increasing in the
world and in the face of the increase in the authority of the USSR; they
demanded the promotion as the absolutely most essential factor the
relations between the United States and other countries in the so—called
"community of industrially developed (that is. capitalist) countries" at
the expense of reducing the attention that was being devoted in the first
half of the 1970s to the relations with the Soviet Union. The attempts to
ignore the role of the Soviet Union in world affairs are not new. "At the
dawn of the Soviet state." L. I. Brezhnev reminded us in his speech at the
solemn session devoted to the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October,"
Lenin warned the American leaders of that time that 'like it or not.
Soviet Russia is a great power,‘ that 'a-erica will gain nothing from
Hilson's policy of pious refusal to deal with us, on the grounds that our
government is not to his liking.’ That was a justified statement half a
century ago. And it is even more justified today"25.

Realistically-minded representatives of the political and academic circles

of the United States recognize that, with the present-day correlation of

forces on the world scene. there is no other, and there cannot be any other,
acceptable alternative to detente and that therefore it is necessary to take

a course of developing relations with the Soviet Union. The famous

American historian and diplomat G. Kennan, who. in his day, had formulated

the concept of "containment" which greatly contributed to the arms race,

speaks from different position in his book "Thu cloud of Danger." which

was published in 1977. Decisively criticizing the opponents of the improvement
of Soviet-American relations. he shows serious concern with regard to the

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

steady increase in nuclear weapons and its proliferation, and in this regard
he calls upon his country to hasten with the normalization and development of
relations with the Soviet Union. The USSR, he states, is "the central problem
in American foreign policy, a problem which, with regard to importance and
complexity, pushes all others into the background and upon the approach to
which many other aspects of American policy depend." Its chief task in the
sphere of relations with the Soviet Union, in his opinion, lies in the
"lessening of the danger created by the arms race"26. Speaking against the
underestimation of the importance of negotiations with the Soviet Union,
another prominent American scientist, S. Uoffmaa, in his book ("Rurden,
Balances, and Fetters”) reminds his readers that without the participation
of the USSR it is iapossible to count upon the serialization of a number

of acute critical situations, such as the Near East situation, and that the
allies on whom it is proposed to switch one's attention are precisely those
who are prinarily interested in the state of Soviet-American relations. and
their influence upon questions of war and peace27. A colleague at the

Uoover Institute of Her, Revolution, and Peace, at Stanford University,

R. Reason. remarks that during the past 60 years the Soviet Union has been
transformed into "a power which is second with regard to the might of its
economy, with a gigantic industry and collectivized agriculture. The

Soviet Union achieved the largest victory in the history of the Russian
people during World Her I! and created a military might approximately
equivalent to that of the United States"28. It is also telling that another
person who warns against the underestimation of the Soviet-American relations
is such a prominent ideologist of the "coemunity of industrially developed
countries" as 6. Ball.

The debates which arecurrently under way in the United States on the question
of Soviet-American relations reflect the struggle which is constantly
present in American foreign policy - the struggle between two tendencies

in the understanding of the ways and methods of carrying out a policy in

the Soviet area: the militaristically aggressive tendency, and the more
restrained, relatively realistic tendency, which has behind it the interests
of the various political forces and social groups within the ruling class.

As is attested to by the author of the book "Shattered Peace," which was
recentl published in the United States, Harvard University professor D.
Yergin3 , within the governmental apparatus of the United States during the
formulation of a policy with respect to the Soviet Union there constantly
occurs a collision between the so-called "Riga axioms" and the "Voice axioms."
By "Riga axioms" he has in mind the point of view of those American

officials who received a diplomatic education in the anti-Soviet spirit in
Riga in the 1930s and who feel that, inasmuch as the USSR is, so they say,

a state whose policy is directed exclusively toward expansion, the lessening
of tension in relations with it is tantamount to the lessening of American
vigilance, which enables the Soviet Union to strive for unilateral advantages.
Typical representatives of this point of view in the 19303 acd 19603, in the
opinion of D. Yergin, were the American diplomats (L. Henderson. A. Kirk.

L. Steinhardt, C. Thayer, E. Page, 8. Durbrow). The "Yalta axioms,"

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

defended by people who share the approach of F. Roosevelt tuward relations
with the Soviet Union (h. Napkins, B. Stettinius. A. harriman, and those
who departed from the "Riga axioms," G. Kennan and C. Bohlen), proceed from
the premise that the USSR has a self-interestedness in international
stability and that therefore the United States is capable of creating
incentives -- military and economic - that can lead the USSR to the
making of decisions that conform to the interests both of the USSR and the
United States. "The Riga axioms," D. Yergin writes, "proved to be the
'victors' in the course of the 1945-1969 discussion. (A discussion which
has much similarity to the present-day one.) The Riga axioms subsequently
formed the basis of American policy and the initial positions throughout
almost the entire period of the Cold Her. For several years, at the begin-
ning of the 1970s, the balance shifted in favor of the Yslta axioms, and
that lay at the basis of the shift in the direction of detente. With the
advent of the new administration to power, there was a renewed heating up
of the struggle between these two rival sets of axioms with their extremely

varied recommendations both with respect to supervision over armaments.
and with respect to trade“31.

In recent time there have been noticeable signs that, in the struggle between
the two tendencies in the approach to the Soviet Union, the people who are
beginning to get the upper hand are the representatives of those circles
which would want to undermine the detente and return the world to the Cold
War, to new confrontations, and to unlimited military rivalry. The forces
opposing detente are sufficiently impressive, and their composition is

well known. They are, first of all, the Pentagon and the military—industrial
complex; they are their influential advocates in Congress, headed by Senator
N. Jackson; they are the reactionary upper stratum of the APoL-CIO trade-
union association, headed by its president, 6. Heaney and by its secretary-
treasurer L. Kirkland; they are the Zionists, the counterrevolutionary
emigres from the East European countries, and other reactionaries and anti-
communists. The capabilities of the opponents of detente are sufficiently
great. For example. the Committee on the Existing Danger, headed by former
U. s. Undersecretary of Defense P. Nitze, includes retired diplomats,
prominent Jurists. scientists, military men, and businessmen. As the NE"
REPUBLIC remarks, this committee extended an "offensive against the agree-
ment to limit strategic arms. That offensive is well financed, has a good
base, is distinguishsd by its inventiveness and refinement, and frequently

is well thought-out" . In the summer of 1978 a new, frantically reactionary
organization -- the Coalition for Peace from a Position of Strength -- was
crested33. Under the flag of anti-Sovietism, it has united the "hawks,"

the reactionaries and anti-communists of all persuasions, renegades and
traitors to the Soviet Union, and zealous enemies of detente and the develop-
ment of international cooperation.

The goals of those who have blundered their way into the flock of "hawks"
do not cause any doubts. The program for the new "coalition" is the

further incitement of anti-Soviet hysteria with the goal of scuttling the
detente, of inflating even more the arms race that is already dangerous
for the cause of peace, of casting mankind back to the gloomy days of the

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFF [611“. USE ONLY

Cold War period. It is not by accident that along the require-lento included
in the progru of the "coalition" is the renunciation of the principle of
equality in relations with the Soviet Union, the achieve-ant of the
all-enbracing supremacy” of the United States, the return to the policy

of operating "tron a position of strength."

The unflagging struggle between the various groupings of the U. S. ruling
class with regard to the question of Soviet-Anerican relations cannot fail

to have an effect upon the foreign-policy course of that country. Under

the influence of the situation that had developed within it, the ford adninis-
tration in 1976 began to wind up, to a certain extent, its work of developing
Soviet-merican relations. It not only rejected the use of the ter-
"detente." but also delayed the inpleuentation of the understandings that

had already existed. The Carter adainistration that replaced the Republicans
in the White House in November 1976, responding to the pressure exerted by

the rightist forces. at first attupted to distort those funda-ental principles
of the mtual relations that had been worked out during the previous years,
and, in particular. to revise the Vladivostok understanding with regard to

a new agreaent to liait strategic arms. In the approach to the negotiations
on the limitation of strategic area, it is noticeable that the circles

which from the very beginning had been against such an agree-ant are doing
everything to disrupt it, to untie their own hands for an uncontrolled arms
race. Moreover, the Carter adninistrstion is showing a tendency to "coor-
dinate" the pronotion at the negotiations, and in general the fate of the
agreaents on the limitation of strategic area, with other problaas that do
not have any i-ediate bearing upon the sphere of Soviet-Aaerican relations.

Both the statements nsde by the president and other highly placed individuals,
and the specific deeds of Hashington, attest to the changes in U. S. policy
which are dangerous for the cause of peace. Official state-ents inflate

the ayth of the Soviet "nilitary threat." and renain silent about the
funds-ental docuaents of recent tine - the "Principles of the Interrelation-
ships between the USSR and the United States" and the Agreeaent to Prevent
Nuclear war -- in which. with special force, the fact is eaphasiced that both
powers ends 3 choice in favor of detente, with all its concomitant pledges.
In practical politics. the course being taken is one of inciting the arns
race, of interfering in the domestic affairs of the Soviet Union, and the
linitation of the ties and contacts between the two countries. "In the
situation conplicated by the U. S. policy," the 17 June 1978 PRAVDA

editorial entitled "Present-Day U. 8. Policy" enphasizes, "the Soviet Union
reconfins its-course aimed at the easing of the international tension and

at the developnent of good, Iutually advantageous relations with the United
States. if the United States also desires that. For the successful forward
love-eat in that direction, which conforms not only to the vital interests of
both countries, but also to the interests of unkind as a whole, necessary
factors are reciprocity and a responsible attitude toward world policy on

the part also of the leaders of the U. S. adainistrstion."

The USSR consistently proceeds free the prenise that the existence of broad
areas of genuine bilateral self-interestedness in the development of

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constructive Interaction creates the prerequisites for the further
advancement in Soviet—American relations. Noting that the development and
reinforcement of relations with the United States is one of the "primary
tasks of our state's foreign policy." L. I. Brezhnev emphasizes that the
Soviet Union and the United States "can do a great deal to prevent a new
world war. with its catastrophic consequences. such as the history of the
world has never known." that upon the USSR and the United States 'hmch

also depends in the solution of such complicated and vitally important
tasks of worldwide magnitude as the protection of the environment on our
planet. the mastery of space. the reproduction and intelligent use of

the earth's power and food resources. and the struggle against mass
diseases and the most dangerous ones"3‘. The Soviet governaent has invariably
expressed its readiness to continue the development that has already been
begun in the relations with the United States on the basis of jointly
ratified principles of equality. identical security, noninterference in

one another's domestic affairs. and mutual advantage. In a discussion
with Senator S. Kennedy on 9 September 1978. L. l. Brezhnev expressed his
conviction that "the normalization of relations between the USSR and the
United States and the continuation of the course aimed at their improvement
would correspond to the yearnings of the people of both countries; to the
interests of the consolidation of international detente and peace throughout
the world"35 .

The history of Soviet-American relations convincingly attests to the fact
that the interaction of our two countries in the interests of lasting peace
and international cooperation is completely possible and realistic. This
requires that the considerations that should be the decisive ones in Soviet-
American relations are not the considerations of a situational or transitory
nature. but. rather. of a long-term nature. which have been dictated by the
concern for peace. That is precisely the line to which the Soviet Union

has consistently adhered. And that is what the Soviet Union is. with
complete justification. awaiting from the American side.

FOOTHOTES
l. V. I. Lenin, PSS [Complete Collected Works]. Vol 61, p 242.

2. L. i. Brezhnev, "heninskim kursoe" [0n Lenin's Course]. Moscow, Vol 4,
1974. p 81.

3. "Dokusenty vneshney politiki SSSR" [Documents of USSR Foreign Policy].
Moscow, Vol I, 1957. pp 286-290.

6. See L. A. Gvishiaai. "Sovetakaya Rossiya i SShA 1917-1920 gg." [Soviet
Russia and the United States. 1917-1920], Moscow. 1970. pp 65-69; R. Sh.
Ganelin. "Sovetsko-amerikanskiye oinosheniya v kontse l9l7--nacha1e
1918 g." [Soviet-American Relations in Late 1917 and Early 1918], Lenin-
grad. 1975. PP 195-200.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.
7.

a.

10.
11.

12.
13.

110.

15.
16.
17.
'18.
19.

20.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"DoILuIenty vneshney politiki SSSR," Moscow, Vol XVI, 1970, p 663.

See V. I. Lenin, P88, Vol 39, p 197.

Sec V. I. Lenin. PSS, Vol 46, p 148.

V. I. Lenin. PSS, Vol 37, p 69.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 39, p 209.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 ‘0, p 1‘7.

The position occupied by Lenin in 1918-1920 with regard to the question
of Soviet-Mericsn relations decisively refutes the point of view
existing in Merican literature to the effect that the Soviet seven-ant,
during the first years of its existence, did not have s sufficiently
couplete idea of the importance of the relations betveen the Soviet state
and the United States (see 6. Kennan, "Russia Leaves the Bar," Princeton,
1957, p 31).

"Uolunenty vneshney politiki SSSR," Moscow. Vol IV, 1960, p 262.

lbid., Moscow. Vol III, 1959, pp 176-177.

Pros a letter sent by the USSR Deputy People's Cos-isssr for Foreign
Affairs, H. H. Litvinov, to the USSR plenipotentiury in France. lbid.,
Moscow, Vol IX, 1964, p 120.

Ibid., V01 XVI, p 341.
Ibidn PP 749-750.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE BULLETIN, Hay 1975.

DEPARTMENT OF STATE BULLETIN, August 1975.

1.. l. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kurson," Vol 4, p 156.

Quoted in: A. Belov. V1. Petrov, "SSSR-SSM: perestroyks otnosheniy"
[USSR-United States: Reorganization of Relations], Moscow, 1976, p 14.

See "Sovetsksya programs nira v deystvii" [The Soviet Peace Program in
Action], Moscow, 1972; "Vizit Leonids Il'ichn Brezhnevs v Soyedinennyye
Shtsty Meriki" [Visit of Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev to the United States of
Merits], Moscow, 1973; "Dolenenty i naterialy tret'yey sovetsko-
ueriksnskoy vstrechi na vysshu urovne" [Doclnents and Haterials of the
Third Soviet—Anericnn Sunni: ﬂeeting], Moscow, 1976; "Doha-lenty i
naterinly sovetsko-nneriknnskoy vstrechi vo Vladivostoke" [Docuents and
Haterials of the Soviet-American Meeting in Vladivostok], Moscow, 1971:.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22.
23.
26.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

'10.

31.

32.
33.
36.
35.

COPY

5075
cso:

FOR OFFICIAL 1181". ONLY

1.. I. Brezhnev, "Leninakll kuraom.“ Moscow. Vol 5. 1976. p ‘70.
PMVDA. 1 Jnmmry 1978.

I'MVIM. 17 Hay 1978.

l.. I. Brezhnev. "Lenlmkh kuraon." Moscow. Vol 6. 1978. p 595.
c. Kennan. "The cloud of Danger," Boston. 1977.

Quoted In FOREIGN POLICY. No 25. "Inter 1976-1977. pp 109-110.
HASNINOTON POST. 7 November 1977.

FOREIGN POLICY. No 25. "Inter 1976-1977. p 110.

I). Yergln. "Shattered Pence: The Origins of the Gold "at and the
National Security State." noston. 1977.

INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE. 5 Septclbcr 1977: FOREIGN AFFAIRS. V01
55. No 3. 1977. pp 517-538.

NEW REPUBLIC. January 1978.
PRAVDA. 10 August 1978.
PRAVDA. 1 April 1978.
PIUWDA. 10 Some-bar 1978.

RIGIIT: lzdntel'atvo "Pravda." "Voprosy Intern." 1978.

1800

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

lN‘l‘MMTI "MI:

USSR INDOCIIINA SYRATEGY MALVZED

lokyo GilliJl KtiiitVU [JAPAN MILITARY REVIElil in Japanese Vol 14 he I (No 154)
Jan 79 pp 3443

[Article by Takio Vamazaki. International affairs researcher: 'Comnentary
on Soviet Indochina Strategy“!

[lextl liith the conclusion of the Indochina war which covered thirty years
after world liar II. it was expected that a period of peace would settle in.
without any wars in Southeast Asia. and that peaceful coexistence would come
about among the three socialist countries of Indochina and the liberal coun-
tries of ASEAN (Alliance of Southeast Asian Natiors).

In reality. however. Vietnam and Kampuchea are continuing a fierce ”proxy
Sino-Soviet war' (National Security Adviser Bzrezinski); and the situation
has changed to one in which the Soviet Union. which is backing Vietnam. and
China. which is backing Kampuchea. are in fierce conflict in Indochina. from
which the United States withdrew.

with this kind of situation. China. while restraining Vietnam with a problem
of the overseas Chinese. strengthened its containeent of the Soviet Union

by making a treaty of peace and friendship with Japan. But the Soviet Union
strengthened its support of Vietnam in order to roll back this containment.
and. at the same time. has aimed at closer relations with ASEAN.

In June of last year. Vietnam became affiliated with the Soviet-led COMECON
(Council for iiutual Economic Aid); also. Party Secretary Le Duan and Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong visited the USSR in November. and ostentatiously
displayed the unity of the Soviet Union and Vietnam by issuing a joint de-
c arat on.

Now the Soviet Union is reinforcing the fighting power of the Soviet Pacific
fleet which is based in its maritime provinces. here must be some purpose
to this reinforcement of military power. and it would seem related to the
strengthening of its support for Vietnam. But there is a concern that the

development of such a state of affairs will influence the security affairs
of our own country.

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Strategy Viewed from Post-war history

if the post-war history of the Asian Pacific Ocean is taken in summary. the
Pacific Ocean was under the control of the United States for a long time
after the war. although the USSR supported the Chinese revolution and
extended the "cnnmmnist sphere" to the Chinese continent. The United States
stationed many military bases in Japan. South Korea. Okinawa. Taiwan. the
Philippines. Thailand and other countries; and the security of the western
Pacific was maintained by American naval power. as represented in the
Seventh Fleet.

The Soviet Union changed this state of affairs and tried to push back even
more American power from Asia. The strategy the Soviet Union employed to
no this was to set up a rivalry between the United States and China. That
strategy was inaugurated at the time of the Korean liar in 1950.

The Soviet Union avoided any direct intervention in the Korean liar. and
wanted China. which had just established its Chinese conmunist government
the year before. to send troops into the Korean peninsula to fight against
tin.- American army. Taking this opportunity. both the United States and
China entered into a state of hitter antagonism; but this was allowed to
happen by none other than the Soviet Union.

Also. the Vietnam war. which began in 1964. aggravated even more the Sim-
hnerican antagonism.

in order to get rid of this Sine-American antagonism. the American scheme
to turn the tables in its own i’avnr was the Nixon visit to China in 1972
and was the drive for the Nixon coctrine which followed from the visit.

The United States withdrew 540.000 troops from Vietnam and reduced its mili-
tary strength elsewhere in Asia as well. However. with the retreat of Amer-

ican military power. a "power vacuum" was created and the Soviet Union
stepped in to fill that vacuum

Likewise. Nixon's visit to China became an opportunity which allowed the
communist parties of both China and Vietnam to become antagonistic toward
each other. As the uhan Dan magazine pointed out in August 1972. the Viet-
namese comunist party has harbored a feeling of mistrust. which is hard

to uproot. toward the Chinese coamnist party which “gave an innertube to
a drowning bandit". It was none other than the Soviet Union which gave
enormous military aid to Vietnam. which further deepened its mistrust of
China. and helped it obtain its victory in 1975.

liaving done this. the Soviet Union acquired a 'base" of power in Vietnam
from which the United States had withdrawn. And Hanoi. which won a victory
in the lndochina "liberation war“ with Soviet aid. aimed at forming an
"lndochinese Federation" with itself as the leader.

25

a..- -n—o—oao ”an- out...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Union strongly supported Vietnam in this. Pro-Soviet Party Secre-
tary to Dean of the Vietnamese Connmnist Party visited Moscow in October
l975. and issued a joint declaration with the Soviet Union. But. so as not
to give any room for Chinese intervention. it hurried with its unification
of north and south Vietnam and. at the same time. removed all people of
Chinese lineage from positions of responsibility in the party and the mili-
tary. This became the source of the present "problem of the overseas Chin-
ese“.

Taking off on this "problem of the overseas Chinese.” China unfolded a cam-
paign of criticism against Vietnam. However. in opposition to this. the
Soviet Union intensified its criticism of China. and. on June 29. Secretary
Brezhnev made a definite statement that Vietnam is an ”advanced base“ in
which socialism can put its trust.

The Soviet-led COHECON had formally decided on Vietnam's affiliation the

day before. June 28. This was an indication that Vietnam. the inportant
place in Southeast Asia. would be connntted to the Soviet camp. Undoubtedly.
ﬁrezhnev's speech about “advanced base” was the result of these facts.

According to information from the United States Pacific Forces Commander
Uiesner. it is said that the Soviet Union has already completely equipped
a Soviet missile base in Cam Ranh Bay. it is also said that a Soviet naval
base has been built on Cat 8a island. just outside Haiphong Harbor.

In short. the Soviet Union has changed to a Situation which literally makes
Vietnam. the important spot in Southeast Asia. an “advanced base“. This is
nothing less than a sound victory for Soviet military and diplomatic strate-
9y.

USSR Strategy Plans for Asia and the Pacific
Thus. the Soviet Union progressively pushed into the Pacific and post-war

Asia; and. with the retreat of United States military power. it acquired a

base in Vietnam. thereby reinforcing its containment of China.

it seems there are the three following broad aims to this Soviet strategy.
These are the elimination of American military power from Asia. the actual-
ization of China-USSR reconciliation. and control of maritime traffic

from their Far East bases to the Indian Ocean.

First. the elimination of American military power has shown great progress.
The United States military power already has been withdrawn extensively

from lndochina; and Thailand. which yielded to Vietnamese pressure. asked
for the withdrawl of United States forces stationed in Thailand. The United
States army pulled its presence out of Thailand in July 1976. Likewise.
American troops are supposed to be withdrawn from South Korea as well.

Consequently. the next important aim will be directed at the elimination
of American military pewer in the Philippines.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON!)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. the actualization of Sine-Soviet reconciliation is expected to be
achieved by reinforcing its containment of China. The USSR's greatest de-
sire is that China will yield to Soviet pressure and convert to the Soviet
line: and then. Sine-Soviet reconciliation will be complete. with that. it
would be possible to divert to Europe the as army divisions deployed along
the China-USSR border. Therefore. the USSR is reinforcing its containment
of China. By doing so. they anticipate that Soviet influence will gain
power within China and that China-Soviet reconciliation will come about
from the seizing of political power. Their containment of China has been
showing progress. Vietnam. together with Laos. is deepening its leaning
toward the USSR. especially since Vietnam has become an "advanced base” for
the Soviet Union. Therefore. the next aim 15 directed mainly at ASEAN.

lhird. the “control of maritime traffic" has become indispensable for sup-
porting not only USSR strategy toward Asia but its world strategy.

As for control of maritime traffic. they want to have under Soviet control
maritime traffic which goes through the Strait of Korea, heads south from
the South China Sea. goes through the Strait of Malacca to the lndian Ocean.
in other words. it is to eliminate American control and establish Soviet
control over maritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean.

however. Southeast Asia is a great gateway for this maritime traffic from
the Pacific Ocean to the indian Ocean. After all. whoever controls Southeast
Asia can control nmritime traffic from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian

Ocean.

Southeast Asia consists of the three socialist nations and the five liberal
nations of ASEAN. The USSR has acquired a base in lndochina. Therefore.
the Soviet Uni0n will try next to expand its influence to all of the nations
of ASEAN from its base in Vietnam. That will contribute greatly to its
attempt to contain China to the south. to cause American military power to
pull back from ASEAN. especially from the Philippines. and to establish
Soviet control of maritime traffic under the protection of Soviet naval
power. which will use Soviet naval and air bases now in Vietnam.

whoever Controls Oil Controls the world.

in the above manner. the Soviet Union has aimed at control of maritime traf-
fic flowing from the Pacific Ocean to the lndian Ocean. Out. as a Sevlet
wurld straIEQY. that seems to have a close relationship with its strategy

that aims at controlling the petroleum shipping routes which go from the
oil-rich Persian Gulf to Hestern Europe and Japan.

The Soviet Union has attached great importance to the lndian Ocean where
petroleum shipping routes pass from the Persian Gulf to Europe and to Japan.
Since 1968. they have already put their naval power permanently in the

lndian Ocean. and given it the duty of "checking' the petroleum shipping
routes of the west.

27
, .
A“ a - .

W) l vat? station

‘ ..§i§93’ ‘2’ - ‘3 no~M'

.3. T:

i' I "6
aw;

POI! OFHOIAL llilﬁ ONLY

  
        
 

‘zﬂ'm '

(15)

(MB)

Manet I can
“Manama; ’

touts-.9 rmuu-amttamum

treaties of friendship and coopeation

. USSR

lianifesto or declaration of friendship

and cooperation

. cancelled
. Bangladesh
. Malaysia

. Iran

. lraq

india
lurkey

. Libya
- form

2.0 million barrels daily
petroleum transport routes

. 4.I million barrels daily
. Ethiopia
. Angola

Somalia

liHl million barrels daily

Soviet Union expands circle of friend-
ship and cooperation to all nations.
(from 1971. lion-socialist countries
are excluded.)

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

alumna»
.(li fa‘

After that. the USSR made
a nilitary aid pact with
South Yemen in 1969. and
acquired a naval base in
Aden and an air force base
on Sunutra island. 0n the
other hand. South Yemen.
which had received aid
from the USSR. supported
the Pfto liberation nove-
inent in (loan. a neighbor-
ing country. and threat-
ened the nonarchic govern-
ment of that country. it
also tried to threaten the
security of the Strait of
Normz. which is an im-
portant gateway for petrol-
eun shipping routes.

Also. in August i971. the
USSR made a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with india. which received
enormous Soviet support.
crushed Pakistan in the
third lode-Pakistani war
and made Bangladesh inde-
pendent. ln March 1972.
the USSR made a treaty of
friendship and cooperation
with Bangladesh also.

lioreover. the USSR made a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with irag in
April 1972. and supported
pro-Soviet foner Premier
Band with the change of
90vernment in Afghanistan.
obtaining that country
for the Soviet sphere of
influence. They made a
treaty of friendship and
cooperation with Somalia
in 1974. completely equip-
ping naval and air naili-
tary bases in that coun-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

try. ihis became an incxn-tant base for the Soviet indian OCean fleet.

In April l975. the USSR carried out "OKEAN' maneuvers. using the world

seas as a stage. Likewise. they carried out naval attack maneuvers in the
Indian Ocean. deploying many ships and aircraft. Moreover. the USSR air
transported directly to Angola 20.000 Cuban troops for the Angola dispute.
which had intensified since the end of 1975. At the same time. Soviet

naval units escorted a fleet of ships. transporting to Angola large numbers
of tanks and heavy weapons.

The USSR. making a treaty of friendship and cooperation with Ethiopia in
May 1977. sent Cuban troops to Ethiopia Just as they did with Angola and
their naval power escorted a fleet of vessels to the Eritrean port of Mas-
Sawa.

Smnilia. objecting to the USSR's assistance to Ethiopia. cancelled unilater-
ally its treaty of friendship and cooperation with the USSR in November 1977
and requested the evacuation of all Soviet military advisers and the return
of bases being furnished to the Soviet Union. To c0unteract this. the USSR
gave Ethiopia aid exceeding one billion dollar; and 50.000 tons. And. they
sent l7.000 Cuban troops and 2.000 South Yemen troops to Ethiopia. and un-
folded a large scale aSSault against Somalia. Because of this, the Somalia
side. which had brought the Ogaden area under its control. caved into this
destruction. Somalia‘s President Barre suffered the degradation of a de-
feated con-under.

The USSR. which lost the military bases at Berbera and the like because of
Somalia's treachery. is trying now to rennest substitute bases in Eritrea.
it is said that Ethiopia has already allowed a Soviet air base in Asmara
and a naval base on Dahlak islands outside Massawa Harbor.

Under these conditions. a siege strategy toward the Persian Gulf has inten-
sified since April of last year. This can be seen in the coups d'etat

that have occurred successively around the Persian Gulf areas. Such as in
Somalia, Afghanistan. Yemen. lraq and others. This also indicates how much
importance the USSR attaches to control of the petroleum shipping reutes to
the western nations from the Persian Gulf.

The USSR in now supplying 80 million kllolitcrz. of oil annually through a
plpulim- tn the Eastern European nations, except Romania. But it seem
that the oil production of the Soviet bloc has not progressed en0ugh to
meet increased consumption. Therefore. according to some sources. if the
oil supply to Eastern European nations should stop in the 80's. it would
mean that the Soviet control of Eastern Europe would collapse indisputediy.

from this. it seems that the USSR has been deepening its interest in Persian
Gulf oil. But the security of Japan. Hestern Europe and the United States
hangs on the securing of the petroleum shipping routes leading from the
Persian Gulf to the western nations. So it can be said that whoever con-

29

9M ﬂI‘t‘l'l‘VAl "1" Assist
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

trois the oil of the Persian Gulf controls the world.
Strategic Value of indochina.

Thus. the Soviet Union attaches great importance to indochina from its

view of world strategy. especially control of maritime traffic from the Paci-
fic Ocean to the indian Ocean. That is because the Soviet Union has dis-
covered the great strategic value of lndochina.

First of all. lndochina. together with the Malaysian archipelago. constitutes
the “rim-land” of the southeastern part of the Eurasian continent. However.
since indonesia and the Philippines are in the open seas off of this rim-
land. that area becomes an important gateway. tying together the shipping
routes of the indian Ocean with the Pacific Ocean.

lhe shipping routes that go from the Pacific Ocean and pass through this
region to the indian Ocean can be squeezed into the general classification
of the following four routes.

the first shigging route is the one that passes through the Strait of Malac-
ca. for the viet Union. this route is the shortest route tying the Indian
Ocean with the bases in their maritime provinces. in addition, Vietnam.
which has become affiliated with COHECON. and Malaysia. which has advocated
for Soviet “friendship and cooperation”. are close to this shipping route.
therefore. the Soviet Union has the advantage of being able to request bases.
as well as port privileges. from Vietnam andlhlaysia.

The second shipping route passes through the Strait of Sunda.

lhe third shipping route is a route that leaves the indian Ocean. and passes
through the Lombok Strait from the Strait of ihkassar.

the fourth shipping route is a route that goes through the indian Ocean.
passing through the Strait of Omhai from the Molucca Sea.

ihese last three shipping routes are a greater distance than the first ship-
ping route. and need a mutual indochinese agreement as well. Therefore.
from the Soviet Union‘s perspective. it can he said that the first ship-
?'"9 route is much more advantageous. and the possibility of securing it

s greater.

Secondly. lndochina has a great value from the perspective of containing
Ch no.

the USSR has pressured China from the north. deploying a military force of
45 divisions along the Sino-Soviet border. in addition to this. Indochina
has joined the Soviet bloc. If the Vietnamese anny of 1.5 million men.
which is the strongest military power in Asia (if one excludes China).
decides to pressure China from the south. the containment of China would be

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

solidified even more.
Third. there are great undeveloped undergiound resources in indochina.

It is said that there are promising undersea oil fields in the Gulf of Siam
and Gulf of Tonkin in lndochina. Further. it is anticipated that there

are oil and natural gas deposits in the Red River delta area. Besides
this. there are mineral resources of uranium ore. cool. iron ore. zinc and
the like in the Phu Lang Thuong area.

it is said that. in exchange for project
aid. the USSR aims at the acquisition of
these underground resources. Toward this
end. it sent to Vietnam a vice-minister
level investigation team many times.

The investigation team. led by the vice-
minister of the Ministry of Geology.
prospected for oil and natural gas for
about one month last year in July.

According to another report. it was said
that the aim which the USSR had in push-
ing for Vietnam's affiliation with COMECON
was the control of its oil and mineral
Key: resources.

Vietnam's Mineral Resources

 

Fourth. lndochina is an advantageous

1. coal base to expand its influence to the

2. iron ore ASEAN nations.

3. zinc

4. tin After the 'lndochinese liberation" in

5. copper 1975. Laos and Kampuchea abolished their
6. gold monarchies and became socialist countries.

Laos deepered its leaning toward hanoi.
but Kampuchea intensified its resistance

to hanoi's leadership and. opposing Soviet-supported Vietnam, requested the
support of China.

Vietnan has aimed at a Southeast Asia under the leadership of Hanoi. and ad-
vocated for a "Southeast Asian Com-0n Market" in June 1975. That concept

was extensive enough to include the ten nations of Southeast Asia. in short.
Soviet-supported Vietnam is trying to extend its influence to the ASEAN nations

in place of the Soviet Union. And. Vietnam has become a base for an ASEAN
assault by the USSR.

Hill Vietnam Become the Cuba of Asia?

(hi account of the USSR's strategy to make Vietnam an “advanced base". China
has been put into a situation where it is threated from two fronts---the

3|

rnn ﬂn'ﬂ'l' l'fl‘ “\I'V
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

north and the south.

China has experienced this kind of military threat three times: the first
was when General MacArthur insisted on attacking Manchuria during the Korean
War of 1950; the sec0nd was when the Soviet army assumed a posture of chal-
lenging a full-scale battle by sending tanks to the front. Therefore.

this present crinta would be the third crisis for China.

This crisis materialized more last year. Namely. there was an incident in
which the Soviet troops invaded the Ussuri River border on May 9. .in the
south. clashes by both parties---China and Vietnam---have occurred frequently
at the China-Vietnam border. The Soviet navy carried out threatening man-
euvers between Luzon island and Taiwan at the end of June. it can be seen
that Soviet naval power was “demonstrating” against China, by getting caught
up in the China-Vietnam dispute. Further. there was an incident in which

the navies of both China and Vietnam battled over Nanshan island. about
which both China and Vietnam are in dispute and which both claim as its own
possess on.

Under this state of affairs. China. putting up its full strength. has en-
deavored to organize an "anti-Soviet consolidated front”. As is connonly
known. Vice Premier Teng hsiao-ping expressed his "discourse on the big
three worlds“ dt the United Nations natural resources assembly in 1974.
lhat is. one must look for the source of all the evils of the world's wars
in the hegemony principles of such large countries as the United States and
the Soviet Union. who belong to the first world. But he made it clear for
the first time that the existence of Soviet socialist imperialism as the
more dangerous.

China has put itself in the third world against this dangerous USSR, and.
involving the second world of the leading industrial nations. such as Japan
and others. has begun calling for an “anti-Soviet consolidated front". in
short. it can be said that China's discource on the world became the yard-
stick to measure all acts as either “anti-Soviet“ or “pro-Soviet."

Vietnam's Prime Minister Pham Van Dong made clear his opposition to China

in a discource on the world that divides the world into five worlds at

a national assembly just after the 1975 liberation. The first is the social-
ist bloc. led by the Soviet Union: and it has the greatest importance. The
second is Laos and Kampuchea. which must be added to the "lndochinese Federa-
tion": the third is all of the Seutheast Asian nations that form the nucleus
of Asthﬂ. The feurth is the non-aligned nations. And last of all. the
United States. Hestern Europe. Japan and other; are mentioned as the fifth.
In short. Vietnam's world perspective is a view which puts as its foundation
a confrontation between the USSR and the United States. Hhether something

is "anti-American" or "pro-American" becomes the yardstick for measuring
the suitability of all acts.

In other words. Prime Minister Pham Van Dong dealt a frontal counterattack

12
PER OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘llil Ill-'I-‘ICIM. "SF. ONLY

against the "disaourse on the big three worlds“ by Vice-premier Teng Hsiao-
ping. So. it is natural that the Soviet Union supports Vietnam.

The USSR allowed Vietnam to become affiliated with COMECON in June of last
year. Secretary Brezhnev made it clear that he would support Vietnam resol-
utely as "brothers" and declared that Vietnam is an "advanced base“ which

socialism can trust. in short. the Soviet Union made clear its firm inten-
tlon to add Vietnam to the Soviet blac.

Under these conditions. China. which aims at forming an “anti-Seviet consoli-
dated front“. concluded a China-Japan treaty of peace and friendship on
August 12 of last year. The Soviet Union repeatedly objected and warned
against this Slop-Japanese treaty, which includes an “anti-hegemony article"
hostile to the USSR. This has become a frequent undisguised threat. and is

unparalleled as an intervention by a major country in the relations between
two other countries.

But the China-Japan treaty was finally concluded. was formally ratified in
October and became effective. The China-Japan treaty and the United States-
Japan Security Treaty mean that there will be cooperation thr0ugh the media-
tion of Japan. The USSR. seeing this as the establishment of an "anti~Soviet
alliance“ by the United States. Japan and China. is increasing its vigilance.
This can be seen from the fact that Party Secretary Brezhnev had a conversa-
tion with First Secretary Tsedenbal of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary
Party in the Crimea on August 23. He declared that "recently. very negative
elements have arisen in the Far East and Southeast Asia.“

The Soviet view is that even though the anti-hegemony article may have been
watered down. no basic change has taken place in the anti-Soviet character
of the China-Japan treaty. Therefore. the USSR predicted that the status
change important for Asia. which comes from the ’ormation of this treaty.
namely. the balance of power. will collapse. in order to offset this, the
USSR has emphasized repeatedly that there is a need to change Soviet policy
toward Asia. it can be stated that the substance of this policy has been
able to bring about an important change in the Asian situation. as was
pointed out by Vice-chairman Kowarenko of the USSR-Japiu Society.

So. the predicted ”roll back policy" of the USSR is asking to conclude a
USSR-Japan good neighbor friendship treaty in order to restore the balance.
and. secondly. is intensifying the military pressure against China. Third.
it is to make Vietnam the "Cuba of Asia". and to try to assume the duty of
“lead soldier“ in its approach to RSEAN.

This kind of movement has already shown itself. Until now. the USSR. along
with Vietnam. has not recogniZed ASEAN as an organization. However.
iZVESTlVA recognized ASEAN as an organization for the first time on July 13.
Vietnam's newspapers also advocated for a “Southeast Asian Neutrality Con-
cept.” Prime Minister Pham Van Dong himself made of tour of the ASEAN coun-
tries. As China states. their aim is to try to etpand their influence within

Li)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ASEAN as a "Trojan Horse.“

Moreover. so as to support Vietnam's move. First Assistant Minister Fillyu-
vin of the Soviet Foreign Ministry. while nuking a tour of the ASEAN nations
near the end of October. made a statement of support for the peaceful charac-
ter of ASEAN.

After this unified USSR-Vietnam approach to ASEAN. the USSR invited to the
Kremlin an administrative-level party delegation. led by Party Secretary Le
Uuan and Price Minister Pham Van Dong. it can be said without a doubt that
their aim was to reinforce Vietnam's "Cuba status."

USSR Has Built a Bridgehead in Indochina.

the USSR entered into its “roll back policy" as prediced. the Soviet Union
made a treaty of friendship and cooperation with Vietnam on November 3; and
with that. the USSR built a “bridgehead" with which to impede China's
inroads into the lndochinese peninsula.

the core of this USSR-Vietnam treaty of friend31ip and cooperation is the
article on "emergency deliberations.“ whereby it was decided to mutually

support each other when either party. i.e.. the Soviet Union or Vietnam.

is expoSed to a threat of attack. this article. which makes cooperation

important from a military viewpoint, has a high degree of strategic sub-

utance.

in June of last year. the Soviet-led COMECON recognized Vietnam's formal af-
filiation. that indicated that Vietnam has already been included economically
in the Soviet bloc. However. to offset that. China made its China-Japan
treaty. Moreover. China made clear its plan to cancel the 'Sino-Soviet Alli-
ance Treaty." The powerful “roll back policy“ had begun with the Soviet-
Vietnam friendship treaty.

Now. full-scale hostilities by troops of both China and Vietnam. which began
in October of last year. have been repeated at the China-Vietnam border.
Also. their uncanny move. centering ar0und a ”dry season large-scale offen-
sive“ has continued into the Vietnam-Kampuchea dispute. Kampuchea‘s Vice-
premier leng Sary. who made a speech at the United Nations in October of
last year. stated that Vietnam will use again several army divisions. sta-
tioned in foreign territories. in its dry season offensive. In this case.
tees is clearly indicated as the foreign territory. it seems that about
four army divisions of Vietnamese troops are stationed in Champassak Pro-
vince on the southern extremity of Laos.

in addition to this. Vietnam includes in the "K.mpuchean Liberation Front”
Kalvuchenns residing in southern Vietnam. aneuniing to about 150.000 men.

they have formed a “Kampuchean People's liberatiOn Army“ from among these.
and sent out into Kampuchean territory well-chosen guerrillas and political

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sabnteurs. They are using this dual front stategy to intensify internal
disturbances in Kamuuchea. in short. iianni is using exactly the some kind

of strategy against Kampuchea

as they used for the concuest of
sxzaqnmmgﬁ | South Vietnam in the past.
in this way, if Vietnam u5es Lao
(”NH-A territory for troop movements.
it is possible that China will
expand its troop movements into
i tan territory to counteract them.
1 Ch na built 600 kilometers of
road in northern Laos. adjoining
£97.. Chinese territory. And. it would
seem that if they were to use

 

      
  

7 l S‘II‘S‘I‘J -

. th-s road. they could easily
mo enter Thailand and at the same
__._.._.... time. threaten Vietnam from the

rear.
Key:
l. Chinese Roads in Laos l7. Ou Dom Sal
2. China 18. Nam Pak
J. Yunnan Province 19. Vien Sai
4. Lai Chan 20. Houei Sai
5. noun Neua 21. Sam Neue
6. ilat Sa 22. Muong [lung
7. Vietnam 23. Du River
8. Mengla 24. Laos
9. Phonq Saiy 25. Pak Tha
lo. Myo 26. Muong Scn
ll. Dien Bien Phu 27. Pak Beng
12. Burma 28. Mekong River
l3. ila Ten 29. Luang Prabang
id. Muong Khoua 30. Jarres Plains
I5. Muong La 31. Thailand
16. Luan Nam Tha

_____Roads built with China's assistance
(600 kilometers completed)
_ _Under construction

With this. there is a danger that the Vietnam~Kampuchea conflict will spread
to all of lndochina. engulfing Laos. If the USSR backs up Vietnam and China
backs up Kawuchea. there is a possibility that it will develop into a Sino-
Soviet clash. making lndochina the stage.

the ASEAN nations are exceedingly afraid that i: will expand to such a situ-
ation. in particular. the feeling of crisis is very acute in Thailand.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICMI. USE ONLY

borders Kawpuchea. in particular, if Kaupuctea cannot withstand a large of-
fensive from the USSR-Vietnam union. and. if a pro-Soviet/pro-Hanoi govern-
went appears upon the collapse of the Pol Pot regime. certainly this would
be the actualization of an "indochinese Federation" at which Hanoi aims.

Then. the pressure on Thailand would suddenly increase from the USSR and
from Hanoi.

Thailand is a country where two coups d'etat have occurred since 1976.
caused by the indochina shock. It is a country which requested a complete
evacuation of United States troops stationed in Thailand. because of Viet-
nam's pressure. In the event that Thailand offers the air bases at U Thapao
and elsewhere to the USSR. because of pressure from the Soviet Union which
has solidified its ”bridgehead" in Indochina. the Soviet Union would be able
to control maritime traffic passing through the Strait of Malacca by using
its bases in Thailand and Can Ranh Bay.

However. the appearance of such a situation would not Only threaten the
South China Sea route for transporting natural resources to Our own country.
but would have such a great influence that it w0uld destroy the strategic
balance in Asia and the Pacific.

COPYRIGIT: Japan Military Review 1979

9400
050: 4105

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si-2 UNLY

INTERNATIONAL

FEDOSHEV ADIRESES SOCIALIST COUNTRIES' TiIEmE'i‘chL CONP’EREMB
Moscow VB‘INIK AKADDIH NAUK SSSR in Russian No ll. 1978, pp 88-91

[Article by L. S. Yagodovskiy, candidate of juridical sciences]

[Text] An important place in the rapprochement of the countries of social-
ist collaboration in occupied by steady intensification of scientific con-
tacts and the developent of Joint research activity. in recent years.
creative relations of specialists in social studies of the fraternal states
have obtained an ever-greater scope. Phltiiateral problem emissions are
functioning. international research teens are successfully working. the
nusber of joint publications is increasing. etc. All this required the
creation and ilproveuent of stable organizational ferns of regulation of
the expanding collaboration. Therefore the Conference of vice-presidents
of the academies of sciences of the socialist countries for the social aci-
ences was formed as a pomnent institute.

The ‘ihird Conference was held in Budapest on l8 to 20 A ii (the first was
held in Moscow in 1975 and the second in Warsaw in i976 . At this Ieetlng,
organised by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, there were representatives
of the academies of sciences of Bulgaria, Viet Nam, the CIR. Cube, Mongolia,
Poland, Rensn ia, the USSR and Czechoslovakia. 1he delegations of seientiata
were headed by Professor N. Bachvarov, Acadelician as P. Pakh, Professor
Vu Kkheu, Academician ii. Kalweit. Professor J. A. Bustananta, Acade-ician
Sh. Bira, Acadelicion J. Ssczepanski, Professor Ceterchi, Acade-iclan P. N.
Fesoseyev and Acad-aicien Z. Snitil. in the delegations, side by side with
the directors of leading acadulc institutes, were respons ibie workers of
the central co-ittees of the fraternal columnist and workers‘ parties, and
also representatives of scientific research centers under the central coa-
nittees of those parties and higher educational institutions.

Before the conference work was started the leaders of delegations and repre-
sentatives of central conittees of tho fraternai parties were received by
ii. Ovari, Politburo amber and secretary of the central conittee of the
Hungarian Socialist Horkers' Party, who later participated in the plenary

sessions. Acadenlclan F. Marta, general secretary of the Hungarian Aceddly
of Sciences, participated in the work of the conference.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The conference was opened by the president of the Hungarian Academy of Sei-
euoos. Acadeeician J. Sentagetay.

it has beeono a tradition to start such meetings with an exchange of opinions
of urgent theoretical and methodological problem of Inrxlst-leninist social
studies and of Information about the most important investigations being con-
ducted in the fraternal countries. At Budapest those questions were discussed
in connection with discussion of the report "Social requirements and the
social sciences," presented in the name of the Hungarian delegation by Academ-
ician ii. Saholchi and corresponding members of the ilungarian Academy of Sci-
onces K. Kulchar and i). Ranki. 11w elevation of the role of science in today's
world was spoken at in the report. and not was made of the growth of influence
of the social sciences. which are called upon to explain complex and at

times contradictory shifts in tho contemporaty develop-ant of unkind. deter-
Isino the min directions and establish more precisely the specific paths of
social doveiqment in the very near and remote future.

The participants in the conference stressed that before the social scientists
of the socialist cmntries, who use as a basis a genuinely scientific. Harx-
iat-Leniuist methodology of cognition of reality, enormous prospects are open-
ing up in the prediction of the social development of their countries. the
socialist camp as a whole. and also the movement of all mankind toward peace
and progress. At the same time they face exceptionally urgent problems.

The com-mist and workers' parties of the fraternal states are presenting the
social sciences with over-growing requirements with respect to cosprehensive
generalization of the lntornat ional experience in the creation of a new order
and thorough analysis of the processes occurring in the world. On that basis,
social scientists are obligated to contribute maximally to the solution of
complex practical problems in the area of the building of socialise and con-
munlsm with consideration of such general regularities of social dovelepent
as the specific national conditions of each fraternal country, and also of
tasks in the further reinforcement of world socialism.

in the speech of the head of the Soviet delegation, Acadulcian P. N. Fedo-
seyev, a characterization was given of the main functions of the social scl-
ences in the countries of socialism. The main functions. the reporter noted.
are the cognition and theoretical interpretation of the mechanisms in the
establishment of a cos-unist formation, and also of the processes of the
deepening of the general crisis of capitalism and the development of the
world revolutionary liberation movement. P. N. Fedosoyev stressed that
bourgeois social studies. because of its class ilmitedness. is unable to
give an objective analysis of the internal connections and basic trends in
the world social develoiment. its role is reduced to the recording and some
systemtization of facts and their interpretation from positions of apology
for the capitalist order and the struggle against real socialism. The
decisive advantage of Harxlst-lknlnlst social studies consists in the fact
that they are capable of giving and are giving an objective picture and
reliable knowledge of the social processes being accouplishcd in the world
and of the driving forces and directions of the world social developsont.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A no less important function of the social sciences in the socialist coun-
tries is the development of roeeassendatiuna and proposals for the solution
of urgent problems of econoelc and social development. state and cultural
construction. international relations and foreign policy. The reporter
euphasized that bourgeois social studies are in a position different in
principle. Although they can give and are giving other prescriptions for
the econoﬂc and social developaent of capitalist states, the effect of
those recosssendations is extra-sly limited. since in the final account they
hen the purpose of slowing down social progress and prorcrving tho founda-
tions of capitalists. 'lhe enormous advantage of Marxist-Leninist science is
that it is called upon to contribute to the revolutionary renevai of the
world and the acceleration of social progress.

Finally. the functions of the social sciences in the countries of socialism
include the further theoretical dovoioplsent of socialist ideology, the solu-
tion of sooio-poiiticnl problem and the developont of ethical standards
Intrinsic to our society, and the denunciation and criticism of bourgeois
ideology.

During the discussion of the report the participants in the conference exa-
Iined urgent problems of the economic. political. historical and other social
sciences, questions connected with the conducting of sociological investiga-
tions. with the analysis of the development of the sphere of consciousness.
with study of the most acute worldwide probiesis. etc. Much attention was

given to the growing role of the interdisciplinary. coaplex approach to the
Investigation of social processes.

[in organic continuation of that discussion was the discussion of the report
of Acade-icisn 2. Snitii (cssa), devoted to the activity of the Multilateral
Problel Cousission on 'Questiens of the ideological Struggle in Connection
iiith the Coexistence of Two World Systems." The delegates of countries
participating in the work of the comission spoke of the great ilportance

of the problees being worked out by it. Emphasizing that in the contemporary
world the ideological struggle is conducted in all directions of the social
studies, they noted the need for further intensification of coordination of
the activity of all probin emissions on soc lai sciences and of attention
to ideological aspects of the investigations being conducted by then.

also discussed was the question of inprovenent of the fetus of collaboration
of scientists of the fraternal countries within the freleworic of that con-
Ilssien. 'ihe speakers discussed the need to crnate a snail nuaber of inter-
national research taalas capable of working fruitfully and unifying the repre-
sentatives of different branches of science. in the resolution adopted on
that question it was stressed that the main task of such teens is the pre-
paration of Joint scientific reports and fundamental nonographic works on
very urgent actual problems of the ideological struggle. 'ihis reccnendatlon
of the conference of vice presidents undoubtedly will contribute to improve-
Ient of the activity of other Iultllateral probiea cosssissions.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the lejor Itels on the agenda of the conference vas the conelderatlon
of the ﬁrst results of Ilpluentatlon of the loIg-renge progre- of NIH-
lateral collaboration of solentlflo lnstltutlons of the soelcllst countrIes
In the area of the saclal sclencea. and also proposals for Its further In-
proveeent. II. Kaluelt (60!) presented a report on that euostlon. 'Ihe re-
porter and all those «he spoke In the dlseusslons of the report noted the
posItIVe Ilportanee of the prograe. vhlch was developed at the flrst con-
ference of vIce presldente. That progre- use approved by the Flrst Conference
of I'resldents of Acadanles of Selencos of Soclellst Countrlos (Roscoe. Febru-
ary 1977) and at the Tenth Conference of Representetlves of Acade-Ies of
Sclences (Sofle, Nave-her I977) uan Included In the general progre- of eultl-
lateral sclentlI’Ie colloboratIon of sclentlsts of soclallst states.

The dIscussIon showed that the long-range progral as e whole In belng suc-
cessfully accoepllshed. Thls applles prllarlly to jolnt research belng done
ulthln the fraeeuorks of lultlleterel proqu coo-Isslons. Noted especially
Is the actIvIty of one of the oldest co-Iselons .. the Coulsslon for Prob-
lens of Illstory of the Great October Revolutlon and Subsequent SocIalIst
Rewolutlons.

Jolnl InventIgatlons of socIal sclentlsts In the report porIod were also
conducted outslde the fraleuork of the per-onent conleslons; sc IentIats of
the fraternal countrlus. In pertlcular, Investlgated the very urgent problells
Included In the long-range prograu, ulthln the fraleuork of the axe-celled
goal projects. Work was very successfully doneon the creatlon of the collect-
Ive Ionographs "Razvltoy sotslolluuobshcheye I spetslflcheskoyo v yego
stroltel'stve" ("Developed SoclelIs-uthe Genera-l and the SpecIfIc In Its
Construct!on”], "SotslalIstlcheskIy lnternetslonallu: Ital: prlntelp neth-
gosudnrstvennykh otnoshonly sotsIelIstIchesklkh stren" ["Soclallut Inter-
natlonellsn as the Prlnclplo of the Interstate Reletlons of Soclallst Coun-
tr|og"], and also on o brlef hlstory of world liar II and an the proparatlon
of e Column Slovle and a Cos-Ion Carpathlan dIeleetoIogIcel atlases. II col-
prehensIve analysls was been Isde of questlons In the developeent of noelellst
deeocracy. An Internetlonal conference devoted to the able of bourgeols
democracy was prepared and successfully held.

In cunnectlon uIth the fonsatlon of some new mllllaterel coenlsslons, and
also In connectlon ulth the need to reflne the ptrpoees and tlle llelts for
certa In jolnt work and other organIzatIonal quesl Ions. the Conference of
vIce-presldents of tho acadeeles of sclences of lhe soclellst countrlee con-
sldered It advlseble to Introduce certaln changes In the effectlve long-range

program.

Questlons of the further devolopent of the long-range program for tho perlod
after 1980 were settled at the some the. It was mpheslzed that quolltetlve

aspects of tho sclentlt‘lc relatlons of soclel sclentlsts of the fraternal
countrles, aspects connected uIth elevetlng the level of onnt reseerch. least
be advanced more and core to the foreground.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NU

Prohlel cue-lulnna In the area of the aoclnl colancee have recelved ordere
to prount by the end of 1979 to the Ceechoelovak nude-y of Sclencee drafta
of the plans of tholr uork for the follovlng ﬁve-year plan. For better
coordination of ouch plane and exchange of experlence. a conference of repre-
sentatlvea of problen cmlaelona vlll he held In Home In l979. ‘l‘ogether
vlth than the acadeolea of aclencee partlclpetlng in the conference of vlce-
presidents mat send thelr propoeela reletlng to ohengea In the llat of the
Ialn dlrectlona of nultllaterel oolleboratlen and ln the llet of target pro-
Jecte. All theae uterlala. after they are et-arlaed. vlll be damned at
the fourth conference of vlce-preeldenta. 0n the haela of thoee recceuenda-
tlcna the flnal vorklng plane of the nultllaterel cc-laalcna for l98l-l985

vlll be approved and the ucrklng plans for new target projecte vlll be adopted.

The partlclpante In the conference exchanged lnferlatlon about preparetlona
for a mother of lajor lnternatlonel congreuee on the eoclal eclencea. The
great ac lentlflc luportence of auch forum uea noted, and aloe the l-pcrtence
of the exchange of lnfcrIatlon about the couree of preparetlcne cf the aclen-
tlatc of eoclellet atetee for then.

Also dlacuaeed van a propoaal to eatehllch en lnternatlonel prlae of the
aoclallet countrlee for the lost valueble jolnt receerch ln the area of the
Iarxlat-lenlnlst eoclel eclencaa. A uorklng group vac fomd for the pre-
paratlon of propoaeln regardlng the prlze.

0n the haala of the report of the dlrector of thc publlehlng house of the
Ilungarlen Acadeny of Sclencea, D. Bernete, there was dlacuulon cf queatlons
of annual collaboretlon ln the publ lcatlon and dletrlbutlcn of lltereture on
the soclal aclencea. The speakers lentloned the pocltlve results achleved

In that area. Note also one node of the need to further lcprcve the nechenlaa
of puhllahlng the results of jolnt reeeerch dono ulthln the frelevork of the
long-range program (thelr jolnt or perellel publlcetlon).

‘Ihe work of the conference proceed In a buelneasllke. frlendly atmosphere and
concluded ulth the algnlng of a jolnt protocol. Ihe next, fourth conference
of vlcc-preeldents, at the lnvltatlon cf the Caucheelcvek Acade-y of Sclencee.
wlll be held ln Prague ln the flret half of 1980.

CG‘YRIGHT: lzdotel'etvc "Nauka", Weatnlk Akadmll neuk SSSR". 1975

2176
050: [800

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

socIo-Putwsormcal. PROBLDB 0P mu autonomi-
Hoscow VOPROSY nwsorn in Russian No ll. Nov 78 pp 3-17

[Article 3) N. A. Shchclokov: "Questions of Strengthening law and Order and
Legality Under the Conditions of Developed Socinlise"!

[Text] Developed socialise is a natural stage of the developsent of the con-
sunist forestion and marks the high degree of snturity of social relations.
when there is ”full scope for the action of the laws of socialise and for

the revelation of its advantages in all spheres of social life and the organic
integrality and dynasise of the social systee and its political stability

and indestructible internal unity.”1

Scone-ic. sociopolitical and noral relations have reached a high degree of
Inturity in the society of developed socialiu. The conditions have been
created for the sexism satisfaction- of Soviet people's material and spirit-
ual require-eats and the all-around develop-eat of their capabilities and
citizens' participation in controlling all the sffsirs of society. The de-
signs of the founders of Hsrxis- are embodied in practice: ”a society
organised on co-unist principles will afford sr opportunity for its embers
to conprehensively esploy their cosprehensively developed capabilities.”

The particular futures of the new type of personality. who coebines lofty
ideological-political. coral and professional qualities and adapts his goals
and interests to the interests and goals of society. are being revealed in-
creasingly fully under the conditions of nature socialise.

At the sac tine socialise is waging a resolute struggle against the old.
outdated traditions and custoes which are alien to the standards of co-unist
sorality and which are a serious encumbrance in the building of co-unise.

Overcooing the harnful vestiges of the past in people's minds and conduct.
socialists has proclaised: ".../The development] [these and subsequent words
in slantlines in italics] of the best Iodels, traditions and results of the
/existing/ culture [from the viewpoint] of the world outlook of Marxis- and
the living conditions and struggle of the proletariat in the era of its
dictatorship.“

(02
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The development of socialism has objectively given rise to an increase in
the role or social control as an integral system of influencing the members
of society aimed at an improvement in the organization of their activity
and suntual relations within the framework of the accepted rules in Soviet

society and the social and moral values expressing the interests of all of
society.

Socialist law and order represents a system of social relations emerging as
the result of the realization of the demands of socialist legality. that

is. of precise and unswerving observance of Soviet laws by all citizens

and officials. The USSR Constitution has recorded this nest important
principle. prescribing that the Soviet state and all its organs operate on
the basis of socialist legality and the citizen's rights and freedoms (arti-
cle 6).

Soviet people's constantly growing awareness. culture and civic responsi-
bility and their intolerance of antisocial manifestations are exerting an
increasingly great influence on all spheres of the life and development of
our society. "The higher our society ascends in its development." Conrado

L. I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Committee. has observed.
"the more intolerable the deviations from the socialist standards of moral-
ity. which are still encountered. become. honey-grabbing. private-ownership
tendencies. hooliganism. bureaucratisa and indifference to man contradict

the very essence of our system. In the struggle against such pehnonena it

is essential to make full use of the opinion of the labor collective. the
critical words of the press. methods of persuasion and the force of the law--
all the means at our disposal."‘

There is fundamental significance under these conditions in inculcating in
the population intelligent social requirements. including the universal re-
quirement of stable law and order. unswerving observance of Soviet laws and
other normative precepts and the day-to—day custom of solving conflict situa-
tions and collisions in people's mutual relations on the basis of the legal
rules in force and of harmoniously combining state. public and private in-
tercsts.

Law and order is stable and durable only when the individual is entirely
on its side and incorporates it in his value pri\ciples and orientation.

in accordance with the USSR Constitution (article 65). each USSR citizen is
obliged to respect the laws and legitimate interests of others. display
inplacability toward antisocial acts and contribute to the utmost to the
maintenance of public order.

The legislative consolidation in our state‘s Basic Law of the principle of
all USSR cltizens‘ assistance in the maintenance of law and order is a
natural result of the development of the socialist society. This is a quali-
tative leap forward in the public consciousness at the stage of mature so-
cialism. No other state and no other social-economic formation which existed
prior to the socialism knew such active support for law-enforcement activity
on the part of the population. This principle has assumed nationwide signi-
ficance.

b3
FOK OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

The strengthening of law and order and legality is a couples social problem
oi‘ sany levels. This article exasines only certain of its aspects: the
role or the CPS" in the strengthening of legality and lav and order. social
prevention of penal offenses. the tasks of the lav-entorcesent organs under
the conditions of developed socialis- snd the role of the social sciences in
elaborating theprobleos of strengthening legality.

l. The CPSil's Constant Concern To Strengthen Legality and law and Order

The Cl’SU devotes constant attention to questions of the strengthening of
socialist law and order. This is sanifested in the isproveoent in Soviet
legislation. the alineoent of the rule of last with the new level oi“ society's
developoeat, the further improve-eat in the activity at“ the lav-enforcescnt
organs and the oobilixation of the broad public aasses for active parti-
cipation in the oaintenance of public order and the struggle against penal
offenses.

The elaboration by party and goverment organs and the adoption by the USSR
Suprese Soviet and the republic supreoe soviets of lava on the host frequent
problesn of our life are of oajor sociopolitical significance. Their purpose
is to bring the rule of law into line with the level of development reached
by our society. New legislative seaaures have been adopted concerning such
spheres of life which hitherto had re-aiaed beyond the i‘raoeuorh of legal
regulation as. for example. envirotssental protection. All this is contrib-
uting to the strengthening of law and order and the syste- oi‘ legality. The
dialectics oi’ the developoent of Soviet legislation are such that the tioely
change in legislation and the repeal of obsolete legal rules which have
ceased to correspond to the changed conditions insure the stability of law
and order. The very course of social develop-eat is advancing increasingly
couples tasks. and the sore couple the work. the sore iaportant are coordina-
tion. haroony. discipline and a state of legal regulation.

The law. according to it. Marx. does not have a history of its ova; it re-
i'lects the systes of social relations and law and order and is. as it were.
a "copy" of the social organization. "Regulation and order." it. Marx wrote.
"are precisely a tors of the social consolidation of a given sethod of pro-
duction and. consequently. its relative essncipntion Eros pure chance and
pure arbitrariness."s The consolidation. uintenanee and development at
social relations are achieved as a result of realization of the rule of

law. The principal direction of the develop-eat of Soviet society's poli-
tical systen is the further spread of socialist democracy and the reinforce-
neat of the legal foundation of state and public lite. Its l.. l. Brezhnev has
emphasized. the society at developed socialise has becoae the society of
developed socialist democracy. which is recorded in legislative enact-eats.

The adaption of the USSR Constitution and the union republic constitutions
was the pinnacle of the party and state's lav-asking activity. Our country's
Basic has and the constitutions oi‘ the union republics have recorded the
conquests of developed socialist: and represent the political and legal found-
ation of public and state life and an instrument of comunist building.

6’.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UFFlClAh USE ONLY

The USSR Constitution contains the sum total of real guarantees of Soviet
cltiscns’ rights and freedoms. The basic law protectstheSoviet system
against all attempts to take advantage of these freedoms to the detrinent

of the interests of society and the state and to the detriment of the rights
of others.

In accordance with the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium 12 December 1977 decree
"The Organization of work To Bring USSR Legislation lnto Line With the

USSR Constitution." active preparation is currently underway of the drafts
of a number of legislatlvg enactments which will take account of the new
phenomena in public life. The low of the USSR Council of Ministers and the
law on elections to the USSR Suprene Soviet have already been adopted; laws
on the USSR Prosecutor's office. laws on the labor collective and on the
procedure for appealing in court against the actions of officials which they
have perpetrated in violation of the law and a number of others are being
prepared. Much remains to be done to bringthe-fundancntals of criminal.
criminal-procedure and corrective-labor legislation of the USSR and the union
republics into line with the USSR Constitution.

Everything new and progressive is asserted in the struggle against the old
and the outdated under the conditions of socialism. V. I. Lenin obr - ad
that any phenomenon. if viewed in its process ol development. "will contain
vestiges of the past. the fundamentals of the present and the beginnings of
the future.”7 Antisocial manifestations have still not been fully elininated
from our life. The utmost development of camnmnist principles presupposes

an uncompromising struggle against vestiges of the past in people's minds

and behavior and the eradication of these “remnants."

Among the causes of crime. an appreciable role is played by the influence of
alien ideology--social-psychological principles and moral-everyday standards-
this "culture medium” for the preservation of a variety of "vestiges" in the
mind and behavior of individual unstable citizens. however. we cannot limit
the range of contradictions doternining antisocial behavior solely to the
above-mentioned factors. Objective contradictions which. albeit of a tem-
porary nature, are nevertheless directly or intermediately connected with
offenses and crimes are inherent in socialism. These include: contradic-
tions arising as a result of the fact that the satisfaction of certain per-
sonal requirements is temporarily limited or deferred at stages of the
building of a new society; and contradictions engendered by shortcomings in
the organizationof public life. labor and the distribution of material wealth
and the contradictions between the individual's personal aspirations and

the needs of society as a whole.

The contradictions of the first group represent a consequence of an inset-
ficient level of development of the productionforccs at the first stage of
the building of communism compared with its higher phase and the existence
of differences between city and countryside and between brain work and phy-
sical labor. V. I. Lenin wrote that “without sinking into Utopianism, it
is impossible to believe that. having overthrown capitalism. people will

$5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY

i-edlstely learn to work for a society [without any legal rules] for the
replacement of capitalists [will not i-ediately provide/ the econosic pre-
requisites of [such] a change."8

um. the increased level of development of the production forces and the
increasingly intensive erasure of the boundaries between city and country-
side and brain work and physical labor the contradictions of the first group
are playing an increasingly lesser role in determining antisocial acts.
Soviet people's creative. constructive labor and the very process of con-
munist building are creating a most important prerequisite of the liquids-
tion of crime.

The contradictions of the second group are also being successfully eliminated
in our day. The decisions of the 25th crsu Congress and subsequent measures
of the Conunist forty and the Soviet state are aimed at increasing the role
of the scientific control of social processes. the well-defined organization
of labor and an isprovement in the work of the state organs and public or-
ganimtlons.

The contradictions between the individual's personal aspirations and the
interests of society are also being resolved successfully. The task advanced
by the 25th party congress of a comprehensive approach to the political.
labor and moral education of the working people is aimed at the elimination
of these negative vestiges of presocialist relations which act from time

to time in the role of factors contributing to the perpetration of antiso-
cial acts. Far from all members of the society have yet learned to make
their requirements couensurate with socially useful activity. The inability
or reluctance to make one's claims couensurate with one'a personal labor
contribution conceal a cause of amoral behavior and. frequently. of crime.
These phenomena are alien to the society of developed socialism. a daily

and purposeful struggle is being waged against them and they must be cos-
pletely elisinated.

in the struggle of the new against the old the contradictions sometimes as-
sume the most acute form of socially dangerous msnifeststions--crime.

It is isportant that all citizens have a sound knowledge of legislation and
the principles of its execution. A measure of increasing the public's
knowledge of current legislation is the work currently being performed in
accordance with the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress on publication of
the "Svod zakonuv ssss" [Ce-piled Statutesof the USSR]. The knowledge of
legislative enactments here should amount to more than just knowledge of
the seaaure of liability for this offense or the other. A profound under-
standing of the socially conditioned character of the legal rules and their
nature and an awareness of the possible consequences of the failure to ob-
serve legal rules create a firm foundation for the conscientious execution
of laws In accordance with inner conviction. It law lives and operates only
when it is executed unswerwingly. It is obligatory for all--this is an
unfailing principle of the socialist society. Officials and workers of the

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

state and economic apparatus are primarily obliged to set an example of
genuine respect for the law. The slightest deviations from the requirements
or the rule of law motivated by the "insignificance" and "formalism” of these
requirements and their "lack of correspondence to local conditions." "in-

expediency" and so forth are impermissible under the conditions of the de-
veloped socialist society.

The activity of the state organs for the maintenance of law and order takes
its course under exceptionally propitious conditions. The constant upsurge
of the economy and the growth of the well-being and culture and the active
participation of the working people in the administration of society and
the state--the entire course of communist building creates the prerequisites
for accosplisinent of the task set by the CPSU Program: the liquidation of
crime and its causes.

Dependable law and order is insured in our country. The liquidation in the
country of professional and organized crime is an important social achieve-
ment. Since 1922 the country's population has grown by 120 million. while
crime has been reduced by a Factor of 3.5; in the last 25 years the number
of people convicted of criminal offenses has been cut by a factor of 2.5

Our class adversaries are attempting to impose on socialist society the men-
tality and morality of consumerism and bourgeois living standards. Anti-
Soviets are exaggerating to the utmost the hullabaloo surrounding the ques-
tion of "humn rights" and ”freedom and democracy" which they have inspired,
falsifying these concepts and ignoring the Leninist understanding of demo-
cracy under socialism as a democracy wherein for the first time in history
the bulk of the population is raised up to the point of independent sorti-
cipation in the day-to-day administration of the affairs of society. With
the help of the mass information media the Rest is assiduously publicizing
the "socialism with a human face" concepts and the ideas of "total permis-
siveness" and the anarchic counterposing of the individual and society. which
are alien to Marxism-Leninism. Our ideological enemies are attempting to
conceal behind this wall of noise exploitation and chronic unemployment, in-
difference to man and poverty--all the ulcers of the capitalist organism.
which inevitably involve millions of people in the sphere of crime. The
leaders of bourgeois states themselves acknowledge that crime there has
assumed the proportions of a truly national catastrophe. Vormer 0.8. Attor-
ney General Ramsey Clark was forced to observe: "Poverty, disease. in-
Justice. idleness. ignorance and human squalor and crime go hand in hand.
This is the truth. "e have always know it. He cultivate crime. engender

it andlsoster it. lie should not be surprised that it is flourishing

here!"

On the other hand. foreign guests visiting the Soviet Union remark on the
purity of the moral atmosphere of the socialist way of life and the tran-
quillity of our cities' streets. Thus Hike Davidoff. correspondent of the
DAth woato. writes in his book "Cities Without Crises." which was published
by the American International Publishers Publishing house in 1976, that the

$7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

biggest ispreasion on his was eade by the fact that he could walk around

hoscow's streets without fear day and night. he discovered for himself
the Joy of evening strolls in the fresh air. not having to keep warily
'l‘oohing aromd and not quickening his stops when he heard footsteps behind
in.

fire econuic. political and legal guarantees of Soviet people's rights and
freedoas and reliable protection of the interests of the citisen and the
state represent the greatest social conquest of our society. And if the
party and the organs of state are stepping up the fight against crime. this
is caused by no scans by extraordinary circa-stances but by the new social
possibilities of the developed socialist society and the citizens' in-
creased intolerance of all antisocial usnifcstations and everything that
hinders our advance-eat toward conunisa. The process of co-unist building
is creating objective possibilities of the liquidation of crine. Ilowever.
the realisation of these possibilides will densnd the planned efforts of
the party. the state and the public organizations.

The law has a great role to play in the accouplislssent of these tasks. So-
cialist law protects the econoaic foundation of socialisa--socialist owner-
ship-mad the rights and freedoas of Soviet citizens guaranteed by the USSR
Constitution and raises the- in the spirit of lofty conunist ideals. A
function of socialist law is the nolding in Soviet citizens of the intel-
ligent requirenenta of the coeprehensively developed individual which con-
fora to the level of the develop-eat of production and social relations which
has ben reached and the individual's objective possibilities.

The processes of dynaaic socioeconosic developaent are reflected in the ac-
tivity of the internal affairs organs. This has been expressed priaarily

in the reinforcenent of trained personnel and its professional and cultural
growth. Thanks to the Co-unist Party‘s attention and scrupulous concern.
such has been done to isprove the cosposition of the personnel of the in-
ternal affairs organs. An iwortant role in the iaplenentation of these
seasures was played by the decree deteraining the procedure of the staffing
of the internal affairs organs with the best representatives of the working
people remanded for service by the labor collectives and party and lies-
ssnol organisations. Today 75 percent of the ailitis privates and sergeants
has complete high school education. whereas the figure was only ll percent

in 1968. The leading personnel. right up to chiefs of rayon and city internal
affairs departments and corrective-labor institutions. consists of special-
ists with highereducation. All investigating officers and the vast mjority
of officials of the criainal investigation department and of the organim-
tions for the struggle against enbezzlenent of socialist property and other
subdivisions of the internal affairs organs have higher and secondary spe-
cialized education. Today the PM) has 15 VUZ's, an acadeay and three sci-
entific research institutes in which a large detachocnt of scientists--100
doctors and 1.200 candidates of sciences-work.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The trends and regularities of social development dictate the actntcneed
for the personnel or the internal affairs organs to be armed with diverse
profound knowledge in the sphere of the social. natural and technical sciences.

The 25th chU Congress emphasized that the party has devoted and will con-
tinue to devote constant attention to improving the activity of the militia.
the prosecutor's office. the courts and the justice organs. which are stand-
ing guard over Soviet legality. the interests of Soviet society and the rights
of Soviet citizens. "The party and the state." Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev has
said. "put a high value on the difficult and honorable labor of the workers
of these establishments and are displaying concern to insure that they be
replenished with trained, worthy personnel." 1

2. changes in Legislation and the Tasks of Improving and Reeducating 0f-
fenders

"...A question with which we are constantly involved." L. I. Brezhnev said

In the CPS" Central Committee Report to the 25th party congress. "is [the
question of improving our legislatioaand strengthening socialist law and
order..../ The Politburo has entrusted the corresponding organs with the
preparation of proposals on a further improvement in labor and administrative

law and certain other laws in order that account be taken of the new phenomena
in public life."12

In accordance with these instructions. in 1977 the USSR Supreme Soviet and
the union republic supreme soviets made amendments to and supplemented union
and republic administrative. criminal and corrective-labor legislation

in force. Punishments not involving imprisonment were envisaged for a num-
ber of offenses. and punishment under criminal law for insignificant crimes
was replaced by measures of administrative and social influence. The pur-
pose of these decisions and legislative enactments is to step up work on
preventing offenses and to increase the effectiveness of the struggle against
antisocial phenomena. They mark a new stage in party and state leadership
of the activity of the law-enforcement organs.

Back in 1919. during elaboration of the draft of the second party program.
V. I. Lenin formulated the principal directions of criminal policy. In the
synopsis of the section on punishments he wrote:

"1) whence derived percentage of criminal conviction

2) "" of social censure

3) replacement of imprisonment by compulsory labor with residence at home
6) replacement of prison by educational institutions

5) introduction of comradss' courts (for certain categories. both in the
army and among workers."1

The changes in legislation reflect the extension of the differentiation of
legal sanctions and. on this basis. the decisive increase in their educative
effectiveness.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The law-enforcement organs (the court. the prosecutor's office and the inter-
nal affairs and Justice organs) are waging a rtsolnte struggle against dan-
gerous infringements of socialist law and ordel and insuring the inevit-
ability of punish-eat for offenses. No one can count on being permitted

to darken Soviet people's life by criminal actions with impunity and pre-
vent them from enjoying the benefits and advantages of developed socialism.

L. I. Brezhnev has repeatedly emphasized that Soviet democracy and humanism
have nothing in common with a liberal attitude toward those who break Soviet
laws and the rules of socialist community life. Such is the party's prin-
cipled line.

Each Soviet person must be confident that his rights, life and health and
honor and dignity are reliably protected by the law-enforcement organs.
All this sets the internal affairs organs responsible tasks and entrusts
special duties to them.

The new legislation entrusts big and responsible tasks to the Service set

up within the system of internal affairs organs for the execution of punish-
ments not involving imprisonment. Work on improving and reeducating those
whose sentences have been suspended and those released on probation with
their obligatory enlistment in work is assuming a fundamentally new char-
acter in our day. more attention is being paid to their work and day-to-day
arrangements and there is an increase, in particular, in the role of the
labor collective in the process of introducing offenders to normal labor

and social-political activity.

It is impossible to conceive of making a reality of a legal possibility
with the exclusion of the activity of the people implementing the legal
enactments. The workers of the law-enfocement organs must be strictly
guided by the new legislation and have a sound knowledge of the letter.
meaning and spirit of the law. An important task of legal science is to
reveal the objective regularities of law-enforcement activity and the con-
ditions and factors contributing to or, on the contrary, hindering the ef-
fectiveness of the action of the rule of law. As is known, any legal rule
represents a regulation of social relations determined by need and a logic-
ally formulated rule of behavior or prohibition. The real life of legal
rules is manifested here in law-enforcement activity. He frequently en-
counter a subjective interpretation and defects in the legal conscience
of individual citizens which prevent the correct implementation of the rule

of law.

As an analysis of the results of a study of public opinion shows, certain
citizens believe that it is sufficient to increase criminal liability for
crime to disappear. According to the data of a sociological study of the
process of discussion of the draft Basic Law of the USSR conducted by re-
search assistants of the CPSD Central Committee Academy of Social Sciences,
from 20 to 39 percent of the representatives of different social groups

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

who were polled demand more seVere punishmnue.1“ Soch views are also
shared from time to time by certain workers of the law-enforcement organs.
This is a profoundly mistaken opinion.

1he experience of many centuries has proven incontrovertibly that reliance
on the omnipotence of punishment under criminal law is illusory. V. l.
Lenin repeatedly emphasized that "the preventive significance of a punish-
meat is by no means conditioned by its severity but by its inevitability.
what is important is not that a strict punishment be handed down for a crime
but that [not one/ instance of a crime pass undetected.”-J lt is indisput-
able that an inveterate thief. murderer or malicious hooligan should be
punished with all the severity of the law and that no kind of sentimentality
is permissible lnre. And the people demanding more severe punishments un-
doubtedly have in mind malicious criminals and recidivists. But our atti~
tude toward people who have accidentally transnressed and who have committed
an offense which represents no great danger and who can be corrected without
being isolated from society should be entirely different.

The changes in legislation represent the scieulifically substantiated policy
of our state determined with consideration of ihe conditions of the developed
socialist society. The well-defined wording of the new legislative enact-
ments reflects the essence of criminal policy at the current stage-~a policy
of the inevitability of liability and differentiation of the punishment, a

decisive increase in its educative effectiveness and the labor collectives'
active participation in the reeducnrisn of offenders.

11w labor collective isthenicromilieu through which the relations of col-
laboration and mutual assistance inherent in socialism and lofty ideological-
politicai and moral principles directly influence each individual. if there
is a healthy social-psychological and moral climate in the collective, this
collective is a good educator.

The vast majority of labor collectives is coping successfully with the dif-
ficult task of reeduceting offenders. Only a negligible proportion of those
released on probation commit crimes again. "here the administration of the
construction site and enterprise, the public organizations and the labor
rollectives persistently and skillfully undertake educative work. where
normal work and social conditions are created for those given a suspended
sentence and wheretheinternal affairs organs organize their work in accord-
ance with the new tasks and requirements. normal labor discipline and due
public order is insured.

The adoption of the new usss Constitution andtheunion republic constitutions.
the changes in current legislation in the direction of further democratiza-
tion and humanization of criminal-law and corrective-labor policy and the
well-defined differentiation of sanctions for offenses are designed to

insure a stepping up of the active struggle against all negative phenomena
and a further strengthening of socialist law and order on this basis.

Si
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The struggle against offenses is not an end in itself and an isolated func-
tlon of the state's lawheniorcement organs under the conditions of developed
socialism. ft is a means of solving the complex task of the assertion of
the socialist way of life. the shaping of n harmoniously deVeloped and ideo-
logically convinced. active builder of the new society. who is free of
vestiges of the past. and of the creation of conditions most worthy of human
nature and adequate therefor.16

3. Certain Problems of the Social Prevention of Offenses

The policy of the extensive prevention of offenses is pursued in our country
in full conformity with the party's decisions.

urine represents the runs total of various acts of individual socially danger-
nus behavior. The genesis of offenses is predetermined by a complex of so-
cial factors. This demands a principled approach to the organization of work
on preventing crime. The main direction in the struggle against crime is

the successful solution of the social and economic problems of the life of
society and the improvement, on their basis. of social relations and educa-
tive. Ideological work. 1he solution of the problem of the eradication of
crime will naturally take a considerable amount of time for men's mentality
is refashioncd far more slowly than the material bases of his life. "Prac-
tically everytiog is of significance here: the right atmosphere in the
family. skillful organizationof the academic process. a health atmosphere

in the labor collective. well-organized consumer services and much else."17

The second direction of preventive work presupposes an influence on the spe-
cific microuocial groups in which the negative phenomena are shaped and ma-
tnre.

And. finally. the third direction is individual educational and preventive
work with the specific vectors of antisocial morality and asocial principles.
it consists of changing the system of a person's value orientations. over-
coming antisocial views and molding a respect for the rules of socialist
community life and Soviet law and n"der. Social control. with its measures
of educative. social and state compulsion. including legal liability. are
of considerable significance in this plane.

In accordance with these directions. a well-balanced system of the social
prevention of offenses which incorporates measures of a general. special-
criminoiogical and individual nature has been created in our country. By
measures of a general nature we understand implementation of the tasks of
communist building. Soviet people's guaranteed political. moral and labor
education and the shaping of a healthy moral climate in the individual's
social environment (family. school. labor collective and daily surroundings).
There is particular significance in this aspect in measures of intensifying
educative work in the labor collectives. the elaboration and implementation
of plans of the social development of the collectives and the elimination

of shortcomings in the activity of the state organs and public organizations.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFlC|AL SB ONLY

Special criminological measures art-(nuihcr-aiement of the social prevention
of offensen. Thene include the decisions adopted by the Comsmnist Party

and the Soviet state on stepping upthc fight agalnut crime. improvement

of the activity of 'he militia orgaua. prosecutor's office and the courts.
daily study of the state of crime. the planning of seasnres to fight it.
coordination of the activity of the utate organs and the public in this di-
rection, elimination of the circumstances contributing to crimes being com-
mitted and the generalization and analysis of law-enforcement practice.

A most important element of the syutem of social prevention is the super-
vision of persons inclined. to Judge by their behavior. to commit offenses.
It is closely connected with the measures of an individual nature which

are adopted for specific instances of crimes or other antisocial acts. Hoa-
sures of influence. provided for by the law. applied to persons who have com-
mitted crimeu and measures to correct and reeducate them fall into this
category.

Various forms of persuasion and compulsion. including measures to avert
premeditated crimes at the early stages of their developmentandadministra-
tive supervision of certain categories or people who have served their sen-
tence. represent another element of individual prevention.

Social prevention is an integral part of communist education. and the inter-
nal affairs organs participate to the full in educative-legal work.

The USSR HUD and the USSR Prosecutor's Office and Ministry of Justice in
conjunction with the USSR Gosplan. the AUCCTU and the Komsomol Central Com-
mittee. are drawing up a comprehensive plan of the prevention of offenses
which is tied in with the annual. five-year and long-term plans of the na-
tional economic development of the republics. krays and oblasts. This is a
big scientific and practical task whose solution will make it possible to
create a planning foundation for the unification of the efforts of the par-
ty. soviet and economic organs. public organizations and working people's
collectives in the fight against offenses. A broad circle of scientists--
sociologists. economists. demographers. psychologists. medical workers.
education organ workers and trade union and Komsomol organization workers--
have been enlisted in the drawing up of comprehensive plans of the preven-
tion of offenses. The social prevention of offenses is thus being raised to
the level of all-state planning.

The efficacy of the entire system of the prevention of offenses is connected
to a considerable extent with the work of the voluntary people's militias
and the enterprise prevention councils and the system of public order-
maintenance centers in residential microrayons. Prevention councils are
currently operating at almost every plant. factory and enterprise in the
country. and 32.000 public order-saintenance centers have been organized.
The public order-maintenance centers are an effective form of influence of
the party organizations, the public and the labor collectives on the state
of law and order in the microrsyon. An evaluation of their role and further
development prospects must be approached from precisely these standpoints.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prevention of offenses in the domestic sphere is connected with the ac-
tivity of the public order-maintenance centers. More than one-half of the
lumaicides. aggravated assaults and acts of hooliganism are committed from
domestic motives. The majority of domestic crimes is committed in a state
of intoxication. Domestic life is the most conservative aspect of social
relations and the one which is least susceptible to the influence of society.

This is explained by a number of reasons. First. vestiges of the past are
more firmly retained and the tremendous force of inertia of the old habits.
cuntoms and prejudices and of the consumerist mentality alien to our society
is displayed in the domestic sphere (the family. relations and the immediate
social environment). Social continuity in the domestic aphere assumes a
frequently stagnant nature for it is turned to the past and does not always
adequately reflect the changed living conditions.

Second. in the domestic sphere. under conditions wherein for this reason or
rim other there is a weakening of ideological influence, an everyday con-
sciousness based on worldly-emperical.knowledge and practices begins to play
the dominating role.

And, finally. in the system of social-psychological contacts the domestic
sphere is distinguished by great emotional tension, and an appreciable role
therein is played by psychological compatibility and unity of aims.

Social continuity in an intricate dialectical process which incorporates
elements of rejection and retention of social experience. and these con-
tradictions acquire particular poignancy in the domestic sphere.

The skillful organization of the professional work of the public and the
militia in the residential sector is a topical problem. Intervention in
the life of another family is undoubtedly a delicate question. it must be
solved carefully. attentively and with the greatest tactfulness. The USSR
Constitution guarantees the country's citizens inviolability of resident
and the law's protection of their private life (articles 55. 56). No one
has the right without legal grounds to enter anothcr's residence against
the will of its residents. For this reason preventive work in this sphere
must be armed with subtle and sufficiently effective means of legal pro-
cedure and recommendations on effective pedagogical, psychological and moral
influence.

The struggle against drunkenness is closely interconnected with domestic
problems. The influence of drunkenness on crime is common knowledge.
nurnkenness is a serious enemy in the domestic sphere and in the labor col-
lective. G. S. Strumilin rightly believed that the "complete sobering-up
of production" could additionally yield no less than 10 percent of the in-
crease in labor productivity."18 In-patient departments and narcotic cen-
ters for the treatment of inveterate drunkards are currently being set up
with enterprise funds. Treatment in them has to be paid for and is combined
with productive labor. This is producing positive results: thousands of
people have returned to a normal life and productive labor.

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prevention of juvenile offenses has always been a problem of great state
importance. Addressing the l8th Komuomol Congress on 25 April 1978. L. l.
Brezhnev said: "The party and the Kumsomol are paying great attention to the
moral upbringing or the young people. The assertion of the standards and
principles of communist morality is Impossible without a constant and persist-
ent struggle against antisocial manifestations and spiritual poverty and its
inevitable concomitnnts--drunkenness. hooliganism and violations of labor
discipline. The concealed and, at first glance. not always noticed manifes-
tation of immorality represent no less a danger. indifference. dependence.
cynicism and claims to obtain more than one gives uociety--such moral flaws

must not remain beyond the purview of the Komsomol and. indeed. of our en-
tire community."19

Attention to the problem of offenses among the young people does not mean that
there are many such phenomena in our country. Their overall number is de-
creasing everywhere. But behind each offense stands the tortuous fate of

a young person and a flaw in his ideological. labor and moral upbringing.
Young people are our country‘s future and. consequently. the future of

Soviet law and order. The state of legality and law and order in the future
will depend to a decisive extent on how the education of the younger genera-
tion is organized today and on what social and moral values society implants
in the young hearts. Soviet youth is actively participating in thexbuilding
of communism. The country has cultivated a generation of people which
doesnot know of wars. starvation and thedeprivations of the war and immediate
postwar years. Young people are studying and working in a tranquil atmo-
sphere. Pundamentai changes have occurred in Soviet people's material wel-
fare.

However, we cannot fail to see that the absence of a systematic. beneficcat
educative influence could lead and. indeed. does lead to the point where a
process of the inflation of public material values in the eyes of the young-
er generation occurs in certain families. A consumer attitude toward life
and a nihilistic attitude toward labor and the rights and dignity of others
emerges from time to time in a section of the youth.

he is known, the 25th CPSU Congress observed that the growth of material
possibilities should constantly be accompanied by a rise in people's ideo-
logical-moral and cultural level. otherwise relapses into a philistine.
petit bourgeois mentality are possible.

The Soviet secondary school is called upon to be a genuine center of educa-
tional work with )uveniles in the microrayon. The practice of the operation
of extended-day schools and whole-day schools is becoming increasingly wide-
spread. The experience of their work indicates a promising outlook for

this direction. N. K. Krupskaya vigorously advocated the extension of the
school's influence on the shaping of the students' personality beyond the
confines of class time and the conversion of evening schools into student
clubs. Practice convinces us that this problem is becoming increasingly

55
FOR OFPiCiﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

topical in our time. The operation of the ext :nded-day and whole-day schools
in of particular significance in the regions of Siberia and Us-rhr East

and of the construction of large-scale territorial-industrial complexes. of
which the full employment of all adult members of the family is typical.

The introduction in the schools. vocational-technical schools and tekhnikums
of lessons of moral education and the principles of legal knowledge has an
important role to play in the education of Juveniles. Study of behavioral
ethics should permeate the entire system of instruction. beginning with the
school's elementary grades.

The so-called unfortunate families rquire unremitting attention. it is pre-
cisely the children from these families which are particularly in need of

a used patron and mentor. All such families should be the object of edu-
cative influence. Here is it necessary to display particular concern. at-
tention and a sense of responsibility. working Juveniles must be surrounded
with unflngglnn attention.

in 1977 some 60 percent of high school graduates began work in the national
economy. [7 percent entered a vocational-technical school and 23 percent
entered VUZ's and tekhnikums. Thus yesterday's students represent. for the
most part. the reinforcement of the ranks of the working class and kolkhoz
peasantry. it is the honorable and responsible duty of the labor collectives
and tho nonrnrm or the working youth to foster therefrom a worthy replacement

shift.

Soviet citizens' increased legal conscience and public activeness and their
intolerance of offenses are creating teal possibilities for the further
activisation of the unified front of the social prevention of offenses.

a. Scientific Problems of the Further Strengthening of law and Order and
Socialist legality

Utilization of the achievementﬁ of science is an important factor in the
solution of the social problem of the fight against crime.

V. l. lenin wrote that "history consists of the actions of individuals. and
it is the task of social science to explain these actions...."20

The nature of crime under the conditions of developed socialism and its
objective and subjective causes require comprehensive and in-depth study by
the representatives of a number of social sciences: philosophy. sociology.
political economy. social psychology and jurisprudence. What is needed is
in-dcpth study of the causes and conditions of individual types of offense
being committed and. the main point. scientific recommendtions on their

prevention.

Another napical problem is the personality of the offender. A study of the
criminal's personality is impossible without the buttress of a firm

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR “FFICIAL USE ONLY

theoretical foundation and without philosophical and psychological elabora-
tion of the motlvuu of personality behavior. in recent years Soviet and
foreign philosophers and lhrxist pnyeholagintn have published atumMer of
mononraphical studies devoted to man's social essence. the interaction of
the personallty and the social milieu and public and individual conscious-
ness. the role of the subjective factor in society's deVelopmcnt. the free-
dom of the individual and the increase in his social responsiblity under

the conditions of the building of communism. These studies represent the
methodological basis of a criminolonicai study of the social nature of crime
and its causes. The tank is to continue tlm elaboration of the problems of
criminal policy and of concrete recommendations on the paths and methods and
means of increasing its efficiency. Lav-enforcement activity in the sphere
of the struggle against offenses requires the scientific development of a
number of problems related to the sphere of the philosophical, economic and
sociopolitical sciences.

Scholars specializing in the sphere of sociology and scientific communism
could render considerable assistance in the formation and development of
the science of control in the sphere of law and order. in particular. there
is important significance for practice in the investigation of the problems
of eliminating the causes of offenses in various tiers of society's social
structure and of the influence of scientific-technical progress on the
structure and dynamics of offenses and the formulation of legal procedures
and scientific recommendations on enhancing the role of the labor collec-
tives in the-improvement and reeducatioa of offenders and the prevention of
offenses. Economic science is as yet inadequately investigating questions
of the protection of socialist property and sources of unearned income con-
nected with shortcomings in the planning, production andssie of individual
consumer goods.

An in-depth study of the factors influencing the criminal's personality pre-
supposes a revelation of the social-psychological elements of the public
consciousness. This approach enables us to comprehensively study the per-
sonality of the offender as a participant in specific interpersonal relation-
ships and the vector of particular social-psychological traits and attributes
and to reveal the social-psychological peculiarities of the formation of his
personality.

The social-pnychological approach could make a study both of the psychology
of crime and the mentality of the criminal effective.

An important scientific problem of great significance for a further improve-
ment in the activity of the law-enforcement organs is study of the essence.
content and correlation of persuasion and compulsion at the current stage

of the development of the socialist society. Study of these questions.
which are of great significance in the educative process and in the improve-
ment and reeducation of offenders. is as yet manifestly inadequate. it is

a question of helping the person who has transgressed in the process of his
improvement and reeducatlon. In all cases the attitude toward the offender

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

should be based on the law and imbued with husanisls. if society has set as
its goal the reeducation of the offender so that he should not again com-it
crises. it should implant in his a belief in the possibility of his finding
his place in life. This in the heart of pedagogical optisisn.

The role of pedagogics is growing constantly in the solution of the problems
of strengthening law and order and legality. Studies have been galvanized
markedly in this sphere in recent years. lloweVer. sany relevant problems
still await solution. in particular. it is important that psychologists
and cdueationaiists increase their attention to study of the questions of
the illegal behavior of Juveniles.

It cannot be denied that the nest "neglected people," with whom the family.
the schoolmd the production collective were all unable to cope in the past.
account for a considerable proportion of offenders. 'l'he internal affairs
organs. whose sphere of activity includes these people. oust reorganize

their salads and behavior in a direction desirable for society. But for this
they must he armed with sufficiently effective means of pedagogical influence.

Practice is setting legal science hip, and responsible tasks. it has to

study cosprehcnsively and in depth the interconnections and interaction of
the law with social reality. Naturally. students of law must rely exten-
siveiy on the data of social relations in all their complexity and multi-

rorsity in their research.

The iaw—enforceoent organs will only be able to solve the problems of the
further strengthening of law and order and legality with the help of science.
For this reason it is essential to undertake the purposeful study of the
problems of law and order and the formulation of the corresponding scientific
reconmendations. it was with good reason that the 25th CPSU Congress men-
tioned the need for further study of the problems of the development of our
statehood and the forms and sethods of educational and ideological work.

The conprehensive nature of these problems demands the enlistment of repre-
seatatives of various branches of science in their solution.

The struggle against offenses is not a narrow departmental task. it is u
partywide. statewide. nationwide probles. And it is being successfully

solved in the society of developed socialism by social-political practice
in alliance with science.

FOOTNOTES

i. I.. i. brezhnev. "Leninskim kursow" [Following Lenin's Course]. Speeches
and articles. vol 6. Moscow. 1978. p 627.

2. it. .‘larx and P. Engels. ”Loch." [Works]. vol &. p 336.

J. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soeh." [Complete \lorksl. vol 61. p 1:62.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

ll.
l2.
ll.

lb.

15.
16.
17.

18.

I9.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

L. I. Brezhnev. "Following Lcnln'n Course," vol 5, Moscow. 1976. pp 537-
523.

K. Marx and F. Bnnvlu. "works." vol 25. pnri II. pp 356-357.
Soc VEDOIDSTI VImRIIOVNOGO SOVETA $8511 No Sl . 1977, article 76‘ .
V. I. Lenin. "Complete Horkb," vol 1. p 181.

V. I. Icnin. "Complete Works," vol 33. p 95.

Sec V. l. Lenin. "Complete works." vol 33, p 116.

R. Clark. "Prcalnpnoat' v SShA" [Cri-e in the United States]. Moscow.
1975. p 83.

L. I. ﬂrczhncv. "hailoulna Lenin's Course," vol 5. p 563.

l'lll'.. p 542.

V. 1. Lenin. "Complete Horka." vol 311, p (.08.

See 0. A. Kerimov. in. T. Toshchenkn. "The USSR Constitution and De-
velopnvnt of the Working People's Sociopoliticnl Activenesa" in
SOTSIOIMINIFSKIYB ISSIJIDOVANIYA. No l. 1978. p [7.

V. i. Lenin. "Complete Works." vol 6. p I012.

See K. Marx and F. Engels. "Works." vol 42, p 120.

L. I. Brezhnev. "Following Lenin's Course." vol 6. “ocean, 1974,
pp 95-96 .

unouonrxn I ORGANIZATSIYA PROHYSHLRNNOGO PROIZVODSTVA. No 6, Hovoaibirsk.
1974. p as.

L. I. Brezhnev. "Rech' nn XVIII s"yesde Vscaoyuznogo Leninskogo Kon-
mnnistlcheakono Snyuza Molndczhi" [Speech at the 18th Konsonol Congress].
Hoacow. 1978. pp 17-18.

V. I. lrnin. "Complete Works." vol 1. p 615.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy filosofii". 1978

8850
050:

unoo EN”

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY