ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10685

26' July 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 26/82]

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
”WISEONLY

JPRS M10685
26 July 1982

USSR REPORT

Pouncm. mo SOCIOLOGICAL AFFA2RS
(1000 26/82)

Commas

INTENTION”.

Soviet Participation in Athene MSG) ﬂeeting on lacieu Described
(Editorial Report) ..... ...................................

Soviet Btbnogrephere Vieit Aleeka
(uitori.l ”Pott) 0.0...D.OOOOCOOOOOOO0.000.00.00.00.I0...

“TIM

Greater lole for Sociologiete in Propaganda Bork Seen .
(lb. 3. bio-driven Interview; SWO mu, Jun 82) .......

lnterdieciplinery leeearch on Soviet working Claee Reported

(S. R. Sokolov; VOPROSY IS‘l'Olll, May 82) ...................

lulichenko Sook'e Mvocecy of 'Ploveriu' of Nationelitiee Praieed

(A. Abdulleyev; MST mum. Feb 82) ............ .

Sthnic Dinnaion of Religion Streeeed in New look
(I. V. Gluehkove; 038mm WI V 8888: 8BRIYA I .

PROBLEM! mm W, Nay-Jun 82) ................. .

Republic levepapere ﬂuet Fight Local lationelieu
(I. L. Varm; 038mm W! V 8883: 88RIYA I.

mm mm mm. Nay-Jun 82) ................. ..

Publiehing, Other Activitiee of 'Znaniye' Society

(8m m“. Jun .2) eeoeoe-oeeeeeoeeoeee eeeee eeeoeeeeeeeeea

New Slide Seriea for USSR Jubilee Announced

(G. leseyeva; SWO m. Jun 82) .........

For-nation of Public Opinion Studied by Sociology lnetitute

(u‘:"i‘1 ”mt) eeeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeooeoeeeea

- e - [III - USSR - 35 P000]

ma arm“. USE ONLV

11

lb

16

17

18

20
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

REGIONAL
brand Living Conditions in Uzbek Gantry. id. Described
(A. N. Vinogudov; 033mm mun V 8883; sum 1,
mm mm mm. Hay-Jun 82) ....................

aiming haily Sin Datum in Tajikistan
(uit°'£.l ”pot‘) OOOOOOOOOOIOOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOCOO0.0...

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE GEL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTMTIONAL

SOVIET PARTICIPATION IR Hams UNESCO HIRING 0H BACISH DESCRIBED

[Editorial Report] Hoacov sovmsum man in Buaaian No 3. May-June
1982. carriaa on pp 157-159 a 2000-vord report titled “"l‘he Athena Appeal'
(Anthropologiata Aaainat Racist)" by I. ll. zolotareva. The author reporta on
the participation of Soviet acholara at the MSG) colloquin on racian held in
Athens in March-April 1981. They Joined in the appeal written by the confer-
ence calling on all peoplea to atrugsle minat raciaa in all ita form.

COPYRIGHT: ladatel'atvo "Nauka". "Bovetakaya etnosratiya". 1982

SOVIET W8 VISIT ALASKA

[Editorial Report] Hoecov SOVBTSIA‘IA WA in Russian No 3. May-June
1982. carriea on pp 113-119 a S600-vord article titled "The Visit of Soviet
Bthnosraphara to the 0.8." by 1.8. Gurvich and I. 6. Lyapunova. The article
reporta on the viait of Soviet ethnographera to Alaaka in September 1981 and
providea detaila on their current reaearch on the Alaskan ahoriaine population.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatcl'atvo "Nauka". "Sovetahaya etnografiya”. 1982
(280: 1800/871

FORMALUSIONLY
meomcutustouu

NAHUM].

GREATER R013 NR SOCIOIDGISTS 11'?”th m 8!!!

Hoscov SLOVO man in 81.010 no 6, Jun 82 pp 13-18

[Interview with Prof hull. )bndrhyen. choir-en of the USSR Sociology Associa-
tion. on eociology's inwlvenent in propeaende]

[onsrpte] The question rained er the 26th CPS!) Congrees con-
cerning e reorgeniretion of propegmde eleo fully epplies to
the lecture procees of the epreed of scientific and political
knowledge. This question concern every lecturer ad every
propepnde organizer. Ila-ever. in order to outline the

paths of the reorganization it is obviously neceeeery to
enelyre the ectuel eituetime end circumtences influencing
the efficecy of lecture ectivity in one tiny or the other.

In this connection we eeked Prof ram. Hondabyen. doctor

of philosoPhY. chairmen of the 11883 Sociology Association.
leeder of the (280 Control Co-ittee Leeds-y of Sociel
Sciencee' Philosophy Deportnnt end chair-en of the Scientific-
Hethode Council on lecturing Skill etteched to the All-Union
"Zneniye" Society Boerd. to shore hie thoughts end ensuer

e nder or question. .

[Question] Do the society's orpniretions rely eufficiently on the reeults
of eociologicel research to increese the quality of the lectures?

[Answer] In general. eociologicel reeeerch is being conducted in my regione.
Sociologists ere cited prestigiouly. Although in certein cesee the orgen-
izern of propegmde ere not well diepoeed towerd reseerch: the results ney

be other the: expected; there ere many who ere willing to deprive thee-
eelveo of the feeling of confidence that ell is well end of succeee. But we
should all recell Lenin'e words: "Jmt whet ere theee eucceseee? lleve they
been proven? Do we not have here feiry telee. boestin; end dilettente pro~
niece ('it ie being tuned up." 'e plen hes been drevn up,‘ 've ere sctiveting
forces.’ 've nou guersntee.' 'mdoubted inrovenent' end other cherleten
phr'eeee of which 've' ere such notere)?" Our confidence should be beeed on

*V.I. Lenin, "ioln. eobr. eoEE." ICoqlete Harte]. vol 37, p 90.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a foundation of accurate. indisputable conclusions. It is only possible to
judge the actual state of affairs on the basis of scientific nathods of
analysis. Sociologists. of course. nrely ascertain, race-end and provide
information for the adoption of decisions. Adopting the decisions. however.
is the duty of those who direct lecture propaganda in the rayon, oblsst and
so forth. But in such cases, as Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev observed in his speech
at the 17th 0883 Trade Unions Congress. "not all...lesders display an aspira-
tion...to assuns their share of responsibility, so to speak."

The effectiveness of lecture activity say be reliably gaged today by using
sociological research. To take just one of the lost pagan.” probles—a
differentiated approach to the audience. Procedural race-endations here
depend directly on a study of the thenatic interests of the labor collectives
in which the lectures are being presented. People's sufficiently broad inter-
est in a variety of adajects testifies to a wealth of their intellectual re-'
quireuents. At the one tine the choice of srbjects with regard for the re-
quirements of certain social groups denands mre seriom study.

No less import-1t a problen is the construction of a lecture connincation
model. The lecturer is obliged to take account of the audience's socio-
psychological singularities in order to eccleish educational goals success-
fully. In this connection it would be desirable to develop a eo-unication
nodal based on sociological and sociological-psychological research which
would indicate characteristics influencing the lecturer"; relations with the
audience. Knowing these characteristics and their regularities. we can prepare
with regard for than an opti-l progras of lecturers' instruction in propaganda
skill.

[Question] How do you evaluate as a whole the uthods and procedures of
sociological research into the effectiveness of lecture propaganda?

[Anaver] To speak of the nature of the sociological research into lecture
propaganda as a whole. in the aajority of cases it is conducted as one-tine
audience and lecturer polls. The Iethod and procedure of the surveys amount
to ascertaining the reaction of those polled to this question or the other.

I concede that the inforlation which is obtained is sufficient for reveal-
ing individual characteristics of the lecturing process. But the effective-
ness of the research rises signiﬁcantly if it is conducted in accordance with
fuller programs and the nethod providing for periodic surveys of the basic
"psrueters" of propaganda influence on the audience. There is then an oppor-
tunity to coepare data and evaluate the efficacy of aeasures adopted earlier.

The study of lecture propagmda in accordance with fuller programs lashes high—
er de-ancb on the research sethod. The creation :nder the auspices of the
All-Union "Znaniye" Society Board of a sociology laboratory which would assuae
the fmctions of consultant and coordinator of the sociological research con-
ducted in accordance with assign-ants of republic boards of the society would
be highly desirable. further-ore, this laboratory could formulate standard
Iethods of applied research into lecture propaganda with which it would be
possible to obtain information useful for various links—scientific-nethods
councils. reviewers and the "vaiye" Punishing House.

”OFFICIALIMONLY
mmmmv

Nov. 1: sec. to In, it is necessary to build up nutﬁctcnt sociological data
in order to command that me arc nuded to strengthen the factor:
carting a favorable inflamed on the ntructurc and nature of tho lactate. and
also on the audience's perception of char cmtcnt.

COPYRIGHT: Izdntel'ntvo "Mn", 1982

8850
CSO: 1810/ 733

mmuazouu
woe OFFICIAL USE ONLV

mum

ImRDISCIPLIMIY 338m (ll SOVIET W CLASS mam
lbscow WMSY 1810311 in Russian lo 5, May 82 pp 138-1“.

[Article by s. K. Sokolov: ”0n Hethods of Studying the Contenporary History
of the Soviet Working Class”)

[Test] In Nov-bar 1981 a seating of the prom. group on studying the
Soviet working class of W's [lioacow :State University's] history faculty
with participation of editorial office representatives of the Journal

VOPESY IS‘l'ORIl discussed nothoda of research on the Soviet working class
during the period of developed socialiu. Instructors and associates of the
W. sons other 702's. scientific institutions and journals. graduate students
and students were present at the seating. Main attention was devoted to a
conprehensive analysis of all sides of life and activities of the Soviet
society's leading class. Participating in the exchange of views were
historians and ethnographera. sociologists end statisticians, archive workers.
lath-sticiana and specialists in using electronic coaputors in historical
research.

A. l. Titov. deputy chief editor of the journal VOPIOSY 1810311. described
the work being conducted by the journal in the field of working class :history.

V. 2. Drobishev, supervisor of the problen group, noted that an increasing
nuber of historians of the working class are now turning to the period of
developed socialisn in an attonpt to understand the experiences of research
carried out by representatives of other social sciences. Hence. the range
of questions which nust be discussed: hhe role and place of individual
sciences in studying contenporary developaont of the working class. Its
coeprehensiva research cannot be regarded as a nechenical coebination of
knovledge obtained by various sciences. A coaprahensiva approach is. first
of all, the develop-ant of mified nethodological principles of research;
secondly, nutual onricl-ent of research asthode and techniques; and thirdly.
establish-ant of s cm factual basis which will lake carrying out
coaprehensive research of the working class possible. But in general the
task consists in raising the scientific level of research toward which the
scientists are being guided, first of all, by the decisions of the 26th
CPS" Countess.

"mm“?
'0. OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Recently the problem group cospleted its work on a collective nonograph
entitled "ﬂan Sources on the history of the Working Calss During the Period
of Developed Socialisa." The use of these sources, which asks the study of
phenoaena and processes froa their use side possible. V. 2. Drobirhev said.
sets a great number of tasks before historians. Pirst of all, it will be
necessary to develop adequate nethods of their analysis, which is inpossible
without the use of nathenatical nathods and elect! nic conputers. Which
nethods and how to use then in research on the history of the working class
is not a sinple question.

here it would be expedient to turn to experiences accumulated in applied
statistical develop-eats during analysis of social process dynsnics. Secondly,
the use of ease sources in research on the history of the working class, which
involves application of estheaatical nathods and electronic coaputers,
required a different organisation of work and is inpossible without the
establisbent of a solid sass data base for repeated use.

It is well known that work has begun on establishing a fund of ascbine-
readable docuents in our archives. This process is renarkable in itself.

A historian of the Soviet society, including also of the working class, will
cone across sources of this kind nore often in the future. But perhaps there
are already possibilities at present as regards the question of organizing and
storing “chine-readable date that crops up in the practice of a historisn's
research work in archives. The range of nass sources. V. 2. Drobirhev
continued, includes data fro. nass investigations conducted by sociologists.
hass axaninations are being used increasingly nore often by ethnographcrs.
Concrete social research is often practiced by state and public organizations.
Modern coaputing equipaent and nathenatical netth are being used on an
increasingly wider scale in processing asterials. Hany problens. such as
establishment of a data base or bank. are co-on for all sciences. But
questions arise as to what extent all these eaterials. which have been
collected by representatives of other sciences. can be regarded as a historic
source. like the history of the working class in the present instance. what
are their advantages and what are the shortconings in this plan?

A considerable place in the discussion was occupied by the role and place of
individual concrete sciences in the study of the working class. Host
speakers agreed that participation by these sciences in the solution of a
single conplex probl- does not neon the loss by any of then of their
specific character in learning the patterns of developeents of the Soviet
working class. The purpose of integrating sciences is to give a couplets
picture of this process. In this connection, 0. l. Shkaratan (Ethnography
Institute of the USSR heads-y of Sciences) called for boldly removing the
artificial barriers between sciences, which appear nost of all through the
fault of researchers themselves. One of the soot inportant directions of
conprehensive research is the study of changes in the working class's
structure. This problen has drawn the attention of sociologists. philosophers,
historians and other social scientists for a long tine. The recently held
third all-union conference on changes in our society's social structure was
attended by representatives of various branches of science. The problem of
studying changes in the social structure. in the opinion of 0. I. Shkaratan,
roe OFFICIAL use own

any be defined as a subject of historic sociology and those engaged in the
study of the Soviet working class as specialists precisely in the field of
this discipline. Historians have been reconstructing the past in a plan for
studying sass processes as well as individual events in their particular.
singular nanisfestation. But sociology has been assisting in forsing
typological inagee and in isolating types of social, political and cultural
develop-it.

B.V. Klopov (International Bothera' Hovnent Institute of the 0883 Acedeny
of Sciences) believes that research of ease pheneaene and processes creates
a sort of a background against which people operate. Be is against the
division. which still exists :in literature. of research into historical and
statistical, historical and sociological. concrete historical and so forth.
A. I. Soholov (was), while agreeing with 0. I. Shkaratan on the whole, has
nevertheless noted that historical sociology does not indlude, all aspects
being researched by historical science and therefore it is doubtful that
historians. who turn to studying nssa aspects of the working class's
develop-eat, can be related to this field. Even in this instance the
historians are engaged in analyzing the peculiarity of concrete historic
nanifestations of less processes. The history of the working class renains
the sane even when it turns to netbods of other sdiencee.

The speech by II. S. Poleshchuk (Btluography Institute of the USSR Acaduy

of Sciences) on interrelation of historic and ethnographic methods of
studying the working class was welconsd with such interest. In her opinion,
strmgthenim ties between sciences leads to the use of identical aethods.
Even though ethnography has been practicing a aethod of direct observation
for a long tins. convergence with sociology has enabled it to rise to a level
of ease interrogations—a nore suitable nethod for ethnographic study of

the working class. In cooperation with other institutions, the Ethnography
Institute has conducted lass surveys of workers in the Urala, Krivoy Rog.
Western Ukraine, the Baltic ares. Central Asia. Georgia and also along
national groups of workers in the Volga area. Survey prograns provided for
the study of contenporary fanily way of life, situation in production,
organisation of leisure and so forth. Later. in close contact with
sociologists, all data was processed by electronic conputers. Participants
in the investigations did not concern the-selves with strictly historical
problens but relied on existing develop-ants. first of all, on literature
devoted to changes in the working class's social structure, questions of '
social nobility and history of faeily relations. But it becane evident that
in contenporary ethnic conditions it is inpoesible to asks a decision
without corresponding historic excursions. l'or exanple, the study of
everyday life is inportent for ethnographers as such as for sociologists and
historians. It is precisely in everyday life that social differences at the
prinary level are foraed and felt sore sharply.

Questions related to aethoo's of collecting and appraising the quality of
laterials, their processing and analyzing have occupied a prinary place in

the discussion. All speakers dwelt on this subject in one way or another.

0. I. Shkaratan noted that at present there is an especially pressing
question about repree-Itativeness of data froa individual local investigations

"WWMY
’0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and about the possibility of obtaining a generalized picture of the working
class's development on its basis. The regional and national develonent
peculiarities of its individual detachments are still being insufficiently
considered. A. K. Sokolov dwelt on the source study analysis of aaterials
of sociological research which has a direct relation to the working class.
As a rule. sociological research devoted to topical probl-s of social
development helps historians in selecting subjects and provides a factual
base for their study. Research results as well as materials collected by
sociologists are both of interest to historians. They asks it possible to
check the soundness of results and also say be used in solving tasks of
strictly historic research on the basis of dividing, processing and analysing
a fixed range of data. This applies. for example. to people participating
in important historic events. sass measures and so forth. But sociological

materials are especially inportant in organising research of a comparatively
historic nature.

During the past few years. scientific institutions have implemented large-
scale research programs ainsd at studying the working class. Repeat
investigations for the purpose of analysing changes that occur are being
conducted more often. This increases the value of sociological research

as a historical source. The question has come up on how to store sociological
research materials. So far there are no centers where they could be
concentrated and be accessible to the broad scientific audience. It is well
known that materials of sociological research and public opinion polls

have forned the basis of so-callsd machine-readable archives being established
at major scientific research centers abroad. In addition to information
collected by sociologists, other concrete social research data is supplied

in a machine recorded torn here. Materials. which have appeared in the
process of historians' work with mass sources and which have been prepared
for electronic computer processing. are also stored here. A. K. Sokolov
believes that establishment of such data centers. archives or banks would
sinplify solution of many probl-a, including the use of such data in
historical research. Sons of our research centers and groups have already
accumlated enough asterial which is ready for electronic computer processing.
For example. the problem group on studying the Soviet working class has
nsterials on the 1918 professional census. the 1922 white collar workers
census and information from personal records of workers of sons industrial
enterprises. work is underway in processing materials of the state machinery
census for 1918. the census of responsible trade union workers for 1920,
biograpt- ies of workers-deputies and other mass sources.

I. I. Danilenko (TsGANKh [Central State Archives of the National Bconoay] of
the USSR) described the archive'a work in organising storage of nachine-
readable doct-snts. lie noted that the process of establishing such archives
throughout the world proceeds in two directions. Accepted for storing on
the one hand are materials which exist on machine carriers [neshinnyye
noaiteli] in state institutions and on the other hand scientific research
data to be processed by electronic conputsra. The ‘l‘aGAlIKh's work in this
field is in the first direction. The main source for replenishing state
archiveawith sachine-readabla docuaents are tha sactorial coaputer centers
and data banks. The Main Archives Administration of the 038! has a counter

mommomv
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

center in operation on the basis of which introduction of an automatic
docment information and search systa on the history of the Great October
Socialist Revolution and also on architecture and urban developent of Moscow
and Leningrad is already being implemented. As regards the data that is being
created in social sciences. I. I. Danilenko believes that scientific research
institutions. which have large computer centers. must initiate establisbents
of such data banks. It is done in precisely this way abroad (for example,

the archives of international consortium of stcial and political research

at Michigan University in the United States).

V. N. Shkaratan noted that the data bank on social sciences cannot be
established in a blank space. Sociologists are now attempting to establish

a basis for such data banks: it is planned to publish research materials by
Leningrad and Novosibirsk sociologists and some others by the next sociologist
congress. Repeat investigations will be among such materials, which are
especially valuable for historians. Practically all this research is
connected with the working class.

B. V. Klopov noted that it would be very useful to exchange data processing
netth and experience during comprehensive study of the working class.

lie described how changing trends in the level of professional training and
education were analyzed by comparing population census data and also how
the use of more complex mathematical processing methods makes it possible
to obtain additional information and trace differences among professional
groups according to the level of education.

1.. I. Borodkin (sou) dwelt on the advantages derived from using mathematical
methods in work. These methods are simple enough and universal and have
proved themselves in research devoted to the working class. Unfortunately,
among representatives of various sciences which are united by common tasks,
there appears to be a methodical dissociation and lack of standard packets
of programs for electronic computer data processing. There is a pressing
question about raising the level of technical support for research.
Installation of terminal devices and other auxiliary equipment in educational
and scientific centers can play a great role in this scheme. The solution
of purely technical tasks could have been simplified if there was a selection
of standard programs and a corresponding technical base in establishing a
system at the HGU's history faculty for processing data from questionnaires
of delegates to soviet congresses.

A. K. Sokolov believes that processing of questionnaires of delegates to
soviet congresses will make it possible to trace changes in the composition
of our country's highest organs of authority, participation by workers in
administration of the state, their social aspect. changes in certain groups
and individual destinies of people. Prospects for expanding the data base,
intended for studying participation of the working class in achinistrati'rn
of society and production, are practically unlimited. The methods
denonstrated by B. V. Klopov are particularly efficient for processing

this type of material.

summon“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A good example of integrating methods of various sciences, which was employed
in studying the collective of the "Perishskaya Kommuna" factory. was given

by I. S. Panasova (H00). In I976 a group of sociologists from IHRD [Institute
of International Uorkers Hovement] of the USSR Academy of Sciences conducted
an examination at factories and collected data on the life of workers.
Historians are now using this material. As a result, changes in the
composition of the production collective in a number of important parameters
were compared (age changes, skill and professional training. education and
cultural level of workers). The sociological data is being replenished by
documents from the archives and materials from the factory newspaper WAR.
Content analysis has been used in analyzing the latter. For example. in
studying socialist competition, the analysis of materials which was published
under the heading "who Keeps One's Hord and Bow," made it possible to
establish that forms and extent of workers' participation in competition at
the enterprises have experienced considerable changes compared with the
sixties. Instead of the formerly predominant individual forms of competition,

competition by professionals is practiced more often. Increased specialization
of production leads to increased role of production collectives (brigades,
shops) in organizing and developing competition.

0. I. Shkaratan spoke about the universal character of methods disseminated
in various sciences. The cause analysis, for example, did not originate

in sociology but has been widely disseminated in it. It is one of the most
important trends of contemporary social science. It has not been ruled out
that historians' methodical developments will also be widely disseminated
in other disciplines in the future.

In summing up discussion results, V. 2. Drobishev stressed that the meeting
has shown that there is a growing interest among representatives of various
sciences in mutual contacts. It testifies that the outlines of a unified
integrated approach by representatives of various social sciences are being
marked in the study of contemporary working class. which will make it
possible to promote development and solution of scientific problems.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Pravoa , "Voprosy istorii", 1982

9817
C80: 1800/725

10
F0!‘0'FIJA1.U§I¢NULY
IKIICIHHC1A1.USI(H‘LY

NATIONAL

KULICHBNKO BOOK'S ADVOCACY 0P 'PLOUIRIﬂG' 0P NATIONALITIBS PRAISBD
Baku KOHHUNIST AZERBAYDZHANA in Russian No 2, Feb 82 pp 100-103

[Review by A. Abdullsyev, candidate in philosophical sciences, docent of book
"Rastsvet i Sblisheniye latsiy v SSS!" [The Flourishing and Coming Together
of Nations in the USSR] by H. l. Kulichenko, "Hysl'," Moscow, 1981, 664 pages]

[Excerpts] Soviet social science has been fulfilling its lofty social function
with honor, helping the party in studying and generalizing the new phenomena

in the life of the Soviet people, in improving the scientific direction of

the development of national and international processes, and also in the patrio-
tic and international education of the workers and of the younger generation.

H. I. Kulichenko's monograph which was published last year by the "Hysl'"
Publishing House is an important contribution to this serious party and state
matter.

The author is a major specialist in the field of the Marxist-Leninist theory
of nations and national relations. he is the author of numerous works on

the problems of the development of national relations in the USSR. This mono-
graph is a logical continuation and further development of these works.

The author sees the chief task of his investigation in an attempt to penetrate
into the essence of the processes of the flourishing and coming together of
nations which are occurring under developed socialism. Its successful accom—
plishment is ensured by the skillful application of Harxist-Leninist methodology,
and a consistently class, party, internationalist, and creative approach by

the author to the analysis and generalisation of the complex contradictory
processes of life. In writing the monograph, the author has used an enormous
amount of factual material which serves not as an illustration of well-known
theoretical propositions. which, unfortunately, is frequently the case in

the scholarly literature, but as argumentation for the theoretical propositions
which are advanced, for the discovery of new facets, features, and phenomena,
and for the development of practical recommendations.

The author devotes much attention to his category and conceptual apparatus,

and to a refinement of the content of such basic concepts for the given study

as "national," "international," "the flourishing of nations,“ "coming together,"
“assimilation," "blending," and others. He favors an enrichment of the arsenal

11
IOIIOIIICIAI.UBIGMNLY
FOIflﬂﬂC1A1.USEGMVLY

of means for scientific abstraction, but is against artificial terminology
making and innovations which do not follow from the real needs for a further

deepening of our knowledge of phenomena and, consequently. lead only to
confusion. (p 53)

M. Kulichenko also turns to the age-old controversial issue of the characteristics
of nations. The essence of his position is that the author regards the nation

in a system of historically generated and consolidated communities of people

and through an elucidation of their historical place and role in social progress.
The author takes note of an exaggeration by a number of investigators (N.

D. Dzhandil'din, l. P. Tsameryan, H. s. Dzhunusov) of the role of the ethnic

in the essence of a nation and supports the opinion of Yu. V. Bromley and

Yu. 1. Semenov that the ethnic characteristic is only one of the parameters

and. moreover. not the chief one in the essence of a nation. A nation is

not an ethnic, but a social category. Not limiting himself to proving the
primacy of the social over the ethnic. he discloses the threads of their unity.
The author demonstrates the theoretical invalidity and the practical harm

of both an exaggeration of the role of ethnic factors and an underestimation
of their role.

One of the central places in the work is occupied by a study of the methodo-
logical and general theoretical problems of a further strengthening and develop-
ment of a new social and international community--the Soviet people.

A large amount of space is assigned in the monograph to the leading role of

the CPSU in the flourishing and coming together of the socialist nations,

and to a generalisation of the work experience of the party in the direction

of national and international processes. The chief methodological principle
which the author has placed at the basis of his examination of this question

is the unity of theory and practice in the CPSU's activities. The development
of national relations at the current stage is regarded as a base for the en-
richment of the CPSU's nationalities policy, while the party's policy is looked

upon as a powerful accelerator of the flourishing and coming together of the
Soviet nations and peoples.

One of the important functions of the scientific direction and management

of national relations is the international education of the workers whose
role and importance is constantly growing under present conditions. This

is connected with a large number of factors of an internal and external order
and of a national and international character which are thoroughly analysed
in the work. Touched upon here are such complex issues as the character of
the manifestations of nationalism under developed socialism, and the reasons

for their lasting so long in the absence of classes and strsts whose ideology
and social practice is nationalism.

Of course, not all of the problems touched upon in the monograph have received
a full treatment. The author's position on certain issues cannot be regarded

12
IOIiOFFKJAl.UBEGHVLY
FOI‘D’FIJA1.USIINULY

as undebatable. Certain of his conclusions and propositions are in need of
deepening and reiinenent. llovever, despite this. I. Kulichenko'a nonograph
ondouhtedly nerita the close attention of specialists and will be useful to
ideological workers and to a wide circle of readers interested in the problems
of the developoent of national relations.

COPYlllGlI‘l‘: "Ion-unis: Azerbaydshana", i982

2959
080: “00/600

”WIMWIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIGML

ETHNIC DIMION 0P RELIGION $138889 IN NW WK

Hoscov ossmmsrvmmrr NAUKI V ssss: 8mm 1. mm mm mm in
Mssian No 3. rhy-Jun BZ (signed to press 27 Apr 82) pp 183-188

[Review by B.V. Gluahkova of book "Ateisticheskoye vospitaniye tmdyaebchikhsya:
na mterialskb um A88!" [Atheistic Education of the workers: based on nterial
fron the Udmrtskata ASS!) by 6.1:. ‘Bronina, Izhevsk. Iadatel'stvo Udmrtiya, 1981,
135 Pages]

[ atcerpts] In this book an sttent is nede to generalias eaperimce free atheiatic
education of the workers on the basis of a scientific analysis of sociological
studies of religious vestiges prevailing along part of the population of the lid-art
region. he first part of the book is devoted to a description of the present
status of religiosity in various population groups in the Udmrt area and the
specific nature of the growth of atheise.

For the present-day Udmrt region "a process of pushing religiosity into the
backgrOund is characteristic. For lost of thee religion is becoming an uninportant
utter." (page 26)

Several groups of Old Believers, Old Believers withOut priests [bespopovtsy].
evangelical mristun Baptists and other sects operate in the [Butt region. Now
they are loyal and call for love for their motherland and people. ”Attewts by
the church to adapt itself to present-day conditions do not neen that its ideology
has ceased to be antiscientific, reactionary, antihu-nist and incorpetible with
the interests of the building of co-unisn“ (page 11). In his work with believers
the atheist met take into account the specific nature of their religious danoninstion.
For evangelical Baptists and for Old Believers. devotion to ritual extends to the
perception of all life's processes as God-ordained. and accordingly observance

of this ritual is regarded as a unique naans of insuring "eternal bliss" in the
next world and as a asans of insuring success in worldly affairs. The author
focuses closely on a description of the ethnographic elemts of each religion
practised in the Udmrt region. iron Orthodox Christianity to talent.

The appearance of nodernist trends in all the religions of the Udmrt area reflects
the general crisis of the entire systen of religion Reltanechauung and the atteqt
to adapt by any means possible to the new reality. As an erawle of nodernisa
in lslan an extract is cited in the book iron a serene delivered in the Kaun'
eoeque on 5 Bonner 1965: "Faithful ones! Allah willing. the day after toeorrow.

16
F0! OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7 Novedier. will he the holiday of the Great October Socialist Revolution... which
fulfilled net: of what was foreordainsd in the torn" (page 65). Or: "Let us

work even better and eore conscientiously. for our good work pro-ates the flourishing
of the Iotherland. and that scans we are on the path of truth and are piously heeding

the behests handed down by Allah." {page 65). The author notes that the iqrsssion
is freQuently created in believers "that their lunch is elaost a party lather

Just because he hse proposed that they do not cons to the opaque the following
Friday but rather work to gather in the harvest" (page 68).

Evangelical aarietian Baptists have diacarded the intercession of the priest between
the-selves and god. At the prayer nesting everyone sings. each person considers
hieself an active participant in dealings with god. in atmsphere of ideological
comnity has been established. and this is aluys intessed on the believers.
Propaganda of religious ideas takes place with the aid of technical nouns. in
particular tape recordings of choirs. spiritual hyms, servos and lessons for
children on the gospel stories.

no second part of the hook is devoted to an analysis of the effectiveness of the
oystea of atheistic education of the workers that has been set up in the republic.

writes that in atheistic propaganda special consideration should be given to the
fact that nationalisa and religion are mtually supportive. which. if atheistic
propagenda aeong e-ll and large nations is unskillful. can produce "authr "

toward national features. can result in an increase of religiosity along the
population. As the author notes. cases of identification between national and
religious traditions are encOuntered in practical atheistic work.

common noon AN 8383. 1982

9642
CSO: moo/coo

15
MWUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATICIIAL

REPUBLIC RESPAPBS RUST PICK! LOCAL NATIONAL!“

110ch OBSEWW mun V 5883: 8m 1. ’30me “mom minimum in
Russia: 100 3. lhy-Jun 82 (siped to press 27 Apr 82,- p 171

[Review by 1.1.. Vsrtsnov of on orticlo "Voproey internstsionsl‘nogo vospitoniys
v publitsistike" [Questions of Internstionslist I'ducstion in the Prose] in the
book "Gorisonty publitsistiki: opyt 1 problem" [Press horizons: Experience end
Problsnl en anthology coopilsd by VJ. Arkhiponho. edited by P.1'. Aleksoyev et
sl. Moscow, 1981. pp 188-193]

[Text] Questions of internstionslist educstion in the press are rsiged by D.
mrsunov. Socialist reality itself pronto the need for "sdwncin; the thugs

of the froternsl friendship of the peoples as soon; the soot iwmt in novepepors"
(page 190). This is the result of ths fsct thst the friendship of the peoples

in "s njor foctor in the vitality" of Soviet society. In the usth Soviet
republics it is essential to tsks two isctors into sccount--tho process of
internationalization end the growth of notional consciousness. end, on the other
hand. the distorted ides about the role end piece of tho nstionsl tector in public
life. while subjecting the lsttor to principled. consistent criticise, the party
publicist is obliged to oducote the Soviet person in the spirit of "nilitsnt
inlacebility tomrd an ideology end policy thst is hostile to sociolisl... end
the prscticsl skill to evelusto ell socisl phone-ens tron close positions" (pegs
193).

comma: more AN SSSR. 1982

9662
080: 18W/806

16
FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
MWLMONLY

NATIONAL

PUBLISH”, om ACTIVITIES 0? 'zmmm' SOCIETY
“coco! SIDVO mm in Rneoin lo 6. Jul 82 p 6‘

[Text] The All-Union ”Zneniye"'80ciety will be 35 yeere old in July 1982. In
recent yeere of ite ectivity there hoe been e coneidereble expeuion of the
eociety'e materiel-technicel tecilitiee. It ie in charge of the Polytechni-
cel Hueeu, the Centrel Lecture Bureeu. the centtel Polytechnicel Library,

the theta: Pleneteriu. scientific-technical propegende centere in lbecov,
uningred. Kiev. Pence. Yerevan. ‘l'ireepol' end Glelyebinek, ecientific etheien
centere in Hoecou, We. Teehkent, Out end Bel'tey. the Experimental-
‘l'eeting rectory of Vieuel Aide ad Dennetretion Mental, the "Zneniye"
Publishing Bouee and the journele MM I ZHIZII' , ”WA 23121" ,
awn I 331.16!“ and SLOW anon. In eddition, S9 per-nent lecture bureeue
and 33 pleneterie operete ad 8 journele in the following union reppblice:
mam-4mm in the 33m. MA I ommsrvo, mom I an end TRIBUNA
moan in the lhninlen 883. um I 2317.!" in Lithuania, MN I 231”" in
Azerbeijen, 00‘1le in Botanic end um I m in Georgie ere publiehed
within the ”innin" Society eyetee.

comm: Iedetel'etw "Zneniye', 1982

8850
cso: 1&0/739

l7
”WI-0880813
M‘OGVICIALIBEONLY

NATIONAL

an: suns smss ran ussn MILES mower»
HoecdelDVOLlKTOIAinMeienllo6,Jm82962

[Report by G. Nepyeve. editor of the "Pleket" Pdaliahing Home: "In e Single.
Family ]

[Text] Thia July erbecrihera will receive the eecond ieeue of elidee of the
"Topicel Queetiona of CPS" Policy” eeriee entitled ”In e Single Family”
(author B.V. Tedevoeyen. meow. Plant, 26 atill'a).

The net of alidee with explanatory text in devoted to the 60th anniversary
of the fonation of the 0883, the world'e iiret unified mion nultinationel
worker-peanut atete.

The first atille ere devoted to VJ. 1min. who coqreheneively developed
the queetion of nationality-ante relationa reader the oonditione of the die-

tatorehip of the proletariat end who paid conetent attention to epecific quee-
tione of the formation of a unified uion ultinational etate. The content
of e nuﬁer of the elidee will help the lecturer ahow how in the tonne of
eocinliat building the CPS!) coneietently provided for the accelerated prosteae
of eech repnblic, which nede it poaeible to our-out the ectual inequality

of the peoplee end eneure their energence et the level of develop-ant of our
country'e advenced eocieliat natione and nationnlitiea.

The eudiencea will receive with intereat the etille with tablee and diagram
on the continued increeee in the neterial. and epirituel potentiel of the
union republice end ite mm- uae tor the developeent of the whole country
and on the fact that the 0883 eoonony in e ainsle highly developed national
econouic coqlex.

The elidea will help the lecturer ahow thet internetionelieetion extenda not
only to the econony but elao to the eociopolitical and apiritual apharea of
eociel life. The lecturer will eleo find in the eeriea viauel neteriel on
the fact that the CPSU--the party of internationelieta-ia the guerentor of
the unity. ell-eround develop-nt ad rapprochemt of all the USSR netiona
end nationalitiea.

to
rdeonuuuseouur
momanmouu

The otmctuul-loxlcal diagn- vill M of mutant. in the expo-luau or
much "oblo- - tho «lotion of the nationality qmtlon in th- Sovlct won
an! the tutu-nationalisation of our meaty and will provide a 1d“ of the
nu clunctcrhtlu of tho nu Material co-nlty of people-«ho Soviet

mph.
man: Isdatcl'ttw ”M110", 19”

850
can: 1&0/738

19
”mummy
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

F’ORHATIOR OF PUBLIC OPINIOI 811301!) I! socmuoc! INSTITUTE

[Editoriel Report] Moscow IDVAYA SONIA LIMA PO 0mm
W. "1.08018“?! MI!!! in Rueeien lo 6. June 1982. entries on p 49 e 250-
word description of s nennscript deposited et the 088! Acedely of Sciences
Institute of Scientific Intonation on Sociel Sciences titled "Menu of lines
Infornetion end the Porntion of Public Opinion.” Propered et the Institute
of Socioloqu lesserch. this collective work includes srticlee on nethodo-
logicel prohiens in this eree. the public «land for intonetion. end the in-
fluence of verione typos of ones nedis on public opinion.

commit: Institute neuchnoy infomteii po ohehcheetvennye neuken All 8888,1982
cso: moo/862

20

POIOFFIC‘IALUSIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WIN“.

IMPROVE) LIVING commons 11' um 0012113183)! 050318317

hoecow oesncnsrvmrra NAUKI V 8883: seems 1. ”01m Imucmoco mm in
Meeien No 3. 1hy-Jun 82 (eigned to preee 27 Apr 82) pp 116-120

[Review by A.N. Vinogradov of book "neloviye roete i eblirheniye urovnye rhirni
gorodekogo i eel'ekogo neeeleniye Urbehietene" [Oonditione for the Riee in and
the Bepprochenent of Living Standarde of the Urban end Intel Populations of
Urbelrieten] edited by 1.1. Iotenderov. Uzbek 881 Auden of Sciencee Institute
of Econonice. hehkent. Irdetel’etvo ”Pen." 1981. 166 pegee]

[Text] the book coneiete of e foreword end five cheptere.

anepter 1 ie entitled "The Develop-ht of Social Production-«he lateriel Beeie
for the lepprochenent in the biving Standarde of the Urban and Rural Population."
(A. Abdugeniyev. 11. (human). [hiring the period 1965-1978 the value of the
groee netionel product in the Uzbek 883 increaeed by e fector of 2.7, national
into: by e factor of 2.7, end f ired production capitol throughout the entire
national econoly by e fector of 3.8 (pege 11). The proportion of the cmtion
fund in utilised national inco. for the vase increeeed fron 69.1 to 72.8 percent
(73.7 percent for the entire 0883). AlthOugh the proportion of the acmmletion
fund wee reduced, within it there wee preferential growth rete for eccumletion

of nonproduction fixed cepitel. which eleo remlted in en increeee in the ahere

of nonproduction eccumletion fro. 3.5 percent in 1965 to 11.9 percent in 1975.
About 90 percent of the coneuntion fund ie eeeigned for pereonal coneulption.
Growth retee for utilization of 0188! national incone ere Outetripping growth ratee
for the coneuwtion fund. Deepite the elightly lower ehere of the coneuqtion
fund in the 0:88! cowered with the 0881. ite abeolute eiee ie growing at feeter
retee. 0f the totel voluu of growth in utilized national income. 75.9 percent
went for coneuqtion. but the per capite level of contention in the 0:83]! reneine
coneiderebly lower then the ell-union everege (64 .3 percent in 1978). Thie is
explained pri-rily by denographic factore. in perticuler the higher birth rate
end the epecific neture of the populetion‘e ege structure. which ere resulting

in e greeter feeiliy loading. end eleo by the proportion of kolkho: fer-ere anong
thoee engoged in the netionel. which ie higher then for the US$11 on e whole (pp
17-19).

One prerequieite for the riee in and the rapprochenent of the living etenderde
of the urban and rurel populatione ie the progreeeive ehifte in the etructure of
eociel production. ‘nle eccelereted develop-Int of the induetriel eector of the

21
MWUSEONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national economy and the study growrh of the state sector (in the van froe 75.5
percent in 1960 to 82 percent in 1980) is leading to a store rapid increase in
national incon. an increased level of teoymnt in social production and the
systematic recruitmnt into industry of additional labor resOurces, especially

fros rural localities, and an increase in the proportion of esployed persons with
higher wages and in incomes in general. In the was: the level of real income

for kolkhoz farurs relative to the real incones of workers and emloyees calculated
per fanily ledger rose from 75 percent in 1965 to 87 percent in 1977 (pp 26-27).

Chapter 2 is entitled "Creation of the Material-Technical Conditions for the Rise
in and Leveling of Living Standards for Urban and Rural Populations" (A. Ul'nsov
and l. Blinder). Developlent of the lateral-technical for agriculture is wanting
iaprovesent in the national well-being and its rapprochement between city and
cauntrsyide thrOugh the growth in labor productivity and the rise in the cultural
and technical level of agricultural workers. In the 0155!! an intensive process
is underway to close the gap between industry and agriculture in term of the
capital-to-labor ratio and the electric power-to-worker ratio, along with
productivity and yield on capital. thus. the relationship between indicators for
capital-to-labor ratio in-induatry and in agriculture changed from 3:1 in 1960

to 2.2:! in 1976 (page 56). In grain-growing ferning the transfer to machine
stages of production has been minly coqleted; the systes of Inchinery that has
been set up covers almost all processes in cotton production. but the lecheniaation
of livestock faraing still lags. Even though the electric power-to-worker ratio
in agriculture is growing sore rapidly. at kolkhoass it is almost 1.5 time lower
than in sovkhoaes, and about 30 tiess less than in industry. The authors note
that such a large gap is haspering the transfer of agricultural labor to a variety
of industrial labor. Virtually all kolkhosss and aovkhones now have electric
power. Although the kolkhoaes of the 11188! are ahead of the sovkhoas in terns
of the degree of electric power capacities per 100 hectares of sown area, they
lag in term of the level of the electric power-to-worker ratio.

The nuwer of mechanized cadres at kollthoses and sovkhoaes in the 0288! grew from
125,100 in 1965 to 216,300 in 1978. while their proportion along all workers reached
[0.6 and 13 percent respectively. the nutter of specialists with higher and secondarv
education engaged in agriculture in the UzSSR increased froe 13,600 in 1960 to

76.100 in 1977 (pp 56-57,.

According to economists' calculations. couprehensive eschaniation. the intensification
of agricultural production and the creation of agrarian-industrial associations

make it possible to increase the proportion of workers in industrial categories

in agriculture from 16 to 55-60 percent. increase agricultural production by a

factor of 2.6-2.8 (retaining for the 112833 the role of the country's min cotton

base). build up foodstuffs production at preferential rates for dennd within the
republic and acne exports to other regions of the country. and increase labor
productivity by s teeter of 2-2.5, with corresponding increases in the population's
real incense (p 58).

Gupter 3 is entitled "Growth in Esploynnt and Labor Productivity--the Most
lsportent Factors in increasing the Income of the Urban and Rural Populations"
(P. Rasulev. lJ. latruaiyev and 8. “rakhtayew. At the stage of nature socialise
the qualitative aspects of full onloy-ent of the able-bodied population are saved

22
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the forefront; at this stage. incomes growth depends increasingly on the level
of labor productivity and the intensification of the entire national econony rather
than on increases in the enter of workers. During the period 1960-1976 the nuber
of workers in the 0:883 national economy increased 78.9 perunt with an average
annual growth rate of 3.7 percent. while the corresponding figures for money incomae
were 319.6 and 9.6 percent respectively (page 62).

The preferential growth in labor productivity compared to growth in wages is a
general pattern in socialism, but the degree of this preferential rate is not the
same at different periods or in different regions end republics. In regions where
the living standard is relatively low. preferential growth rates for wages my

be pernitted in the interests of squalintion. In the 028811, during the period
1960-1965 a l-percent pay rise wee equaled by a l-percsnt ilprove-at in labor
productivity; in 1965-1970 the figure wee 1.13 percent. end in 1970-1976 it wee
0.99 percent (the figures for~the whole of the 08811 were 0.52 percent, 0.5 percent
and 0.61 percent respectively; (page 66).

During the period 1960-1976 in the 0688 the average monthly wage for workers and
enployees increased 99.5 percent. wages for kolkhoz fernrs per worker 213.7
percent. paynants and bonuses from public consulption funds 616.2 percent. money
incomes 319.6 percent, and per capita real income by a factor of 2.13 (page 60) .
The level of average yearly wages for Itolkhoz farurs relative to the level of
average yearly wages for industrial workers rose from 62.3 percent in 1960 to 79.7
percent in 1977 wt sovkhoaes the corresponding figures were 55.8 percent to 86.2

percent (page 00, .

All conditions now exist in agriculture in the 0688 for preferential growth in
labor productivity cowared with wages growth. "ages at kolkhoaes have already
reached a level at which its further rise, given preferential growth in labor
productivity. will fully provide the necessary material conditions for reprOuction
of the labor force.

Private subsidiary farming plays an important part in increasing esployment and
the incomes of the rural population. increasing gross agricultursloutput and the
cauntry's food reserves. and in bringing the living standards of urban and rural
populations closer together. In the families of kolkhor farmers in the UzSSR the
proportion of income fron private euhieidary farming is more than one-third (the
figure is one-fourth for the 13511 as a whole). In the 023811 the proportion of
private subsidiary farming in agricultural output rose from 15.2 percent in 1965
to 19.5 percent in 1977. Private subsidiary farming produces 37 percent of potatoes.
62 percent of fruit and berries. 67 percent of meat, 62 percent of milk and 60
percent of eggs. In the Uzssa the main part of consunsr denand for livestock
farning produce is satisfied through private subsidiary farming since livestock
farning accounts only for one-fourth of the total volume of kolkhos and sovkhos

production (page 89) .

Chapter 6 is entitled "The Development of the Material Base for the Services Sphere
as a Pactor in the Rapprochement Between Living Standards in the Urban and Rural

Populations" (Z. Siradzhev, l. Vol'fson and R. mdiyev). In the services sphere
the role of state property (its proportion in fixed capital rose from 50 percent

in 1965 to 77 percent in 1975). and also cooperative and kolhhoa property is playing

23
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e eteedily increeeing role (pege 102). At the eel. tin condition heve eterted
to ripen for the integretion of the wrioue for. of property in this ephere.

(hepter 5 ie entitled “nepprochennt between the Living Stenderde of the “then

end lurel Populetione et the Preeent Stage" (I. blinder. P. neeulev. ‘1'. hereto“.
1. Keri-ave. A. Ul'neov. 1.. Konteeveye. B. nebedehenov end S. likhnnow). the
0:388 re-eine below the everege ell-union level in the degree of developmt in
eociel production (per cepite volume of netionel incom in 1975 wee 63 percent

of the ell-union level. net induetriel output 65 percent; only net egriculturel
output wee elightly higher then the ell-union level) . end in eociel lehor productivity
(by 16 percent). end in living etenderde. nu eein reeeone for thie ere: 1) the
epecific neture of the demgrephic eituetionvin the UeSSR; 2) the inedequete
utilieetion of the able-bodied populetion; 3) the reletively low level of lebor
productivity in egriculture. where newly creeted velue per worker ie 5 percent
leee then for the country ee e whole; lo) inedequete developmt of induetry (pegee
116-116) .

The euthore point out thet under theee conditione. in the long term the riee in
end equelizetion of the living etenderde in the urben end rurel populetione ere
inextricebly linked with e eubetentiel increeee in the growth retee for (Jesse
econouy on the following heeie: nexiu poeeihle recruit-eat of the eble-bodied
populetion into eociel production; optinl dietribution of reeourcee between the
eectore of nteriel production end the nonproduction epheree. teking into eccount
technicel progreee; further developeent of cotton epecieliation in the 11:388.
elong with the netionel econonic cotton couples. which ehould be eccomied by
the releeee of live lebor Ero- egriculture end ite recmitnnt into egriculturel
eectore, eepecielly induetry [ee publiehed] , ieproving lebor conductivity on the
beeie of technicel progreee.

the predominence of the kolkhoe peeeentry in the rurel populetion of the 0:88!
inperte epeciel eignificence to the repprocheeent between the two for- of eocieliet
property during the couree of equelieing the living etenderde or the urben end

rurel populatione.

Deepite the leveling of feniliy inconee. the per cepite level of incom enong
kolkhoz fernere in the 112.883 lege by e fector or more then 2 behind the correeponding
indicetor for industrial workere; thie ie lergely the reeult of the ditterencee

in the ego makeup of the ﬁnally between urben end rurel inhebitente. In the 0:883
there ere 316 pereone per 100 ieniliee of induetriel workere, of which 60 percent
ere eble-bodied for work; the correeponding figuree for kolkhoe fernere ere 696
pereone end 62.5 percent (pege 121). the nudaer of pmionere ie 1.6 time greeter
enong kolkhoz tenure then enong workere end eeployeee. Given thie eituetion.

e eignificent role in equelieing the economic conditione of the different eociel
groupe end urben end rurel dwellere ettechee to reieing the level of utilieetion

of public coneuwtion funde to provide for theee unehle to work.

Given the generel trend towerd repprochennt between the level end etmture of
denend enong the urben end rurel populetione. in the ephere of eetiefying the
deande of rurel dwellere teeny cowlex problene re-in. According to iiguree

ieeued in 1978 on three kolkoeee in the 11683 thet were the eubject of e eociologicel
etudy (387 polleee) 86.65 percent were eetieifed with the Interiel eituetion end

26
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.38 percent vere dieeetiefied; the Monroe for the operation of the club were
19.31 percent end 106.29 percent reepectively. for enppliee of toodemﬁe “.7
percent end 20.1 percent. for induetriel goode 33.06 end 30.42 percent. for
homing condition 51.58 end 15.36. for educetionel fecilitiee 32.80 end 30.95
percnt. So. 82.53 percnt of polleee were confident thet their on plane for
life could be reclined end 1.32 percent vere unenre (pege 65) .

man: man All 888K. 1982

9662
60: moo/a l l

25
MWWONLY
FOIOI'FICIALIBEONLY

RﬁGIOlIAL

CHANGING FAMILY SIZE PATTERNS IN TAJIKISTAN

[Editorial Report] Moscow sommu MIA in Rueaian lie 3. May-June 1982.
carriea on pp 13-26 an 8.000-vord article titled ”The Structure of the Present-
Day Urban Tajik Pauly (Material iron lira-We and Iatara Citiaa".by .L. I.
Honourova. 1111a article mince the for- and atructure of the urban ‘rajik
fanny in Tajikiatan'a oldaat citiaa—Ura-‘l‘yuba and latera. Honourm concludea
that the nuclear family in now the doainant type anon; urban 'rajika but thet the
ao-callad "undivided” fanny. the final developant atasa of the his patriarchal
fully. continuea to be inportant in the old quartera d than citiaa. In the
nodern quartera. failiaa of the latter type are mine-n: but Mouton atreaaea
that both typea of families are part or aocialiat aociaty. The article contains
a wealth of atatiatical data.

COPYRIGHT: lrdatel'atvo Wank". "Sovetakaya etnografiya". 1982

cso: 18007869 m

26
F0. m1. USE ONLY