FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/lOGZQ
2 JULY 1982

'USSR Repoﬂ

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(F0110 22/ 82)

THE CPSU AND HUMAN Rrems

BY
K. U. CHERNENKO

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
m

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and asterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by ms. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornstion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was smsrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within item are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIG‘I LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0P
“TRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINA‘I‘ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL mo SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(P000 22/82)

THE CPSU hm Hum" RIGHTS
BY

K. U. CHERNENKO

CONTENTS

The CPSU and linen Rights
(nssrva “mm. 1981) 0.0.0...OI.IOIOOOOOIOOOOOCOOOOOOOO.D 1

PART I. Equality .. 5
Chapter 1. The Friendship and Fraternity of Peoples ................... 8
Chapter 2. Concern About Soviet Hosea ................................. 19

PART II. Socioeconomic Rights ............................................ 29
Chapter 3. TheHein Social Right .. 32
Chapter lo. Oneof the ﬂoat Important Tasks ............................ 60
Chapter 5. leetely at the hpense of the State end Society ........ . 52

Chapter 6. Unrenittins Attention to the Inprovenent of the housing
Condition. of the worms POOple eeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeso s 60

PART III. Rights in the Area of Culture ................................. 68

Chapter 7. Pros Illiterecy to a Universal Compulsory Secondary

unc‘tion seeseeoeoeeeeeeesosstooeooooesseeseesoeeooeesoeose 71

Chapter 8. The Achievements of Culture to the People . 80

Chapter 9. The Preedos of Creativeer ............................... 90

- a - [III - USSR - 35 3000]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pm Iv- Political Rights and he‘d“. tooeoooeoootooooo0000000000...

Chapter 10. The Soviet People Are the Master of Their Country......
Chapter 11. Man Organizations of the Working People . ....... ......

PART V. Peroonol Rights and Fteedotu ...............................

concluion .0....00.!0.00D.........0......'I0.0000.IOOVIIOOOOIUOOII...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
THE CPSU AND HUMAN RIGXTS
Moscow KPSS I PRAVA CHBLOVEKA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 6 Aug 81) pp 1-208

[Book "The CPSU and Human Rights" by It. U. Chernenko, Izdstel'stvo Agenstva pechati
Novosti, 50,000 copies, 208 pages]

[Text] Introduction

The probleas of the freedom of the individual and democracy, human rights, equality
and humanism are among the aost important problems of the present. They are on the

edge of the ideological confrontation of the two system—socialism and capitalism,
the new and the old world.

Imperialism is powerless to turn back the march of history. Under the conditions
when the might and influence of the countries of the socialist community and the
communist and workers' movement are increasing and the liberation struggle of peo-
ples is spreading, the forces departing from the historical arena are doing every-
thing possible to prolong their existence. In striving to distract the working
people of their countries from the daily manifestations of the deepening general
crisis of capitalism, which rests on their shoulders as a heavier and heavier bur-
den, and in endeavoring to conceal the essence of bourgeois democracy, which de-
prives the nan of labor of real rights and freedoms. bourgeois ideologists and prop-
agandists are attempting in every possible way to represent imperialism as the cham-
pion of daocracy, the good and justice. For this they are resorting. in particu-
lar, to concepts which are connected with what are called "natural" human rights,
which are ostensibly not connected with a specific socioeconomic formation. 0n the
other hand, the fear of the increasing attractive force of real socialism and of
its achieveasnts in the comprehensive meeting of the material and spiritual needs
of the working people and in the development of democracy is forcing them to use
various kinds of insinuations, slander and falsifications with respect to the Sovi-
et Union and the other socialist countries.

In recent times imperialism has brought to the forefront "the idea of a campaign in
defense of human rights," which are ostensibly being violated in the socialist coun-
tries, and particularly in the USSR. The campaign organised by the United States
has assured not only an ideological, but also a political nature. The 0.8. Govern-
ment has declared that "the defense of human rights" is becoming a most important
element of its foreign policy, that it "will concentrate its fire on violations of
human rights in the col-unis: countries...."

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rust oil-lulu. use UNIJ

The fact that the calls for the defense of human rights in the world are coming
from a country in which the ulcers and vices of contemporary bourgeois society are
displayed in a most hypertrophied, distorted form, apparently, little disturbs the
organizers of this sensational campaign. Well. the debate imposed upon us provides
a good opportunity for a comparison of the socialist and bourgeois ways of life,
for the contrast of the real rights and freedoms which the working people of the
Soviet Union and the United States have. ”We have." L. I. Drezhnev noted, "n:
reason to avoid a serious discussion of human rights. Our revolution and the tri—
umph of socialism in our country not only proclaimed, but_also truly guaranteed the
rights of the working man of any nationality, the rights of the masses of millions

of working people--as capitalism has not been able to do in a single country of the
world.

Man is the greatest asset of our society. Having sprung from Great October, it

gave the Soviet people previously unheard of rights and freedoms. which found their
sanction and development in the RSPSR Constitution of 1918 and in the USSR Constitu-
tions of 1924 and 1936. The building of mature socialism enabled us to improve con-
siderably the provisions of the Fundamental Law on the rights of Soviet citizens.
The 1977 USSR Constitution grants them a set of rights and freedoms, which covers
all spheres of economic, political, social and spiritual life and affords the Soviet
people the greatest freedom for the display of all their abilities. Everything in
the name of man, for the good of man-~such is the theme which runs through all its
articles. The famous words of the Communist Manifesto "the free development of

each person is a condition of the free development of all"2 have become the funda-
mental constitutional principle of our state.

It should especially be emphasized that the rights and freedoms of Soviet citizens
not only are proclaimed by the Constitution. but are also guaranteed by economic,
political, legal and other means. In Lenin's words. "the center of gravity is
shifting /from/ [in boldface] the formal [recognition] [in italics] of freedoms (as
was the case under bourgeois parliamentarianism) /to/ [in boldface] the actual guar-
antee of the lexerciae/ [in italics] of freedoms on the part of the working people,
who are overthrewing the exploiters."3 The new USSR Constitution not only expands
considerably the group of rights and freedoms of the Soviet people, but also takes

a significant step forward in the matter of broadening and strengthening their
guarantees.

The leading role of the Communist Party is the most important guarantee of the ex-
ercise of the rights of the working people. From the Leninist documents of the
period of the formation of the revolutionary party of the working class to the de-
cisions of the party congresses and the decrees of the CPSU Central Committee of re-
cent years the concern about the welfare of man and about the all-round, harmonious
deVelopment of the individual has been the main content of all its theoretical and
practical activity, be it questions of foreign policy, the solution of a complex

set of economic. sociopolitical or ideological educational problems. Precisely the
party was the initiator and organizer of the framing of all the Soviet constitu-
tions.

The 26th CPSU Congress once again emphasized that our main goal is a lasting peace
and welfare of the people. The program of the further increase of the well-being

of the Soviet people and the strengthening of the material and spiritual bases of

the socialist way of life are providing the conditions for the more and more com—

plete development of the rights and freedoms of the individual.

2

FOIIOFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
In the west they often restrict the concept of human rights, excluding from it
socioeconomic rights. It is well known that the rights to work. to a free higher
education and to free medical service are not even recorded in the majority of
bourgeois constitutions. It is no mere chance, therefore, that imperialist propa-
ganda says nothing about these rights.

He, in the USSR, include in the concept of the rights of a citizen, along with
political and personal rights, socioeconomic rights. The treatment of human

rights as a unified set, which constitutes the content of the legal status of the
individual in society, is characteristic of socialist democracy. We proceed on the
basis that precisely socioeconomic rights and freedoms constitute the real basis
for the exercise of the political and personal rights and freedoms of a person.

A citizen can feel truly free and equal only when he is free from exploitation and
social oppression, if he is provided an opportunity to participate in the manage-
ment of state and public affairs. We believe that the truly free person should be
sure about tomorrow and about the fact that he will never be deprived of the means
of existence. He should also be sure that the state is watching over his rights
and freedoms, that a material basis has been placed under his rights and freedoms.
This becomes a reality only on the basis of a socialist economic system, which
rules out the possibility of the appropriation of the results of the labor of
others and places at the disposal of man all physical and spiritual values.

The Soviet concept of human rights by no means conflicts with the provisions of the
most important international documents. beginning with the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which was adopted more than three decades ago, and ending with docu-
ments of a later period-the International Pact on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and the International Pact on Civil and Political Rights.

Recent decisions of the United Nations once again confirm the fruitfulness of such
an approach to human rights. In a resolution, which was adopted by the Third Com-
mittee (Social, Humanitarian and Cultural) of the UN General Assembly (Decem-

ber 1980), it is stated: "...For the complete guarantee of human rights and the
full dignity of the human personality it is necessary to guarantee the right to
work, the participation of working people in management, as well as the right to an
education, medical service and the proper diet...." In the resolution it is noted
that "it is necessary to devote identical attention" to the defense of "both civil
and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights."

It is typical that the 0.8. delegation voted against this resolution. For the need
to guarantee the very rights which are absent in America is discussed in the
adopted document.

Soviet legislation in this area goes much farther than the international pacts,
since broader guarantees of the rights and freedoms of the individual are stipu-
lated in it. For example, the International Pact on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights envisages compliance with the right of each person to an education. In the
USSR not only elementary, but also secondary and higher education are free. An-
other article of the same pact speaks about the right to the protection of health,
including the provision of medical assistance and care in case of illness. The
USSR Constitution provides for not only free and skilled medical assistance for all
citizens in case of illness, but also a large number of other measures which are

I!NI(IHHC1A1.USE¢MVLY
FINICHWHCLALIJSEGDNLN

aimed at the protection of the health and the assurance of a long active life of
citizens. The Soviet Union was one of the first in the world to record in its

Fundamental Law the right to housing. This right is not present in the interna-
tional pacts on human rights.

It should be emphasized that in our country the exercise of rights and freedoms

is inseparable from the fulfillment of civic duties. Each Soviet individual is ob-
ligated to observe the USSR Constitution and Soviet laws, to respect the rules of
socialist community life and to bear with dignity the lofty title of USSR citizen.
The Constitution requires that socialist property be guarded and consolidated,

that the interests of the Soviet state be protected and that the consolidation of
its might and authority be promoted. The defense of the socialist homeland, the
promotion of the development of friendship and cooperation with peoples of other
countries. the support and strengthening of world peace are the patriotic and inter-

national duty of Soviet citizens. The USSR Constitution also stipulates a number
of other civic duties.

Our party is steadfastly pursuing the policy: the fulfillment by the Soviet pe0p1e
of their duties is just as necessary an element of democracy as is the exercise of
rights and freedoms.

From the lack of rights to all-embracing guaranteed rights and freedoms-—auch is
the path traversed by the working people of our country under the guidance of the
Leninist party. It was a difficult, unexplored road. “hat we started from, what
paths we took, what difficulties and obstacles we overcame in so doing and, final--

ly, what the rights and freedoms of the Soviet people are today and what the role
and attitude of the CPSU toward these questions are, are told about in this book.

FOOTNOTES

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom" [By the Leninist Course], Vol 6, Moscow,
1974, p 337.

2. K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Barks]. V01 5. p 447-

3. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 36, pp 73—76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PART I. EQUALITY

In the Harxiat-Leniniat interpretation equality is the requirement of identical
political rights for all the citizens of the state. "...Hhen socialists speak of
equality," V. I. Lenin indicated, "they always understand by it /social/ [in ital-
ics] equality, the equality of social status....”1

.The idea of social equality has a centuries-old history. Since the time that human
society was split into classes and private property and the exploitation of nan by
man arose. it has acted as a eighty motive force in the historical process.

At one time the bourgeoisie also adopted this idea in the struggle against feudal-
ism. However, after coming to power, it confined itself to the declaration of the
formal legal equality of everyone before the law, but retained the private owner-
ship of the means of production. The exploitation of man by man and. consequently,
social inequality were thereby legitimized. "At each step in the most democratic
bourgeois state," V. I. Lenin wrote. "the oppressed masses encounter a flagrant
contradiction between lformal/ [in italics] equality, which the 'democrecy' of the
capitalists proclaims, and thousands of [actual] [in italics] restrictions and con-
trivances, which make the proletarians [hired slaves/ [in italics]. Precisely this
contradiction is opening the eyes of the masses to the rottenness, mendacity and
hypocrisv of capitalism."2

Marxism-Leninism teaches that only the destruction of the main sources of social
inequality-the private ownership of the means of production and the exploitation
of man by man-~creates the prerequisites for the achievement of genuine social
equality. "...Genuine, actual equality cannot exist.“ V. I. Lenin indicated. "un-
til every possibilitx of the exploitation of one class by another has been com-
pletely eliminated."

As a result of the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution firm bases of
equality were created in our country. In the political field there was the estab-
lishment of the power of the workers and peasants. In the economic field there was
the nationalization of the land, the main means of production and banks. In the
social field there were the abolition of all national and national republic privi-
leges, the elimination of the estates, ranks, titles and grades, the proclamation
of the equality and sovereignty of all the peoples of Russia. the establishment of
a single titleo-citizen of the Russian Soviet Republic.

The Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets. which was held in January 1918, adopted
"The Declaration of the Rights of working and Exploited People," which was signed

FOIJOIIIC1A1.U831NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by V. I. Lenin. In it there was set at the main task "...the abolition of all ex-
ploitation of man by man, the complete elimination of the division of society into

classes, the merciless suppression of the opposition of the exploiters, the estab-
lishment of a socialist organization of society....“‘

Under the conditions of the most vicious struggle, which the reaains of the exploit-
ing classes launched against Soviet power, our party and state, of course, were not
able to immediately grant all citizens equal rights. The RSFSR Constitution of

1918 proclaimed: "Guided by the interests of the working class as a whole, the
Russian Socialist Federated Soviet Republic deprives individual persons and in-
dividual groups of the rights which are exercised by them to the detriment of the
socialist revolution." The nonworking eleaents were restricted in political and
socioeconomic rights. The honorable right to defend the revolution with arms in
hand was granted only to the working people. The subsequent course of events com-
pletely confirmed the correctness of this solution of the question of equality.

Hith the building of socialism and the elimination of the remains of the exploiting
classes all USSR citizens were placed in an equal position with respect to the
means of production. An equal opportunity to work, to make use of spiritual values,
to display their abilities in seience, art, sociopolitical activity and others was
granted to them. The previously established restrictions in rights were abolished.
This found its ratification in the USSR Constitution of 1936.

Now the Soviet people are living under the conditions of a mature socialist soci-
ety. It guarantees the equality of working people in all areas of economic, polit-
ical, social and cultural life. Our Constitution ensures the equality of all So-
viet citizens before the law regardless of origin, social and property status, ra-
cial and national affiliation, sex, education, language, attitude toward religion,
type and nature of occupation. place of residence and other circumstances. All
citizens of the union republics are USSR citizens, equal members of the fraternal
family of peoples who inhabit our country.

Socialist equality presumes not only the equal rights, but also the equal duties of
citizens. which they have to society and the state. It was F. Engels who wrote
that "/equal duties/ [in italics] are for us an especially important addition to
bourgeois democratic [equal rights/ [in italics], which deprives the latter of
their specifically bourgeois meaning."5

Under socialism there are no such classes or social groups, no such people, who
enjoy privileges in the exercise of rights or are exempt from the performance of
duties. The requirements of the law are equally binding for all Soviet people. No
exceptions can be made to this basic rule. "The awareness that he is equal in
rights with the other members of society. can always count on a just, respectful
attitude toward himself...," L. I. Brezhnev indicated, "is important to every

person."6

It should be noted that the distribution of material wealth in socialist society is
carried out only with allowance made for the quantity and quality of labor. here.
of course, more skilled labor is paid more. But already now, at the stage of ma-
ture socialism, a high degree of the equalization of the socioeconomic status of
the members of society is being achieved.

6

FIII(HHHC1AI.USEGDNLY
Public consumption funds are playing an especially great role here. Free training
and the improvement of skills, free medical assistance, grants, pensions, stipend:
for students, pay for regular leave, free travel authorizations to sanatoriums and
vacation homes and travel authorizations at concessionary prices, the upkeep of
children at preschool institutions and a number of other payments and benefits are
provided fro- then. The state with the extensive participation of public organiza-
tions and labor collectives is ensuring the increase and fair distribution of these
f unda .

The centuries-old struggle of the working people for their liberation is insepara-
bly connected with the struggle for national equality and the emancipation of
women. How the just solution of the national question and the equality of women
and men were accomplished in our country under the guidance of the Conmunist Party
will be discussed below.

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 24, p 364.
2. Ibid., Vol 37, p 255.
3. Ibid., p 262.
6. Ibid.. Vol 35. p 221.
5. K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch." [Horks], Vol 22, p 235.

6. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kursoe" [By the Leninist Course], Vol 5, Moscow,
1976. p 70.

7

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(M“LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1. THE FRIENDSHIP AﬂD FRATBRNITY 0F PEOPLES

USSR citizens of different races and ne-
tionalities have equal rights.

Pron Article 36 of the USSR Constitution

More than 100 different nations and nationalities, the sire of which is from

137 million (Russians) to 506 (one of the nationalities of the Far East-the Negi-
dale), live in our country. All of then. in conformity with the USSR Constitution,
have equal rights. This is one of the main achieve-ants of socialism.

K. Marx and F. Engels linked the solution of the national question with the class
struggle of the proletariat. "Along with the antagonism of the classes within na-
tions the hostile relations of nations among themselves will also decrease.“1 it
is stated in the Communist Manifesto.

V. I. Lenin creatively developed the ideas of the founders of scientific com-unian.
During the era when imperialisu aggravated the national conflicts to the utmost,

he developed the theory of the national question. showed the role of the national
liberation struggle and elaborated the scientific principles of the national policy
of the Communist Party.

V. I. Lenin discovered the law of two opposing trends in the national question un-
der the conditions of capitalism. “Developing capitalism," he wrote. "knows two
historical trends in the national question. The first: the awakening of national
life and national move-eats, the struggle against any national oppression, the cre-
ation of national states. The second: the developnent and increase of the fre-
quency of all kinda of relations anong nations, the breakdown of national barriers,
the creation of the international unity of capital, of economic life in general,
politics, science and so on."2

Both of these trends are in irreconcilable contradiction under inperialism. The
internationalization of socioeconomic life takes place here not by the cooperation
of equal nations, but by the subordination, as was the case in prerevolutionary
Russia, of the less developed nations to the more developed ones. This inevitably
evokes the resistance of the peoples who do not enjoy full rights. That is why,
along with the tendency of unification, the tendency toward the eradication of the
forcible forms of this unification is growing.

liIIClﬂﬂCIAl.lEIICNVLY
Tsarist Russia was called a prison of peoples. The non-Russian peoples, who made
up 57 percent of the population, were completely without rights. were subject to
rapacious exploitation and suffered humiliations and insults. In the outlying na-
tional regions of Russia, which had the status of colonies and semicolonies, tsar-
ist governors or governor generals threw their weight around unchecked. The work-

ing people languished here under double oppression-—that of the local and Russian
landowners and that of the capitalists.

The policy of the tsarist government was aimed not only at oppressing the peoples,
but also at stirring up national animosity and hatred. Such a policy helped the
classes which had been in power to oppress the working people.

Our party proceeded from the fact that the unification of the working people, re-
gardless of their national affiliation, in the common struggle for a new social
system, which was free of all types of oppression and exploitation. is the main
thing in the solution of the national question. However, such a union could be
lasting only on the condition of voluntariness and the mutual trust of nations.
Therefore, "the right to self-determination for all the nations included in the
state"3 was one of the basic requirements of the first Party Program.

If we require succession for all oppressed and underprivileged nations without ex-
ception, V. I. Lenin explained, "it is not at all because [we are for the succes-
sion/ [in italics] of then, but [only] [in italics] because we are for /free, volun-
tary/ [in italics] convergence and merging, and not for forcible convergence and
merging. /0nly/ [in italics] for this reason!"“

For those peoples who wish to remain within the unified state, the party demands
the broadest autonomy; the promulgation of special laws which would guarantee the
free development of national minorities; the complete equality of citizens regard-
less of race and nationality; the right of every citizen to speak at meetings in
his native language; the introduction of the native language at all local public
and state institutions and others. It customarily confirmed these demands in the

decisions of its congresses and conferences right up to the Great October Social-
ist Revolution.

The national policy of the Communist Party won it the sympathy and support of the
broad masses. The program slogan of the right of nations to self-determination at-
tracted the oppressed peoples of Russia to the side of the proletariat and its
party and contributed to the education of the working class in the spirit of pro-
letarian internationalism and to the joining of the national liberation movement
with the all-worker and peasant movement into a united front.

In the class battles the fighting unity of the proletarians of all nationalities
grew stronger. the alliance of the working class and the working peasantry of all
the peoples as a powerful international revolutionary force arose. The Communist
Party, which united in its ranks the working people of different nationalities,
acted as the cementing nuclear of this alliance from the moment of its creation.
All this was one of the decisive things, which governed the victory of Soviet power
in the outlying national regions of Russia, undermined the old national animosity
and served as the basis of the emergence and development of the movement for the
unification of the peoples into a free and fraternal union.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-Uli UH'ILIAL U51: ONLY

The Great October Socialist Revolution was the main political condition of the im-
plementation of Lenin's national program. On 25 October 1917* the Second All-
Russian Congress of Soviets in the appeal "To the Workers, Soldiers and Peasants!"
solemnly declared that Soviet power would provide all the nations of Russia with
the real right to self-determination. within the Council of People's Commissars
(the Soviet Government), which was formed by the congress, the People's Cmmnissar-

iat for Nationalities was created for the practical implementation of the national
policy.

On 2 November 1917 the Council of People's Commissars adopted “The Declaration of
the Rights of the Peoples of Russia," in which there were proclaimed the equality
and sovereignty of the peoples of Russia; their right to free self-determination,
up to succession and the formation of an independent state; the abolition of every
and all national and national religious priVileges and restrictions; the free de-

velopment of the national minorities and ethnic groups, which inhabit the territory
of Russia.

In December 1917 the Soviet Government recognized the national independence of the
Ukraine and Finland.

The working masses of the outlying national districts greeted with enormous enthu-
siasm the news about the socialist revolution. "We, the farm laborers and Kirghiz
poor from Narynskiy Uyezd," it was stated in one of the documents from those times,
"greet the power of the soviets and the leaders of the proletariat in the person of
the Communist Party, express sincere gratitude to them for liberating us from the
oppression, exploitation and coercion of the hated bourgeois system.

"He vow to no longer permit the dominion of rich landowners. manap [pl manapy] and
kulaks and to keep the enemies of the revolution under strict surveillance, to de-
str0y them mercilessly."S

During the first postrevolutionary years independent Soviet republics emerged on the
territory of the former Russian Empire. The first of them-the Russian Republic--
was founded as a federation, as a free union of free nations. Following it the
Ukrainian and Belorussian, then the Azerbaijan, Armenian and Georgian Soviet Repub-
lics were formed. Autonomous state formations of different peoples also emerged.

"We have given /all/ [in italics] the non-Russian nationalities [their own/ [in
italics] republics or autonomous oblasts,"6 wrote V. I. Lenin, who considered the
creation of the national state system of the peoples of our country to be one of the
most important achievements of the October Revolution.

The bourgeoisie and its accomplices-~the Hensheviks and Social Revolutionaries--
said at that time that the Bolsheviks were striving to destroy the multinational
state. In reality it was not the communists. but the bourgeois nationalists, who
were seeking the breakup of Russia. Whereas prior to October they were for a
"united indivisible" bourgeois Russia and strove only for the granting of internal
autonomy, following the victory of the revolution they began to fight for the split-
ting qaof the former Russian Empire into individual bourgeois border states. This
was an antinational policy.

 

*The dates of 1917 are given in Old Style—Editor.

lO
FOI‘DFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
The Communist Party directed the unifying movement of the peoples. It led the
masses with the greatest patience and caution to the practical solution of the prob-
lem of creating a united confederate multinational Soviet state.

Hhereas during the first period after the victory of October, when the working peo-
ple of the different nationalities felt independent for the first time, their co-
operation did not yet have an entirely definite, strictly established form, during
the period of the civil war and foreign intervention it assumed the form of a close
military-political allitnce. The pooling of economic and military resources and

the fraternal solidarity of the Soviet peoples ensured their victory over the do-
mestic and foreign counterrevolution.

During the postwar period, when the questions of the restoration of the war-torn

economy were brought to the forefront, the military alliance was augmented by an
economic alliance. During 1920-1921 the relations of close mutual assistance of

the independent Soviet republics were consolidated in a number of treaties.

At the same time the problems of defending the gains of the revolution against in-
ternal and external enemies, of eliminating the economic dislocation and building
socialism advanced more and more urgently the need for the state unification of the
Soviet republics. Under the circumstances of the capitalist encirclement none of
them, taken separately. could consider itself guaranteed against economic attrition
and military defeat on the part of world imperialism.

Our National Anthem begins with the words: "Great Russia has united for ever the
indestructible union of free republics." Precisely the Russian Soviet Federated
Socialist Republic became the center of the unification of all the peoples of our
country. The largest centers of industry and culture were located here. The Rus-
sian Federation gave the other Soviet republics military-political, diplomatic,
economic and cultural assistance. The Russian proletariat, which was steeled in
the revolutionary battles. opened the way to a new society to all the previously
oppressed nations and nationalities.

At that time the RSFSR was the only country in the world, in which the experience
of the peaceful cohabitation and cooperation of a large number of nations and na-
tionalities on the basis of their mutual trust and voluntary aspiration for union
turned out well.

The 10th party congress, basing itself on the experience of the RSFSR, wrote down
in its resolution on the national question: "The federation of Soviet republics,
which is based on the commnn character of military and economic affairs, is that
common form of state alliance, which makes it possible: a) to ensure the integrity
and economic development of both the individual republics and the federation as a
whole; b) to encompass all the diversity of the life, culture and economic status
of the different nations and nationalities, which are at different stages of de-
velopment.-and in conformity with this to use one form of federation or another;
c) to organize the peaceful cohabitation and fraternal cooperation of the nations
and nationalities, which in one way or another have linked their own fate with

the fate of the federation."7

The First All-Union Congress of Soviets, which was held on 30 December 1922, on the
basis of the free will of the peoples, proclaimed the formation of the Union of

11 I

FOI10FFKJAL.USI¢MHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Socialist Republics (the USSR). The first USSR Constitution (1925) consoli-
dated legislatively the unification of the Soviet republics into a united multina-
tional state on the basis of their sovereignty and full equality.

All the subsequent experience of the Soviet national-state system confirmed the
vital strength of these basic Leninist principles. "The Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,? it is stated in the USSR Constitution of 1977. “is a united multina-
tional union state, which was formed on the basis of the principle of socialist
federalism, as a result of the free self-determination of nations and the voluntary
unification of the equal Soviet socialist republics."

Let us note in this connection that in contrast to the Soviet Union the bourgeois
federations were created not on the basis of the voluntary desire of their members,
but by means of coercion, often with the resistance to this of a portion of the
united states, at times by means of various methods of the acquisition of terri-
tories (seizure, purchase and so on). Usually they are the administration consoli-
dation of territories which are not connected with the national composition of the
population, with the boundaries of the habitation of individual nationalities. For
example, in the United States there are 50 states, but not more than 7 basic na-
tional groups. At the same time the representatives of such an indigenous national-
ity as the Indians do not have here their own national-state formation.

Exercising the right to self-determination. the numerous nations and nationalities
of our country established during the years of Soviet power various forms of the
national state system: union and autonomous republics, autonomous oblaats and onrugs.
The number of national state organizations increased. Thus, whereas in 1924 there
were a union republics, 13 autonomous republics and 13 autonomous oblaats, now

15 union republics, 20 autonomous republics, 8 autonomous oblaats and lO autonomous
okrugs belong to the USSR.

The USSR as a confederate state is based on the principle of democratic centralism,
which makes it possible to combine in the best way the cumin“ international inter-
ests of all the peoples of the Soviet Union with the national interests of the re—
publics. Here centralism concerns the basic questions of the leadership of the
country as a whole, which is dictated by the requirements of the socialist economy
and by the interests ofthesociopolitical and spiritual development of society and
the defense of the country. But it operates in fundamental interrelationship with
democracy, with the broad independence of the republics and the unhampered develop-
ment of their initiative.

/In accordance with the USSR Constitution, all the union republics are sovereign
Soviet socialist states/ [in boldface]. This means that they retain their inde-
pendence and freedom in the exercise of state power in all matters of political,
economic. cultural and public life, with the exception of those which belong to
the jurisdiction of the USSR.

The sovereign rights of the union republics are backed by real guarantees. Each
of them has its own constitution, which corresponds to the USSR Constitution and
takes into account the national features of the republic and its citizenry, solves
by itself questions of the administrative and territorial system and has the right
to enter into relations with foreign states. The territory of the union republic
cannot be altered without its consent. The right of free succession from the USSR
is reserved for each union republic.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Supreme Soviet of the union republic is the sole legislative organ which is
competent to settle all questions which have been assigned to the jurisdiction of

the union republic by the USSR Constitution and the constitution of the union re-
public.

In addition to the nationality, which gave the name to the republic, other peoples
and national groups, which are characterized by the uniqueness of economic develop-
ment, the way of life, culture and other features, live on the territory of several
union republics. They have national territorial autonomy of one level or another.

The autonomous republic is a Soviet socialist state. which is a part of the union

republic. It has its own constitution, but also has the right to promulgate within
its competence laws which conform to the constitutions and laws of the USSR and the
union republic, has its own higher organs of state power and organs of state govern-

ment and its own citizenry. The territory of the autonomous republic cannot be al-
tered without its consent.

The autonomous oblast is also included in the union republic. It enjoys self-

government in its internal affairs and has its own national organs of state power
and state government.

The autonomous okrug is a form of the autonomous Soviet state system of the small
nationalities of the Far North. It ensures them administrative self-government on
questions of domestic life, has local national organs of state power and gOVernment.
The autonomous okrugs (some of them unite two or more nationalities) are within
krays and oblasts, which is conducive to the quickest possible development of the
economy and culture of small peoples.

The rights of the autonomous oblasta and okrugs are backed by the corresponding
laws of the union republic of which they are a part.

/In conformity with the USSR Constitution the Soviet Union is based on the principle
of the equality of the unified union republics/[in boldface] regardless of the size

of their population. the amount of territory. the level of economic development and
any other features.

The formation of the highest organ of state power of the country-the USSR Supreme
Soviet-—which consists of two equal chambers (the Council of the Union and the
Council of Nationalities) is a guarantee of equality. Both chambers consist of an
equal number of deputies, and equal representation from each union republic (32 re-
presentatives each) is exercised in the Council of Nationalities. Moreover, each
autonomous republic, oblast and okrug is represented in the Council of National-
ities accordingly by an equal number of deputies (ll, 5 and 1).

National equality is also secured by the fact that the right to participate in the
settlement of questions. which are assigned to the competence of the USSR, in the
USSR Supreme Soviet. the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, the USSR Government and
other organs of the Soviet Union has been granted to each union republic. The union
republics have the right of legislative initiative. Each of them is represented in
the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet (in the person of one of the deputy chair—
men) and in other all-union organs.

13
FOR 0i!ﬂ€1Al.lEﬂE(ﬂULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All the autonomous republics, oblasts and okrugs are represented in the Supreme
Soviets of the corresponding union republics subject to the size of their popula-
tion. The representative of the autonomous republic is one of the deputy chairmen
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the union republic.

The equal legal opportunity to use one's native language and the languages of the
other peoples of our country in schools, in the press, on radio and television is
granted to USSR citizens. The laws of the USSR, the decrees and other acts of the
USSR Supreme Soviet are published in the languages of the union republics. This
principle is also strictly implemented in the activity of the courts.

Criminal and other liability for the violation of national equality has been estab-
lished in our country. In accordance with the USSR Constitution, any direct or in-
direct restriction of rights, the establishment of direct or indirect advantages of
citizens according to racial or national attributes, as well as any advocacy of ra-
cial or national exclusiveness, animosity or disrespect, are punished in accordance
with the law. "The duty of every USSR citizen," it is stated in the Constitution,
"is to respect the national dignity of other citizens, to strengthen the friendship
of the nations and nationalities of the Soviet multinational state."

Legal equality, which was established during the first days of Soviet power, did

not yet imply, however, the complete and final settlement of the national question.
[One of the main political goals of the party was to put an end to actual inequal-
ity. to overcome the economic and cultural backwardness of the formerly oppressed
nations and nationalities/ [in boldface]. This required considerable time. It was
the 10th party congress that indicated that "the elimination of actual national in-
equality here is a lengthy process which requires the determined and persistent
struggle against all vestiges of national oppression and colonial servitude."8

Basing itself on the ideas of the founders of scientific communism and taking into
account the historical peculiarities of the peoples of the former tsarist colonies
(Kazakhstan, Central Asia, the Caucasus and the North), the party set the task to
bring them to socialism, bypassing the capitalist stage of development. The policy
of the rapid economic, cultural and social development of the outlying national re-
gions was adopted.

The firm conviction that economic equality is the basis of actual equality was the
starting point of this policy. The formation of the USSR afforded extensive oppor-
tunities for the solution of this problem. The Communist Party and the Soviet
state. having concentrated the material resources of the republics, channelled them
into the creation of the material and technical base of socialism on the scale of
the entire country. In a historical short period, in 10-12 years, modern, first of
all heavy, industry was created in our country by the efforts of all the peoples.

The incustrialization of the union republics was a component of the overall program
of the creation of the material and technical base of socialism. The rational dis-
tribution of productive forces with allowance made for both the needs of the eco-
nomic development of the entire country and the problems of the development of the
economy of the formerly backward outlying national districts played an enormous
role here. The extensive development of natural resources and the construction of
industrial complexes were launched in the regions of Central Asia and Kazakhstan,
in Transcaucasia, Siberia and the Far East. in the Urals and the Volga River area,

16

lili<lﬂﬂC1Al.USE10NLY
that is, in those regions, the population of which to a considerable extent was
made up of previously oppressed nations and nationalities. The merging of the eco-
nomic potentials and resources of all the republics expedited the economic develop-
ment of each of them and the equalization of the levels of this deVelopment. For

a long period the subsidies from the union budget to the republics of Central Asia
and Kazakhstan exceeded their revenues.

Our party and state devoted much attention to the solution of the problem of the
socialist transformation of the agriculture of the national republics and the
changeOVLr of the masses of many millions of peasants to the path of collectiviza-
tion. Vast assets were allocated for the construction of machine and tractor
stations and hay-cutting machine stations. the implementation in Central Asia of a

land and water reform, the changeover of nomads to a settled way of life and other
measures.

The material, political and organizational assistance on the part of the working
class and all the working people of the developed regions of the USSR was the deci-
sive condition of the rapid economic development of the republics of Central Asia,
Kazakhstan and Transcaucasia. This unselfish assistance took the for. of a con-
sistent and comprehensive direction, which was elaborated by the party, of the all-
union economic policy. The Russian working class and the Russian people agreed to
sacrifices in the name of the overcoming of the backwardness of the outlying na-
tional districts, seeing in this their lofty international duty. Hhereas in 1960
the gross output of RSFSR industry had increased sixfold as compared with 1928,

in Kazakhstan and Georgia, for example, it had increased eightfold, in Tajikistan
and Armenia--ninefold, in Kirghizia--lO-fold.

Our party considered as one of the most important tasks in the settlement of the
national question the elimination of the cultural backwardness of the previously
oppressed peoples. It was also possible to accomplish this task only with compre-
hensive assistance and a high rate of cultural construction. In the shortest pos-
sible time an end was put to mass illiteracy in the national regions. They were
covered by a network of schools. libraries, clubs, tskhnikums, higher educational
institutions and scientific institutions. The party and the state sent to the
former outlying districts of Russia technical specialists, physicians, educators,
cultural workers and others. Additional assets were allocated for the needs of
public health and education. Great privileges in the enrollment in higher educa-
tional institutions were given to national personnel. The result was significant
gains in the development of culture, which were Iade in all the union republics.

The development of modern industry, the socialist reorganization of agriculture
and cultural construction enabled the once oppressed people, who had been without
rights and were at different stages of social development—-from the patriarchal-
tribal to the capitalist system-in a historically short period to overcome their
economic and cultural backwardness and to achieve all-round prosperity.

it should especially be emphasized that /the inviolable friendship of the peoples
of the Soviet Union was one of the most important achievements of socialisal [in

boldface]. This friendship. which by right we are proud of today, is the result

of the overcoming of the vestiges which we inherited from the era of national op-
pression. There was among them. in particular, great power chauviniam--the

15

IKIICHWHCJAI.USE(N§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reflection of the'past privileged status of the Russian nationality. Moreover,

among a number of peoples, who had not yet been able to free themselves from the
old national resentments, nationalism made itself felt. It goes without saying

that both of these phenomena hindered the cause of the actual unification of the
republics into a single state union.

The resolute struggle against nationalistic vestiges, and first of all great power
chauvinism, was one of the most important tasks of our party. In rallying the
working people in the struggle for the building of a socialist society on the plat-
form of socialist internstionaliam, it demanded the consideration of the national
feelings of each people. "In any case," it was indicated in the second Party Pro-
gram, "particulsr care and particular attention to the vestiges of national feel-
ings among the working masses of the nations which were oppressed or were without
rights are necessary on the part of the proletariat of those nations which were
oppressing nations."9 As a result of the implementation of Lenin's national policy
during the years of the building of socialism the feelings of past distrust of

the peoples for each other were replaced by the feelings of mutual friendship and
fraternity.

The Great Patriotic War was a rigorous test of the durability of the Soviet multi-
national state. Fascism, when preparing for war, was convinced of its collapse,

of the revival of national internecine wars. Goering's "green folder" ordered the
fascist officers: "In the Baltic countries to use in the interests of Germany the
conflicts between Lithuanians, Estonians, Latvians, Russians.... In the south--
the existence of conflicts between Ukrainians and Russians.... In the Caucasus-
the conflicts between the natives: Georgians, Armenians, Tatars and Russians."10

However, the war smashed these plans of the enemy. The friendship of the peoples
of the USSR, which had been cemented during the years of the building of socialism,
was one of the main sources of the victory of the Soviet Union in the encounter
with Hitler fascism. The representatives of all the peoples and nationalities of
our country defended shoulder to shoulder at the fronts of the Great Patriotic

War their freedom and independence, their revolutionary gains.

During the years of Soviet power the character of each of the union republics
changed beyond recognition. In a few decades they had traversed a path which under
different conditions had required many decades. The emergence and development of

a new historical community--the Soviet people--are the general result of those pro-
found changes which occurred in the material and spiritual life of our society and
its internationalization. This cmmmunity marks a higher stage of the sociopoliti-
cal unity of all the nations and nationalities of the Soviet Union. Such concepts
as "the Soviet man," "the Soviet economy," "the Soviet character," "Soviet patriot-
ism" and "the Soviet way of life," which originated during the years of the build-
ing of socialism, serve as its expression. Soviet means common to, characteristic
of each nation and nationality of our country.

At present the national question in the form in which it arose following the revolu—
tion has been settled completely, definitively and irrevocably. It is no longer a
question of the elimination of national oppression, inequality and antagonism.

“This is an achievement," L. I. Brezhnev noted, "which by right can be ranked with
such triumphs in the building of a new society in the USSR as industrialization,
collectivization and the cultural revolution."11

16
FIHICNﬂHCJAI.USE(NVLY
In the capitalist world in the years which have passed since the victory of Great
October the national conflicts have become even more acute. Apartheid and the
bloody racial clashes in the scuthern part of Africa, the anti-Arab, Zionist poli-
cy of Israel and the fierce national struggle in England, Canada, Belgium, the
Netherlands, Spain and other capitalist countries are evidence of this.

As is known, the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe contains obligations of the states to respect the rights of people be-
longing to the national minorities and their equality before the law and to provide
them with every opportunity to exercise these rights. Along with the European

states the United States also signed this act. how do things stand here with the
meeting of the assumed obligations?

Take, for example, the Indians. Today in the United States there is no more of an
oppressed, impoverished national minority without rights. The reservations on
which the bulk of the 850,000 Indians live are in the full sense outdoor slums.
Pitiful housing, glaring poverty, diseases, nearly universal unemployment (up to
75 percent)--such is the lot of the ancestors'of those who inhabited this land be-
fore the appearance of the first European colonists.

And how is the status of blacks, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans better? At present in
America, just as lo or 20 years ago, the representatives of the numerous national
minorities, and first of all blacks, drag out a miserable existence and are subject
to cruel exploitation and discrimination in all areas of public life.

Under the conditions of mature socialism the party program and party policy in the
area of national relations are aimed at the all-round development and the all-

round convergence of the nations and nationalities. these are two objective, inter-
connected processes which express the unified international essence of socialist
society, in which the convergence of nations is the lending trend.

Of course, this does not mean that in the sphere of national relations all ques-
tions have already been settled. The dynamics of the development of such a large
multinational state as ours gives rise to many problems which require the respon-
sive attention of the party. The CPSU. it was emphasized at the 26th party con-
gress, struggled and always will struggle resolutely against such manifestations,
which are alien to the nature of socialism, as chauvinism and nationalismé against
any nationalistic oddities, be it, for example, antisemitism or Zionism.1 Unfor-
tunately, these vestiges still spear at times. For centuries lie behind them and,
moreover, western propaganda is trying to stir them up.

He oppose tendencies which are aimed at the artificial eradication of national
peculiarities. But to the same extent we consider their artificial exaggeration
to be inadmissible. The party sees as its sacred duty to educate the working
people in the spirit of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism, the
proud feeling of belonging to the unified great Soviet homeland.

It is quite clear that the socialist transformations changed substantially the
ratio of the international and the national in the spiritual life of all the peo-
ples of the USSR. National equality, the fraternal friendship and cooperation of
the peoples, their mutual spiritual enrichment and the all-round prosperity of
the Soviet nations, which have become firmly established in our country-~such is
the result of the Leninist national policy of our party.

17
IKIICIHHCIAI.IEHE(HVLY
2.

3.

4.

s.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12'

IIIICHHWCIAL USE(DNLN

FOOTNOTES
K. Marx and P. Engels. "Soch." [works]. Vol 4, p 445.
V. I. Lenin. "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete works], Vol 24. p 126.
"KPSS y rezolyutsiyskh 1 resheniyskh s"yezdov. konferentsly 1 plenunov Tax”
[The CPSU 1n Resolution and Decisions of Congresses. Conferences ad Plenuns of
the Central Committee]. 8th edition, V01 1, Moscow, 1970, p 63.
V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 30, p 120.

Quoted from T. U. Usubsliyev, "Prunee—-stolltss Sovetskogo Kirglzstsns"
[Prunze-Cspltsl of Soviet Kirghizstsn], Moscow, 1971. p 63.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.." Vol 44, p 1&6.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyskh...," 8th edition. Vbl 2, Moscow, 1970, p 250.
Ibid., p 252.

Ibld., pp 65-66.

Quoted from "Osnovnoy zskon nsshey zhizni“ [The Fundamental st of Our Life],
Moscow, 1978, p 239.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskln kurson" [By the Leninlst Course], Vol 4, Moscow.
1974, p 50.

See "Haterisly XXVI s"yezds KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress],
Moscow, 1981, p 57.

18

IN]! OIIICIAl.lEﬂ£(HVLY
CHAPTER 2. CONCERN ABOUT SOVIET HOMER

"omen and men have equal rights in the USSR.
Prom Article 35 of the USSR Constitution

It is possible to judge the level of culture and social maturity of society from
what position woaen hold in it.

In prerevolutionary Russia, for example. there were laws in accordance with which

a wife without the permission of her husband could not obtain a passport, purchase
property, enter the civil service and change place of residence. The meat diffi-
cult, unproductive household labor, which lowers human dignity and does not con-
tain, in the words of v. I. Lenin, anything that would proeote their deVelopment

in any way,1 traditionally was the lot of women. According to the 1897 census,

of the total number of women working for hire. household servants and farm labor-
ers made up 80 percent. only 13 percent were employed in industry and construction
and a percent were employed at institutions of education and health. Only 11 women
per 1,000 had more than an elementary education.

A letter, which the working women of the Trekhgornyy (formerly the Prokhorovskiy)
Factory addressed in the 1930's to the party Central Committee, eloquently attests
to what the fate of women was under the conditions of tsarist Russia. Here are
lines framthis letter: "Many of us. the weavers and spinners. had occasion to
drink a bitter cup of sufferings and slavish humiliation at the Prokhorovskiy
Factory. Our life was gloomy and pitch dark, like a grave. Barracks. a joyless
existence on plank beds, religious intoxication, drudgery for meager pay, fines
and constant threats of firing. the despotic mockety of the foremen--a11 this was
our lot.

"We gave birth at the machines. The awful threat of dismissal and hunger cogstant-
1y hung over ud. There are few words, but a bottomless river of sorrow...."

Bourgeois democracy with its high-flown slogans of freedom and equality in fact
concealed the lack of freedom and inequality of women. The ideologists of the hour-
geoisie, in attempting to justify this situation, reduced the essence of the prob-
lem to the biological "tragedy" of women.toostensib1y their inferiority, incapaci-
ty for independent creative thought.

K. Marx and F. Engels gave the correct answer to "the question of women's rights."
Tney proved that the unequal status of wonen in society stemmed from socioeconomic

l9

FOI1OIIKJA1.USE(HVLY
IlﬂttﬂﬂﬂtJAl.USE13NLY

causes. "The genuine equality of women and men," P. Engels wrote, "can, in my
conviction, be accomplished only when the exploitation of both by capital has been
eliminated, while the running of the household, which is now a private business,
has been turned into a sector of social production."3 Having revealed the roots
of the social inequality of women, the founders of scientific communism also indi-
cated the only correct means of eliminating it. It is the path of the class
struggle and the socialist revolution.

V. I. Lenin regarded the struggle for the emancipation of women as an integral
part of the common cause of the workers. "The proletariat," he emphasized, "can-
not achieve complete freedom without having won complete freedom for women."4

Lenin's theses on the equality of women were included in the first Party Program,
which envisaged for women equal political rights with men, advanced special re-
quirements of the protection of female labor and motherhood and clearly indicated
that proletarian women can achieve their liberation only by participating in the
revolutionary struggle of the working class.

The party educated working men and women in the spirit of the community of their
interests, awakened in women class self-consciousness and the sense of human digni—
ty and involved them in the general proletarian struggle against the autocracy and
capitalism. And the women's proletarian movement was never separated in our coun-
try from the general workers' movement. Working women followed the party and took
an active part in the October Revolution. "Hithout them," V. I. Lenin said in a

talk with K. Tsetkin, "we would not have triumphed. Or we would have barely
triumphed.”s

Great October brought emanicpation to working women. During the first months of
its existence the Soviet government razed to the ground the former laws which had
placed women in a subordinate position. The decress on civil marriage and divorce
eliminated, in Lenin's words. "the eagecially heinous, ignoble, hypocritical in-
equality in marriage and family law." The equality of political and civil

rights and equal pay for equal labor were established for men and women, social
insurance was introduced, which provided for leave to pregnant women with the re-
tention of wages. The equality of the political and civil rights of women with
men, which was proclaimed by the resolution, was sanctioned legislatively in the
first Constitution of the Soviet Republic.

The Communist Party and the Soviet state had to solve the important and difficult
problem of the actual emancipation of women. "For the complete liberation of women
and for their real equality with men," V. I. Lenin indicated, "it is necessary for
there to be a public sector and for women to participate in general productive la-
bor. Then women will occupy the same position as men.”7

During the first years of Soviet power the main thing was to enlist as many women
as possible in socially useful labor. It was also important to increase their
political consciousness. level of culture and education and to break them away from
"household slavery."

The second Party Program for the first time in history became a program of the prac-
tical solution of the problem of women's equality. In particular, there were set

in it the tasks-by means of ideological and educational work to eradicate all

20

FOI10FFKJA1.UBI(HVLV
traces of the former inequality or prejudice with respect to women, especially
among the backward strata of the proletariat and the peasantry. to free women from
the physical burdens of obsolete housekeeping by its replacement with communal

apartment houses, public dining rooms, central laundries, children's nurssries and
so forth.8

Taking into account the sociopolitical and cultural backwardness of women, which
was inherited from the recent past, the party found forms and methods of work,
which were called upon to help women workers and peasants in mastering the rights
granted to them by the revolution. All-Russian and all-union congresses, rallies,
conferences and meetings of women in the oblasts, krays and national republics were
held for this purpose. Commissions on agitation and propaganda among working women,
which were then transformed into women's departments, were set up in the Central
Committee of the Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks), and then in all the
oblast. kray, gubernia and uyezd party committees. Organizers for work among women
were distinguished in the party cells.

The women's departments held for women workers and peasants discussions, meetings.
conferences and congresses, published leaflets, pamphlets, journals and the special
series of books"Little Library of the woman Worker and Peasant." The women activ-
ists of the women's departments took part in the discussion of the drafts of laws
affecting the interests of women. were the initiators of many government decrees

and submitted suggestions when reviewing the budgets and the plans of the develop-
ment of the national economy.

A peculiarity ofthe work of the women's departments consisted in the fact that they
combined propaganda and agitation with the involvement of women workers and peas-
ants in the everyday activity of the authorities. This was accomplished by means
of meetings of delegates. They were permanent courses on the familiarization of
women with public work. The delegates were elected at the meetings of women work-
ers, peasants and housewives according to an established norm (1 out of 10, 20 or
50). In 1926, for example, 620,000 delegates were elected in the country, the next
year--7h7,000.

Reports on political themes, as well as questions about the practical activity of
the local soviets, cooperatives, trade unions and individual economic organs were
included in the programs in accordance with which the meetings of delegates worked.
The delegates were sent for practical work to the departments of labor, public
education, public health, food supply and social security. They participated with
the rights of instructors in the examination of complaints and statements, the re-
ception of visitors. the supervision of various departmental institutions. The
most capable remained for permanent work at the place where they had done practical
work.

The elections of delegates were held annually throughout the country and were con-
ducted as mass political campaigns. Millions of working women of the cities and
villages participated in them. Through the meetings of delegates the party estab-
lished strong ties with the broad masses of women.

One of the forms of the involvement of women workers and peasants in the building
of socialism was their participation in the organization of dining rooms, kinder-
gartens and nurseries.

21

FIIICIHHCJAI.lENE(HVLY
run annual. use ONLY

After the Great October Socialist Revolution a network of institutions for the
care of the health of mother and child was set up. In spite of the famine and dis-
location, in 1922 there were already 300 women's advice bureaus, children's poly-
clinics and outpatient clinics in the country. An allowance was given to nursing
mothers, while free food was give to children.

The first steps in the new life were especially difficult for the women of the
east, where patriarchal-tribal and feudal relations, customs and institutions:
polygamy, the buying and selling of brides, the giving of juveniles in marriage
and so forth, still continued to remain. The customs of seclusion by a stone wall
shut off Uzbek, Tajik and Azerbaijani women from the outside world.

Our party attached particular importance to the work among the working women of the
east. women's clubs, mobile yurts and houses of women peasants were set up. These
were unique institutions. Legal and medical advice bureaus, nurseries and kinder-
gartens and production workshops operated in them, in addition to the school for
the elimination of illiteracy, a library and amateur art circles.

The emancipation of the women of the east required from the party considerable per-
sistence, perseverance and the overcoming of the fierce opposition of fanatics.

In order to get if only in some way an idea of the urgency and complexity of the
problem, let us cite a few reports from the newspaper PRAVDA for October 1927.

This was the time when our revolution was preparing to mark its 10th anniversary.

Here are lines from these newspaper reports:

"It was awfully difficult for the eastern woman, and many of the remnants of the
aervile past have continued to remain in the way of life to this day. Many regions
still do not know the use of soap, they cripple women in childbirth.... They often
continue to regard a woman as a creature of the lowest order. The savage customs
do not always enable her to obtain an education on the same level as and together
with men....

"In 1927 in Uzbekistan 90,000 Uzbek women took off the yashmak.... The entire re-
actionary world-the mullahs, rich landowners, kulaks—-was up in arms against those
who had exposed themselves.... The religious fanatics are tormenting the women
delegates, who are performing propaganda and organizational work among the women,
up to massacres of them.... But there is no return to the past. Yesterday's
woman slave now is the same master of the Soviet Union as all the working people."9

The Communist Party exerted considerable efforts in order to involve women in so-
cial production--the basis of bases of their actual equality and economic independ-
ence. During the first years of Soviet power this question was specially discussed
at a number of party congresses.

The difficulty, apart from other things, consisted in the fact that the building of
socialism in our country was begun under the difficult canditions of economic dis-
location and unemployment, which were due to the civil war and military interven-
tion. Nevertheless, our party did everything possible to retain and attach women
to production. The 13th Congress of the Russian Co-unist Party (of Bolsheviks) in
the resolution "0n Work Among Women Workers and Peasants" emphasized that "the re-
tention of female manpower in production ls of political importance and faces the

22
FINICMHHC1A1.USE(MVLY
party with the task of intensifying the improvement of the skills of female labor
and of involving women, where possible, in those sectors of production, in which
female labor has not been used at all or has been used to an inadequate extent.“10

Socialist industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture, cultural con-
struction created the conditions for the mass involvement of women in industrial
and agricultural production and for their familiarization with socialist culture.
On the instructions of the party Central Committee a special five-year plan of the
involvement of women in production was drafted. In 1936 as compared with 1929 the

number of women workers and employees in all sectors of the national economy had
increased by more than 5 million.

The universal literacy of the women who worked in industry was achieved by the end
of the 1930's. The vocational and technical training of boys and girls was equal-
ized. The fact that a percentage (quota) of the mandatory admission of women and

girls to the schools of factory and plant training was established, was conducive
to this.

Profound changes occurred in the status of the peasant woman after collectivization.
Participation in social production brought her actual emancipation and equality
and made her free and economically independent from men.

The numerous and diverse measures, which were implemented by the party. as well as
by the soviets, trade unions and Komsomol on accustoming women workers and peasants
to conscious participation in the building of socialism, made it possible to sur-
mount the enormous gap between the social status of men and women. The increase of
the activeness of working women increased the gains of socialism. while each gain
was a new step in the matter of their actual emancipation and equality. The USSR
Constitution of 1936 consolidated the achievements of the Soviet state in the solu—
tion of the question of women's rights, granted women equal rights with men in all
areas of economic, state, cultural and sociopolitical life and indicated the guaran-
tees which ensure the actual exercise of these rights.

Having withstood the tests of the Great Patriotic War and having overcoming the
difficulties of the postwar restoration period, our party and state invariably de-
voted much attention to the questions of improving the status of women. Legisla-
tion protecting their rights was developed and improved. An extensive network of
children's preschool institutions. as well as institutions which protect the health
of mother and child was set up. The number of personal service and public dining
enterprises increased.

In specifying the main tasks of the building of communism, the party in the deci-
sions of its congresses has indicated the need for the complete elimination of the
remnants of the unequal status of women in daily life, the creation of the social
and everyday conditions for the combination of motherhood with the more and more
active and creative participation of women in national labor and public activity,
in the study of science and art. The great achievements in the development of the
socialist economy made it possible to implement a new vast set of social measures.

The USSR Constitution of 1977 sanctioned all this.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI(ﬂﬂﬁ(]Al.USE10NEY

/Among the guarantees of equality the granting to women of equal Opportunities with
men in labor. the remuneration for it and job promotion are among the first/ [in
boldface]. This is not by chance. Precisely the participation of women in social-
ly useful labor creates the real basis for their actual equality with men.

The highest rate of employment of women in the world is ensured in our country. In
the total number of workers and employees they constitute more than half. Here it
is important to note that the largest number of women work in industry, including
in the sectors which require high skills of the workers. Profound qualitative
changes are also occurring in rural labor, which is being transformed more and more
into a variety of industrial labor. The number of women machine operators and

operators of automated poultry factories and industrial livestock complexes is
increasing.

The number of women engaged in primarily mental labor is growing rapidly. Among
specialists with a higher and secondary specialized education there are more than
16.6 million of them. or 58 percent. Nearly one out of two engineers in industry

is a woman. Among agronomists, livestock experts and veterinarians with a higher
education they constitute about 50 percent. Hbmen are taking a leading role in
public health and public education, where they constitute two-thirds of all physi-
cians and nearly three-fourths of the teachers. More than half a million women work
as directors of industrial enterprises and sovkhozes, the managers of construction
projects, institutions of trade, public health, public dining and personal service
and of administrative institutions.

Among all scientists about 40 percent are now women. They are actively participat-
ing in the solution of problems of thermonuclear fusion and space biology, mathe-
matical physics and genetics, the chemistry of high-molecular compounds and radio
engineering, philosophy. There are 116,100 women who have the academic degrees of
candidate or doctor of sciences, 2,900 have the title of academician, corresponding
member of the Academy of Sciences or professor.

Let us note for comparison that, for example, in the United States in the mid-1970's
among engineers only 1.1 percent were women, among physicians--7 percent, among
physicists and mathematicians--less than 1 percent. As the journal U.S. NEWS AND
HORLD REPORT reports, approximately 80 percent of the working American women are
employed in the lowest paid positions. The situation in other capitalist countries
is also similar. We are nolonger speaking of unemployment, which among the women of
the capitalist world is considerably higher than among men. For example, in the
United States it is 1.5-fold higher.

ISoviet legislation completely rules out any discrimination of women as compared
with men in wages/ [in boldface]. In all the sectors of the national economy the
same wage rates, salaries and rates for the job being performed are set for men and
women of the same skill. Moreover, a number of privileges and benefits are stipu-
lated for women by Soviet legislation. Thus, in the case of a transfer to an easier
job in connection with the birth of a child the average wage for the former job is
retained for them. For women machine operators in the case of identical pay the
output norms are 10 percent lowerthan for men.

In the United States again the labor of women receives considerably less pay than
the labor of men. Moreover, this differencc is steadily increasing. Whereas in

26
I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1956 a woman working a full workday received 63.9 percent of the wage of a man of
the same skill, by the end of 1978 she received only 58.9 percent.

[The USSR Constitution guarantees women equal opportunities with men to obtain an
education and vocational training] [in boldface]. The doors of schools, vocational
and technical, secondary specialized and higher educational institutions have been
opened wide to them. women and men are trained at them according to uniform pro-
grams. At secondary specialized educational institutions girls make up 56 percent
of the students and at higher educational institutions-~52 percent. Out of every
1,000 women employed in the national economy, more than 800 have a higher and sec-
ondary (complete and incomplete) education.

Let us also cite in the connection several parallels. In the United States, for
example, during the 1976/77 academic year at medical schools only 25 percent were
girls, at some law schools their proportion was only 20 percent. In France many
higher educational institutions and vocational schools in reality are closed to
girls. Higher education in Japan is a male privilege.

The CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers are devoting particu-
lar attention to the improvement of the vocational training of women workers. It
is very important that women workers, who have children up to the age of 8 years.
now undergo retraining and the improvement of skills with leave from work and the
retention during training of the average monthly wage.

[The USSR Constitutions guarantees women equal opportunities with men to partici-
pate in sociopolitical and cultural activity/ [in boldface]. The following data.
for example, attest to this. In our country women make up 09.5 percent of the
total number of people's deputies elected to the Supreme Soviets of the union and
autonomous republics and to the local soviets. In the highest organ of state
power--the USSR Supreme Soviet-there are 487 women, or nearly one—third. 4 of them
are members of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet. women head standing com-
missions of deputies, hold important posts in the governments of the union and
autonomous republics. Many of them have been elected the chairmen and secretaries
of the executive committees of local soviets of people's deputies. 0f the workers
of the staff of the organs of government, 66 percent are also women.

For comparison let us note that in the American Congress of the present session
there are only 21 women, and in the upper chamber-the Senate-there are only 2.
American women hold slightly more than 10 percent of the elected posts primarily
in local bodies of government.

I would especially like to emphasize the active role of woaen in the life and activ-
ity of our party. 0n 1 January 1981 there were 4.6 million of them in the ranks of
the CPSU, or 26.5 percent. Among the secretaries of the rayon and city party com-
mittees women make up 21.4 percent. while among the secretaries of the primary par-
ty organizations-—more than 35 percent.

[Along with other guarantees of actual equality the USSR Constitution provides for
special measures on the protection of the labor and health of women/ [in boldface].
The use of female labor in especially difficult processes and in processes harmful
to the health is prohibited in our country. It is not permitted to enlist them in
jobs which involve the carrying and shifting of loads greater than the norms set

25

F03¢lﬂﬂChULlEEZONLY
FKHRCHHWCJA1.USEIONLN

by the law. Additional benefits-the right to a shortened workday, additional

leave and a preferential pension-are envisaged for the women of a number of occu-
pations.

Today nearly 50 scientific research institutes of hygiene and labor protection.
motherhood and childhood, obstetrics and gynecology are conducting research for

the purpose of providing favorable working conditions of women and protecting their
health.

Strict state supervision of the compliance with the legislation on female labor has
been established in our country. An important role here belongs to the standing
commissions of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the Supreme Soviets of the union and autono-

mous republics, kray and oblast soviets of people's deputies on maternity, child
development and the work and life of women.

In the Soviet Union motherhood is recognized as the most important social function
of a woman. /The USSR Constitution guarantees the creation of conditions which en-
able women to combine labor with motherhood] [in boldface]: legal protection,
material and moral support, including the granting of paid vacations and other bene-
fits. the gradual shortening of the work time of women who have young children.

There has been established for all working women loo-percent paid maternity leave
regardless of their length of service. The number of paid days for caring for a
sick child has been increased. Monthly monetary grants for children in needy fami-
lies have been introduced.

Mothers having two children in the case of the birth of each subsequent child re-
ceive a lump sum state grant, while those having four or more children in the case
of the birth of each subsequent child receive a state grant monthly. "omen, who
have borne and raised to the age of 8 five or more children, receive the right to

a pension for age at the age of 50 instead of SS. Mothers of many children are
commended with special state awards.

In our country there are more than 10,000 maternity advice bureaus. Tens of thou-
sands of medical specialists watch over the health of the mother and child. From
the first days after birth medical observation over each child is set up.

/The Soviet Constitution guarantees the equality of women not only in labor and
sociopolitical activity, but also in family relational [in boldface]. The state is
displaying concern about the family by creating and developing an extensive network
of children's institutions, organizing and improving personal and public dining
service, paying various types of grants and granting benefits to families with many
children.

The network of personal service enterprises is steadily growing. In 1980 there
were 270,000 of them in the country, while the amount of personal services came to
7.8 billion rubles. Public dining has also developed into an important sector of
the national economy.

Today 16.4 million children attend preschool institutions in the USSR. This is
nearly one out of every two children in the country. of the total amount of the

26

IIIICHHHIIA1.UEE(NVLY
expenditures on their upkeep the parents pay only 20 percent, the remainder is re-
imbursed by the state. Additional benefits have been established for some families,
especially those with many children.

Let us note for comparison that, according to the testimony of the American journal
NEWSWEEK, at present in the United States, with allowance made for governmental.
private and commercial children's institutions, at the officially recognized child
day care centers there are fewer places than there were in 1945. Of the 7 million
small children who have working mothers, 5.6 million have to be turned over to the
care of baby sitters or be left at home without supervision.

Special schools and groups with an extended day. at which school children stay
after classes under the supervision of teachers, have been set up in the Soviet
Union. The number of these schools and groups is steadily increasing. At the be-
ginning of the 1980/51 school year there were 13.2 million pupils in the schools and
groups with an extended day, at boarding schools and other boarding institutions.

In our country there !s an extensive network of country Pioneer camps. In the sum-
mer of 1980 about 14 million children spent their vacation at them. On the average
a vacation at a Pioneer camp costs parents 12 rubles. This is a fourth of its ac-
tual cost. For children with poor health year-round Pioneer camps of the sanatorium
type have been opened. at which the children are treated and are taught in accord-
ance with the syllabus of the general educational school.

From year to year in our country the number of Pioneer camps, sports and health
and work bases for adolescents is increasing, the network of palaces and houses of
Pioneers, stations of young technicians and naturalists. children's clubs, sports
and music schools and other children's institutions is being developed.

Much has been done, but there are also unsolved problems. Even now it is difficult
at times for a woman to combine the duties of a mother with active participation
in production and public life.

Extensive and effective measures, which are aimed at the improvement of the work-
ing conditions of working women, family recreation. personal and cultural service,'
were specified in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. It is a question, in
particular, of the introduction of partially paid leave for the care of a child up
to the age of 1 year, a partial workday for mothers of young children, the enlarge-
ment of the network and the improvement of the operation of children's preschool
institutions, schools with groups with an extended day. all personal services and
others. The party Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers have adapted
the decree "0n Measures to Increase State Assistance to Families Having Children."

Soviet women by right have occupied a worthy place in the life of our society. "In
speaking about the great deeds of our people," L. I. Brezhnev noted, "it is impos-
sible not to talk about what role the Soviet woman plays in them. Our homeland is
obliged in many ways for its achievements and triumphs to her dedication and -
talent."n

27

F0.‘0FFNJA1.UBE1MVLY
1.

2|

3.
4.

So

6.
7.

9.
10.

11.

IN3I OFFICIAI.U8EZCNNLY

FOOTNOTES
See V. I. Lenin, “Poln. sobr. soch." [Co-plate Works], V01 39, p 202.

Cited fro- Ye. Bochksrevs and S. Lyubinove. "Svetlyy put'" [The Bright Path],
Moscow, 1967, p 3.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Works], V01 36, p 294.
V. I. Lenin, “Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 50, 158.

"Vosponinsniys 0 V. I. Lenine" [Rnniniscences About V. I. Lenin], V01 5, Moscow,
1969 p P 100.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," V01 62, p 369.

Ibid., V01 39, p 201.

See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyskh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenu-ov Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenuns of
the Central Committee], 8th edition, V01 2, Moscow, 1970, p 43.

PRAVDA, 6, 6, 9 October 1927.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh...," 8th edition, Vol 3, Moscow, 1970, p 123.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kurson“ [By the Leninist Course]. V01 5, Moscow,
1976, pp 545-566.

28

IIIICIﬂﬂI1A1.UBB(NNLY
PART II. SOCIOECONOHIC RIGHTS

The rights to work, relaxation and the protection of health, to social security and
housing are grouped with the socioeconomic rights of Soviet citizens, which are set
down in the USSR Constitution. The mighty national economic complex, which has been
created in our country during the years of Soviet power, serves as a firm material
guarantee of the exercise of these rights. The socialist economic system ensures
the crisis-free, stable and dynamic development of all its sectors, the growth of
public wealth and the increase of the well-being of the working people.

The steady increase of the material and cultural standard of living of the people
is the highest goal of the economic strategy of the CPSU. Back in 1902 when pre-
paring the first Party Program V. I. Lenin indicated that its goal is the assur-
ance of "...the Icomplete/ [in italics] well-being and free [all-round] [in italics]
development of /all/ [in italics] the members of society."1

The Comnist Party set about the practical achievement of this goal inediately
after the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution. Since the first days
of Soviet power it did everything possible to improve the situation of the working
people. "Owing to the most serious dislocation which the country is experiencing,"
it was stated in the second Party Program, "all else should be subordinate to the
practical goal-~to increase immediately and no matter what the cost the amount of
products most necessary for the population. In this respect the progress of the
work of every Soviet institution. which is connected with the national economy.
should be measured by the practical results."2

The party advanced in the Program "as the main and basic thing. which determines
the entire economic policy of the Soviet regime. ...the utmost increase of the pro-
ductive forces of the country."3 The party considered socialist industrialization
as the key task in this matter. Only highly developed mechanized production, which
is based on the latest achievements of science and technology, V. I. Lenin taught,
can be the material base of socialism.

The first unified statewide plan of the development of the economy in our country
and in all world practice--the State Plan of the Electrification of Russia (GOERLO)—-
which was drawn up on the initiative of v. I. Lenin, was the most important step
toward this. The history of the scientifically substantiated, planned, comprehen-
sive development of the economy originates from this plan.

Using the advantages of the socialist system. the Communist Party was able to solve
the fundamental problems of the industrialization of the country in the shortest

29
FOR¢0IIICLAI.1§IE(HVLY
run urn-nun. use ONLY

historical time. The material base was created for the strengthening of the eco-
nomic independence of the USSR, the technical renovation of all the sectors of the
national economy and the conversion of agriculture to a new. socialist basis. In-
dustrialization strengthened public ownership in the decisive area of the economy,
ensured the supplanting of the capitalist elasenta and the triumph of the social-
ist mode of production in industry, the growth of the working class and its leading
role in society. It promoted the strengthening of the economic and defensive might
of the USSR and in many ways predetermined our victory in the Great Patriotic War.

Along with the creation and strengthening of the material and technical base of so-
cialism the standard of living of the Soviet people increased. Our 10 fiVe—year
plans have become glorious historical milestones on this path. And although each

of them was special in some way, one thing--concern about the man of laboré-unites
and connects them all.

It should be said that owing to a number of historical reasons our possibilities
in increasing the well-being of the working people for a long time were limited.
Only with the building of mature socialism and with the creation of a mighty eco-
nomic potential was our party able to make a sharp turn in the accomplishment of
this task. The socioeconomic programs. which were advanced by the 24th. 25th and
26th CPSU Congresses, set as the main goal the acre and more complete meeting of
the increasing material and spiritual needs of the Soviet people.

The share of the industrial output of the 08811 in its world production at present

comes to one-fifth. while in 1913 prerevolutionary Russia accounted for only a
little more than 4 percent. The economy of our country produces daily a national

product of more than 2.8 billion rubles. This is 67-fold more than in 1913, 13.1-
fold more than in 191.0 and 2.3-fold more than in 1965.

The national income--this moat generalizing indicator of the development of the
economy and the source of the increase of the well-being of the people-which was
produced in 1980 amounted to 437 billion rubles and had increased 75-fold as com-
pared with the prerevolutionary level. About three-fourths of it were used for
constmption, while with allowance made for the expenditures on housing, social and
cultural construction approximately four-fifths of the national income were allo-
cated directly for the well-being of the people.

He have now achieved such night that we can simultaneously build such giants as the
Sayano—Shushenskaya 635, the Kama Hotor Vehicle Plant, the Atom-ash Plant and
others. create and develop tens of territorial industrial complexes. build the
Baykal-Amur Railway Line, perform major operations in the Nonchernosem Zone of the
RSFSR, renovate thousands of enterprises and with all this not only not cut back
but, on the contrary, expand the programs on the increase of the well-being of the
people.

The working people of the Soviet Union understand well that labor. the mind and
hands of those who smelt steel. produce petroleum, design machines, construct
plants and electric power stations, sow and harvest grain. were and remain the only
source of our well-being. The vital interest of the Soviet pe0p1e in the increase
of social production is conducive to the steady increase of their creative active-
ness--our reserve in the acceleration of economic development. which cannot be re-
placed by anything.

30

MWUSBONLY
The entire path of the building of socialism and communism is convincing confirma-
tion of Lenin's words that “socialism not only does not suppress competition but,
on the contrary, creates for the first time the opportunity to use it truly lex-
tensively/ [in italics], truly on a [mass/ [in italics] scale, to truly draw the
majority of working people into the arena of that work, in which they can display
themselves, develop their abilities. rexeal their talents. of which among the
people there is an untapped spring...."

Our party always strove and is striving to utilize most completely the creative
potential of the masses. The Communist Saturdays of the first years of Soviet pow-
er, the shock labor movement during the period of the socialist reconstruction of
the national economy. the Stakhanovite movement. the present national campaign for
the increase of production efficiency and work quality--all these are examples of
how the party cautiously and carefully cultivated the shoots of the communist atti-

tude toward labor among the broadest masses of working people and developed their
initiative and creativity.

Under the conditions of mature socialism socialist competition assumed an unprece-
dented scale and turned into a mighty factor of social progress. Now more than

106 million people are participating in it. The party is trying to see to it that
the competition would be lively and creative, is carefully studying and disseminat-
ing what is new and valuable that originates from practice.

The 26th party congress advanced for the 11th Five-Year Plan and the 1980's as a
whole an extensive program of the further increase of the well-being of the people.
This program encompasses all aspects of the life of the Soviet people--consumption
and housing, culture and recreation, working and living conditions.

With the development of socialist production, the increase of its efficiency and

the improvement of the quality of work in all the links of the national economy the

material and cultural needs of the Soviet people are being met more and more com-

pletely, the socioeconomic rights of citizens are being filled with a more solid

material content and the guarantees of these rights are becoming stronger.
FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Polo. sobr. soch." [Complete works], Vol 6, p 232.

2. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK"

[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, ConferencesandPlenums of
the Central Committee], 8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 50.

3. Ibid.

4. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 35, p 195.

31

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USB|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 3. THE MAIN SOCIAL RIGHT

USSR citizens have the right to work....
From Article 40 of the USSR Constitution

The right to work is the most important social right of man. The exercise of pre-
cisely this right leads to the creation of physical assets, ensures the well-being
and genuine freedom of man and creates in him confidence in the future.

For the Soviet people the right to work seems obvious, self-evident. And this is
understandable. For they have not known for a long time now what unemployment is.
Its last traces were eliminated in our country half a century ago.

It must be said, however, that during the transition from capitalism to socialism
unemployment in the USSR was a major social problem. The solution of this problem
required from the Communist Party and all the Soviet.people considerable efforts
and the surmounting of a large number of obstacles.

As is known, mass chronic unemployment appeared in the world along with the develop-
ment of capitalism. The founders of scientific communism explained and substanti-
ated scientifically the emergence of "the reserve industrial army." They proved
that the existence of an army of the unemployed enables entrepreneurs to increase
the exploitation of the proletariat to an enormous degree. "The overwork of the
employed portion of the working class," K. Marx emphasized, "increases the ranks of
its reserves, while the increased pressure, which is exerted by the competition of
the latter on employed workers, on the contrary, compels them to overwork and
obedience to the dictates of capital."1

The scientific conclusions of K. Marx and P. Engels about "surplus population" and
"the industrial reserve army," which originated from the capitalist system. were
developed by v. I. Lenin, who demonstrated that it is impossible to solve the prob-
lem of eliminating unemployment under capitalism,2 that the path of the class
struggle of the proletariat is the only means for this.3

In prerevolutionary Russia the nature of unemployment did not differ from unemploy-
ment in other capitalist countries. The army of the unemployed was enormous here.

Thus, about half a million of them were identified by the 1913 census, which was
conducted only in a number of large cities.

32
IND! OFIW(1A1.1EHEINVLY
The ruin of the peasantry was one of the causes of the increase in unemployment.

Not finding a use for their labor in the countryside, hundreds of thousands of hun-
gry, exhausted, ragged people rushed to the industrial centers in the hope of find-
ing work. But these hopes rarely came true. There was no social security for un-
employment, and masses of able-bodied peeple were often left without any means of
existence and approached the brink of poverty.

"I had occasion to experience myself that unemployment is a horror. and not only

of a physical, but also of a moral quality," related K. Ye. Voroshilov, an out-
standing figure of the Communist Party and Soviet state and a former Lugs mechanic.
"When a proletarian loses his job. he feels that no one needs him. although he is
full of strength and capable of working. He begins to scour about different plants,
factories and workshops, scours about for years, but if in addition he comes under
the suspicion of the police as politically unreliable, in general he becomes an
outcast, a declasse person, a man who has nowhere to lay his head."‘

Our party linked the elimination of unemployment and the establishment of the guar-
anteed right to work with the victory of the socialist revolution. It tirelessly
explained that the struggle for the elimination of unemployment was a part of the
general proletarian struggle for the liberation of the working class.

Immediately after the Great October Revolution the party began to implement its
-program in the area of labor. The nationalization of large-scale industry and the
land and the introduction of workers' control and an 8-hour workday were the mate-
rial prerequisites for the elimination of unemployment and its sources. The Peo-
ple's Conmdssariat of Labor. the duties of which included the registration and dis-
tribtuion of manpower resources, the drawing up of legislative acts on labor, as
well as the organization of assistance to the unemployed, was established. In the
first Soviet Labor Code the right to work in one's specialty was proclaimed_for all
citizens.

ﬂowever,-the Soviet state was not able to provide a job immediately to all those
needing one--too large a reserve army of labor was inherited from old Russia. More-
over, the demobilization of the Russian army and the curtailment of military pro-
duction as a result of the withdrawal of Soviet Russia from the imperialist war
increased the ranks of the unemployed.

The situation was aggravated by the fact that the implementation of the decrees of
the Soviet regime in the area of labor encountered, especially at first, the fierce
resistance of the representatives of the overthrown exploiting classes, who still
retained some positions in the economy. Citing the lack of fuel, the former fac-
tory and plant owners frequently closed enterprises, conducted secret lockouts and
used secret "blacklists" of workers.

The representatives of the petty bourgeois parties. the Social Revolutionaries and
the Henshevika, attempted to take advantage of unemployment and the famine. They

tried to suggest to the masses that the Communist Party and the Soviet regime were
to blame for unemployment, and strove to incite the working people to counterrevo-
lutionary demonstrations and to organise strikes.

Industry of the country, which was experiencing an acute crisis as a result of the
imperialist war and dislocation, as well as the sabotage and lockouts of the

33
Ft“!(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(HWLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entrepreneurs, was not able to absorb the huge mass of the unemployed. The party
was faced with an urgent task--to organize immediate assistance to these people.

"The Statute on Unemployment Insurance," which applied to the entire territory of
the country and to all people engaged in work for hire at state and private enter-
prises, institutions and public organizations, was put into effect. The costs of
insurance rest entirely on the employers, from whose payments the unified A11-
Russian Fund of the Unemployed was formed. The payment of benefits was carried out
through insurance offices, of which the representatives of workers' organizations
were members. In spite of the acute need for money, dining rooms and dormitories
for the extremely needy unemployed were set up in many cities.

In early 1918 the organs of the Soviet regime began the creation of an extensive
network of labor exchanges. They subsequently became authoritative organizations
which were in charge of the registration and distribution of manpower.

The activity of the party and the people on the restoration of the ravaged economy
and its transformation on a socialist basis was the main measure of the struggle
against unemployment. However, the armed intervention of the imperialist states.
which began in 1918 and was supported by the internal counterrevolution, hindered
the solution of the problems of peaceful construction.

Hundreds of thousands of workers at the call of the party joined the Red Army and
with arms in hand defended Soviet power. The serious food situation in the cities
had the result that a portion of the unemployed, as well as of the workers, espe-
cially of recent peasant origin, rushed to the countryside, to where there was
bread. As a result, unemployment disappeared in the cities. Moreover, by the end
of 1918 the labor exchanges were no longer able to fill the orders of enterprises--
the demand for labor considerably exceeded its supply. Unemployment developed

into a new problem—-a shortage of manpower.

however, its fundamental causes were net eliminated. The party was well aware that
an intensive struggle against agrarian overpopulation, the declassing of the work-
ing class and other phenomena lay ahead. Therefore, its second Program specified
as the immediate task of the economic policy "the maximum utilization of all the
manpower available in the state, its proper distribution and redistribution both
among the different territorial areas and among the different sectors of the na-
tional economy."5 The party also set as its goal "to return to a labor life every-
one who had been knocked from the path of labor."6

After the end of the civil war and the foreign intervention a new wave of unemploy-
ment was added to the numerous difficulties being experienced by the Soviet people.
In January 1922 160,000 unemployed were registered at the labor exchanges. a year
later there were 641,000 of them, while by July 1924 there were more than 1,346,000.
At the 15th party congress the problem of unemployment in our country was specified
as one of the most important difficulties of the building of socialism.

"hat explained the existence of unemployment in the USSR at that time?
Agrarian overpopulation was one of the causes. As the national economy was re-

stored and the life of the urban population improved, the influx of the rural popu-
lation to the cities again began to increase. "For individual categories of labor

34
FIIICHHWCJA1.USE(NVLY
(laborers, domestic employees, low-skilled office employees and so on)," it was
noted in the resolution of the 15th Conference of the All-Russian Communist Party
(of Bolsheviks), "unemployment in the immediate future threatens to become chronic,
owing to agrarian overpopulation and the continuous influx of manpower to the
cities from the countryside."7

The existence of unemployment was also due to the dislocation which had been caused
to the national economy during the period of the civil war. The gross output of
large-scale industry in 1921 was one-third of its amount in 1917, while the number
of workers decreased from 2,596,000 to 1,185,000. The ranks of the unemployed were
also enlarged in connection with the demobilization of the army.

The party, as well as soviet, trade union and economic organs took steps which were
aimed at the alleviation of the situation of the unemployed: the improvement of
their social insurance; registration and placement in a Job through the labor ex-
changes; the extensive development of public work (the removal of construction de-
bris from the cities. the draining of swamps, the filling of gullies and so forth);
the organization of labor collectives made up of the unemployed, where they not
only received work, but also acquired occupations.

It should be emphasized, however. that the Communist Party saw its main task not
in alleviating the situation of the unemployed and in lessening unemployment. The
-sain thing was to eliminate it forever in the life of Soviet society.

The period of the industrialization of the country and the collectivization of
agriculture was the decisive stage of the struggle against unemployment. Lenin's
plan of the building of socialism at the same time was also a plan of the elimina-
tion of unemployment in the USSR.

The restoration of the national economy for the most part was completed by 1926.

Our country entered a new period of its dcvelopment--the period of socialist recon-
struction on the basis of industrialization. The lhth party congress specified the
policy of the rapid development of heavy industry, which was capable of providing
factories, plants and agriculture with the latest equipment and of changing the
peasant sector in the socialist manner, of transforming the country from an agrar-
ian into an industrial country and of ensuring the building of a socialist soci~ty
in the USSR. In the development of industry the party saw the decisive condition

of the increase of the ranks of the working class and, consequently, of the elimina-
tion of unemployment.

In overcoming the enormous difficulties, under the conditions of the hoatile capi-
tallst encircle-eat, the Communist Party determined the most effective means of in-
dustrialization and sought the necessary assets for this within the country. The
coal, petroleum, electrical equipment, chemical, automotive, tractor, defense and
other sectors of industry underwent particular development. Railroad construction
was expanded. Cottage industry was also developed.

Rapid industrial construction made it possible to considerably reduce unemployment
among skilled workers. However, as a whole at the labor exchanges in late 1926

there were 1,310,000 unemployed, many of when it was impossible to send to the works
. because they did not have the occupations and skills, which the national economy
needed.

35
F0l(nﬂﬂ(1Al.USE(NﬂLY
FOIIOFFKJAI.USEIONLY

Under these conditions the party Central Committee adopted a special decree on the
training and instruction of manpower, including--this was especially emphasized--
from among the unemployed. Courses, in which the unemployed were trained entirely
at state expense, were set up everywhere on the basis of this decree.

Special attention was directed to the training of unemployed adolescents, more than
122,000 of whom were registered at the labor exchanges in October 1925. In accord-
ance with a decision of the government the number of schools of factory and plant
apprenticeship was increased. In 1929 163,000 adolescents were studying at them.

In the final engagement with unemployment the decisive word belonged to the First
Five-Year Plan. During those years new industrial projects were built at an accel-
erated rate, giants of socialist industry were put into operation, the ranks of the
working class grew. The process of the building of socialism in the countryside
was intensive. The party policy of the collectivization of agriculture, which was
adopted at the 15th Congress of the All-Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks),
was aimed at the same time at eliminating the main source of unemployment--agrarian
overpopulation.

With the development of industry and the halt of the influx from the countryside of
unemployed manpower, unemployment rapidly dwindled. In December 1929 the party
Central Committee adopted the decree "0n the Increase of the Personnel of the Work-
ing Class, the State of Unemployment and Measures on Its Lessening." It demanded
the improvement under the new conditions of the training and distribution of man-
power, the registration, distribution and instruction of the unemployment. The
economic organs were commissioned to identify in the shortest possible time the
need for skilled workers and to elaborate a system of specific measures, which guar-
antee the timely and complete supply of industry, transportation and agriculture
with skilled personnel. Additional assets were allocated for these purposes, as
well as for the expansion of factory and plant apprenticeship.

In early 1930 the labor exchanges were carefully checked in the majority of cities.
It turned out that among those who had received unemployment benefits there were
many people who simply did not want to work: tramps, petty thieves. speculators
and so forth. As a result of the conducted check, for example, at one of the larg-
est 1abor exchanges--the Moscow exchange--on1y 177 unemployed were left on the
register. The fall enrollment in schools of factory and plant apprenticeship.
which attracted about 300,000 people, put an end to unemployment among adolescents.
0n 9 October 1930 the People's Commissariat of Labor adopted a decision on the im-
' mediate placement of all the remaining unemployed in a job and on the abolition
of unemployment benefits. Thus, by the end of 1930 unemployment in the USSR had

in fact been eliminated.

The 17th party congress noted: "The proletariat, having overcome the enormous dif-
ficulties stemming from the implementation of the five-year plan, gained a histori-
cally important victory in the matter of improving the status of the working people
of the city and the countryside.... The worker and the kolkhoz farmer have acquired
a sense of security, and the greater and greater increase of the material and cul-
tural level of their life depends only on the quality and quantity of the labor ex-
pended by them. The threat of ugemployment, poverty and hunger has disappeared for
the working person in the USSR."

36
FKIR()FFIC1A1.USI2CH‘LY
The right to work became in the Soviet Union a real right. It was sanctioned in
the USSR Constitution of 1936 as the most important achievement of socialism.

Bourgeois propaganda, as has repeatedly happened, hastened to declare that the ab-
sence of unemployment in the USSR was ostensibly of a temporary nature, that as
soon as the Soviet Union had firmly entered the path of technical progress, it

would again be faced with this problem. Life showed the utter groundlessness of
these "prophecies."

Why is there no and can there be no unemployment in the USSR?

First of all because political power in our country belongs to all the people, in
whose hands are the tools and means of production. The order, in case of which the.

employer determines the number of workplaces, guided by his own private interests,
is thereby destroyed.

Moreover, the socialist system of management is a planned system. It is capable of
combining the acceleration of technical progress with the full employment of the
entire able-bodied population. We have every opportunity to determine in advance
not only the production volume, but also the amount and occupational composition of
the manpower, which are necessary for this. In other words, the production plans
are closely coordinated with the manpower resources, ensuring the full employment
of those who are able to work. This also pertains to young people who graduate_

from vocational and technical, secondary specialized and higher educational insti-
tutions.

The planned nature of the economy has made it possible to set for industry such
rates of development that for half a century now the demand for workmen has ex—
ceeded the supply. Suffice it to say that during the years of the 10th Five-Year

Plan more than 1,200 large industrial enterprises were put into Operation in our
country.

As is known, unemployment in the developed capitalist countries has reached a scale
which is unprecedented for more than the past #0 years and is continuing to rise
steadily. In 1970 there were more 8 million officially registered unemployed here,
in l975-more than 15 million and in l980—-about 20 million. In 10 years unemploy-
ment in the United States increased from A million to 8.5 million and amounts to

8 percent of the able-bodied population of the country. But these are far from the
complete data. The trade unions give different figures: in 11 large capitalist
countries alone in early 1980 more than 25 million people were without work, in-
cluding 12 million in the United States.

Until recently the USSR was characterized by an extremely rapid increase of the
number of workers and employees, who were employed in the national economy. In
1928 it was ll.b million, in 1940--33.9 million, in l965--76.9 million and in
l980—-112.5 million. But in the 1980's the rate of this increase will slow and the
problem of manpower resources will be aggravated: the effects of the Great Patri-
otic War, during which the country lost 20 million people, will being to show.
Therefore, the emphasis on the rapid increase of labor productivity and the sharp
increase of the efficiency of all social production, as was indicated at the 25th
and 26th party congresses, is becoming especially urgent.

37

FOR‘OFFHJALIAREONLY
l-UK UI'HLIAL Us}. ONLY

/The Soviet Constitution guarantees the right to work with payment in conformity
with its quantity and quality and not less than the minimum amount established by
the state/ [in boldface]. In 1980 the average monthly wage of workers and em-
ployees in the national economy was 168.5 rubles. the average monthly pay of kol-
khoz farmers was 116 rubles. The real income of workers and employees per working
person in 1980 had increased fourfold as compared with 1940, the real income of
kolkhoz farmers had increased 6.9-fold, while as compared with l913—-respective1y
10.7-fold and 16.2-fold. Whereas in 1940 the average monthly wage with the addi-
tion of payments and benefits from public consumption funds came to 40.6 rubles,
in 1965 it came to 129.2 rubles, in 1980--232 rubles. The guaranteed minimum wage
is also steadily increasing. Now nearly half of the population of the country has
an income of more than 100 rubles a month per family member, while in 1965 only

4 percent did. The difference in the standard of living of individual social
groups is gradually being reduced.

The 26th CPSU Congress planned to begin the implementation of such an important
measure as the increase of the minimum wage to 80 rubles a month and of the rates
and salaries of workers and employees. The increase of the average monthly wage to
190-195 rubles is planned. The income of kolkhoz farmers from the public sector
will increase by 20-22 percent. It is also envisaged to extend a number of wage
benefits. At the same time the Communist Party and the Soviet state are taking
vigorous steps for the most complete satisfaction of the needs of the working peo-
ple for foodstuffs, daybto-day nonfood goods, as well as durable items.

What does bourgeois society contrast with us in this matter? As is known, the eco-
nomic system of capitalism with its periodic crises entails not only unemployment.
but also the speeding up of inflationary processes. The monopolies and bourgeois
states are openly using inflation and the increase of prices in order to redistrib-
ute the national income in their favor to the detriment of the working masses. Ac-
cording to the official data of the 0.8. Department of Labor, the real wage of
American workers in 1979 had decreased by 15 percent as compared with 1973. On the
other hand, the revenues of the monopolies are steading going up. In 1978 the net
profits of the 1,200 largest American corporations increased by 17 percent, in
1979--by another 22 percent.

Reflecting the changes which have occurred in the content of the right to work, the
new Soviet Constitution supplemented it with [the right to the choice of occupation,
the type of work and job in conformity with one's vocation, abilities, vocational
training and education/ [in boldface]. of course, there are also taken into account
here the public needs, which make themselves knewn, in particular, by the fact

that there are more educational institutions of one type and fewer of another, that
it is easier to enroll in a construction institute, for example, than in the biolo-
gy faculty of a university and so on.

The growth of productive forces and scientific and technical progress are giving
rise to the demand for new specialties and are making new demands on the skills of
workers. Under these conditions, while guaranteeing the right to work, /our state
is carrying out free vocational training, is promoting the improvement of labor
skills and training in new specialties and is developing the system of vocational

guidance and job placement] [in boldface]. These provisions are also set forth
in the USSR Constitution of 1977.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Socialist society is a society of people of labor. Labor and only labor serves in
our country as the source of the increase of public wealth and the well-being of the
Soviet people and determines the social status of a person. "From each according to
his ability, to each according to his labor"-such is the principle of socialism.

As was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, the party and the state have exerted and
are exerting great efforts in order to make the labor of a person not only more pro-
ductive, but also meaningful, interesting and creative.9 Of course, while afford-
ing the Soviet people extensive opportunities for the free choice of occupation,
type of work and job, our society has the right to demand of them a conscientious
attitude toward labor in the chosen field and the observance of labor discipline.

This is not only the constitutional duty, but also a matter of honor of every USSR
citizen who is able to work.

In accordance with numerous suggestions of the working people it is noted in the
USSR Constitution that the evasion of socially useful labor is incompatible with
the principles of socialist society. "And this means," L. I. Brezhnev indicated.
"that it is necessary by all organisational, financial and legal means to shut fast
all cracks for parasitism, bribery, speculation, for unearned income, all encroach-
ments upon socialist property."10

Thus, in practice it has been demonstrated that only under socialism is it possible
to completely eliminate unemployment and to guarantee the real right to work. So-
cialism and full employment, capitalism and unemployment—-such are the character-
istic traits of the two social systems. The Soviet people view with great under-
standing and sympathy the status of the working pe0ple in the capitalist countries
and support them in the just struggle for the main human right—-the right to work.

FOOTNOTES
1. K. Marx, "Kapital" [Capital], Vol 1, Moscow, 1973, p 650.
2. See v. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 16. p 108.

3. Ibid., Vol 5, p 323.

4. K. Ye. Voroshilov, "Stat'i i rechi" [Articles and Speeches]. Moscow. 1936,
p 509.

5. "KP88 v resolyutaiyakh i reeheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenuns
of the Central Comittee], 8th edition, Vol 2, Hoscow, 1970, p 51.

6. Ibid., Vol 2, p 59.
7. Ibid., Vol 3, p 395.

8. "KP83 v rezolyutsiyakh...," 8th edition, Vol 5, lbscow, 1971, p 130.

9. See "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1981, p 57.

10. Ibid., p 59.

39
FOI,OIF1C1A1.[EIE(N9LY
a-.. ~g..-o--~ v—.— the...

CHAPTER 4. ONE OF THE HOST IMPORTANT TASKS

USSR citizens have the right to rest.
Tron Article 61 of the USSR Constitution

USSR citizens have the right to the pro-
tection of health.

Prom Article 52 of the USSR Constitution.

Now, when the Soviet people customarily exercise their right to rest, when the
achievements of Soviet health care are well-known throughout the world, it is use-
ful to recall what the working conditions. the conditions of rest and the health
protection of working people were in prerevolutionary Russia.

The workday at plants and factories lasted 12-13 hours, while in the textile indus-
try it asoumted to 15-16 hours. Best on Sunday was entirely inadequate to restore
strength after a week of gruelling labor. while the workers had no idea of annual
vacations.

The fate of the peasant was even sore difficult. The farm laborers worked for ku-
laks and landlords literally fro. dawn to dusk. Here, for example, are lines from
a contract which those hired for work at the estate of Count Pototskiy were obliged
to sign in 1905: "I, a peasant woman free such and such a village, have hired ay-
self out on my own accord at such and such an estate of Count Pototskiy for agri—
cultural work, no matter what is assigned to we.... I undertake to go to work at
sunrise and to work until sundown.... If the estate sulnons me to do sose job on a
holiday or on Sunday, I do not have the right to refuse to work.... If I should
become sick or die, my family should finish working for me.... These terms are
known to me, which I acknowledge by my signature."

Elenentary labor safety regulations were absent at plants and factories, nines and
pits. In 1902 the Batuni workers wrote to the newspaper ISKRA: "...In the solder-
ing departments of the petroleul refineries the workers are sick with throat and
chest diseases, since the air in these workshops is saturated with the vapors of
various acids. In the pouring departments of these plants the legs of the workers
are swollen and covered with ulcers from kerosene.... Here it is difficult to find
a worker who is not sick with a fever and rheumatisn."2 Accidents, cave-ins, ex-
plosions and flooding of the shafts were a common phenomenon in the Donate coal

40

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
basin. Hard labor under unbearable conditions disabled the workers and premature-
ly took them to the grave.

The expenditures from the state budget for the purposes of public health were liter-
ally a pittance. The workers received only primitive medical help, it was essential-
ly not given to peasants at all. And it is not surprising that there was one hospi-
tal bed per 767 inhabitants, while each physician should have attended on the aver-
age 5,656 people. As for sanstorium treatment, the working people did not dream of
it. Only the capitalists, landlords and their lackeys used health resorts. In

1907, for example, at the Caucasus mineral springs among the "guests" 42 percent

were landlords, nobles and merchants, 2“ percent were plant and factory owners and
kulaks, 23 percent were officers and government officials, 10 percent were scien-
tists and physicians and 1 percent were priests.

The periodic outbreaks of epidemics of typhus, cholera, plague and smallpox envel-
oped entire areas and took the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. About

3 percent of the population died annually in tsarist Russia. Prior to world War I
the overall death rate of the population here was twofold higher, while infant mor-
tality was three- to fourfold higher than in such countries as England, Germany,
Norway, the United States and France.

Our party always regarded the campaign for the shortening of the workday and for

the right of the working people to rest and the protection of health as one of the
most important social tasks. In its first Program it advanced "in the interests of
the protection of the working class against physical and moral degeneration, as well
as in the interests of the development of its capacity for the liberation struggle"
the tasks of the limitation of the workday to 8 hours a day for all hired workers;
the establishment by law of weekly rest which runs continuously for not less than
62 hours: the complete banning of overtime; the prohibition of night labor, with the
exception of those sectors of the national economy, in which it is absolutely nec-
essary; the prohibiting of employers from using the labor of children of school age
(up to 16 years of age) and the limitation of the working time of adolescents

(16—18 years of age) to 6 hours; the prohibition of female labor in those sectors

in which 1: is harmful to a wman's body.3

The provisions of the party program called for the properly organized health in—
spection at all enterprises which use hired labor; the criminal liability of em-
ployers for the violation of labor safety laws; free medical help for workers at
the expense of employers, with the retention of pay during illness; the inspection
by organs of local self-government of the health conditions of the apartment houses
set aside for workers by employers.“

It was possible to achieve all this only by a revolutionary struggle. For example,
under the supervision of the party the working people achieveda slight shortening

of the workday, but on the eve of the Great October Socialist Revolution the bulk
of the workers, including adolescents, were working 10 hours a day, while about

15 percent were working more than 11-12 hours a day. "...The dialectics of the
class struggle is such," V. I. Lenin said, "that.neverwithout extreme need, without
dire need will the bourgeoisie replace the serene, customary, profitable... 10-hour
workday with an 8-hour workday."5

bl
FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE‘DNLY
I'UK UI'I'IL'IAI. USP. UNLY

The Great October Socialist Revolution did this. The Council of People's Commis-
sars adopted the decree "On the Bight-Hour Workday" 3 days after the victory of Oo-
tober. The Soviet regime carried out legislatively and sanctioned in the Code of
Labor Laws all the demands of the first Party Program in the area of labor safety
regulations. "This is an enormous accomplishment of Soviet power," V. I. Lenin em-
phasized, ”that at a time when all countries are up in arms against the working
class, we are coming forth with a code which firmly establishes the principles of
labor legislation, as, for example, the 8-hour workday."6

However, the extreme devastation caused by the war and the pressure of world im-
perialism forced our party and the Soviet state to allow the use of overtime in ex-
ceptional cases, limiting it to 50 days a year; to permit the labor of adolescents
from 16 to 16 years of age, limiting their workday to 4 hours; to increase the
length of night-time work to 7 hours.7 These were forced and temporary measures.

In its second Program the Communist Party set itself the task to ensure in the fu-
ture, in the case of an overall increase of labor productivity, the shortening of
the workday without a decrease of the remuneration for labor. And as soon as the
national economy, which had been ravaged by the imperialist and civil wars, had
been restored, it began the implementation of this task. On 15 October 1927 the
USSR Central Executive Committee on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution adopted a manifesto in which it proclaimed the
changeover from an 8-hour to a 7-hour workday without a decrease of wages. During
the next 5-6 years a 7-h0ur workday was established for the majority of workers
and employees, but the threat of aggression on the part of fascist Germany forced
the Communist Party and the Soviet state to reintroduce the 8-hour workday. And
soon after the beginning of the Great Patriotic Har the Presidium of the USSR Su-
preme Soviet granted the directors of enterprises the right '0 establish, with per-
mission of the government, mandatory overtime lasting from to 3 hours a day.
Regular and additional leaves were cancelled (with the rat ntion of the monetary
remuneration for the unused leave). These steps were clear to everyone: war is war.

After the victory the prewar working conditions and conditions of the rest of work-
ers and employees in the USSR were restored: mandatory overtime was abolished, an-
nual vacations were reinstated. However, in connection with the enormous damage
done to the national economy, the party deemed it necessary to maintain for workers
and employees, with the exception of a number of occupations with hard working con-
ditions, an 8-hour workday.

Following the successful completion of the plan of the postwar restoration and de-
velopment of the national economy the Communist Party again advanced the task of
shortening the length of the workday. In 1956 a decision was adopted on the uni-
versal changeover to a 7- and 6-hour workday. The planned changeover of workers
and employees to a 5-day work week was begun in 1966. This changeover was completed
for the most part by the 50th anniversary of the Great October Socialist _Eevolution.
As a result we began to have on the average during the year 112 days off and holi-
days insteadof 60 in the case of a 6-day work week.

The limitation of the duration of working time is one of the most important guaran-
tees of the right of Soviet people to rest. /In conformity with the USSR Constitu-

tion a work week not exceeding 41 hours has been established for workers and em-
ployees in our country; the workday has been shortened for a number of occupations

52

lN).H0lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂ5li(NVLY
and works; days of weekly rest and annual paid vacations are granted to all work—
ing people/ [in boldface].

The work week in the USSR is one of the shortest in the world. During the years of
Soviet power its length for workers of industry has been shortened by nearly one-

third. Now the average length of the work week of all workers and employees (with
allowance made for shortened working time on preholiday days, holidays in excess of

ordinary days off and the shortened workday of teachers, medical and other person-
nel) is 39.6 hours.

Along with the shortening of the work week the length of annual paid vacations is
being increased in our country. Thus, in conformity with the decree of the CPSU
Central Comittee and the USSR Council of Ministers of 1 January 1968 it was in-
creased to 15 workdays for those categories of workers, who prior to this had a
vacation of 12 workdays. Gradually the length of the minimum vacation of all work-
ers and employees will be increased to 3 weeks, and in the future to 1 month. Let
us note here that any categories of workers and employees in our country have to-
day vacations of 1 month and more.

As to kolkhoz farmers, the length of their work week is not regulated in the Funds-
mental Law: due to the seasonal nature of agricultural work and the great diversi-
ty of natural conditions the length of their working time and rest is regulated by
the kolkhozes themselves in conformity with their charters or labor regulations, on
the basis of the general principles of Soviet legislation.

Thus, as socialist society has developed our party has consistently inlemented its
program provisions on the steady increase of the time for the rest of the working
people.

What does this give each Soviet individual, his family and our society as a whole?

Under the conditions of socialism the very content of free time has changed radi-
cally. It is becoming more and more a gauge of public wealth. In our country
along with the increase of free time a greater and greater portion of it is being
used not only and not so much for rest as such as for the meeting of a wide range
of spiritual needs: education, participation in public life and the raising of
children, reading, participation in sports and tourism, creative amateur artistic
work, going to movies, museums, theaters and so on, or, in Lenin's words, "for
one's own development, for the exercise of one's rights as a person, as a family
man, as a citizen."8

It is quite clear that the appropriate conditions were also created in our country
for this. [The USSR Constitution guarantees the right to rest by the enlargement
of the network of cultural, educational and health institutions, the development of
mass sports, physical culture and tourism, the creation of favorable opportunities
for rest at the place of residence and other conditions of the efficient use of
free time/ [in boldface].

Priority, of course, is given to the expenditures which directly or indirectly pro-
mote the improvement of the health of the working people. Starting with the first
years of Soviet power our party and state devoted exceptionally great attention to

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI WPILIAI. 03E. UNL'

this question. In particular, in May 1922 the Council of People's Comissars pron-
ulgated a special decree on the organization of an extensive network of holiday
hoses for workers. Country dachas, the former estates of landlowners, monasteries
and so forth were first of all used for this. Even under the conditions when the
young Soviet state did not have enough assets for the most necessary thing, the old
holiday homes and senatoriums were restored and renovated and new ones were built.

In subsequent years in conformity with decrees of the Cos-unist Party the expendi-
tures for these purposes were steadily increased. “heroes in 1939 in the country
there were 3,600 sanstoriums and other institutions of rest with sccomaodations for
1:69.000, in 1980 there were 13,160 with accomodations for nearly 2.2 million. In
the past 10 years the amber of those who have been treated and have rested at sans-
toriums and vacation institutions (excluding l- and 2-day stays) and at tourist
centers has increased 2.3-fold and in 1980 came to 39 million. Let us note here
that 86 percent of the travel authorizations to senatoriuns, holiday hotels, holi-
day homes and sanetorius-dispensaries were issued at the expense of the assets of
social insurance, including 17 percent free of charge.

/ In our country physical culture and sports are playing an important role in the
improvement of the health of the working people/ [in boldface]. At all the stages
of their history the Conunist Party and the Soviet state have done everything pos-
sible for their development. In recent years alone the CPSU Central Conittee has
adopted a amber of special decree on these questions.

A firm material basis has been created in our country for the extensive, truly mas-
sive enlistment of people in the pursuit of physical culture and sports. Now there
are about 200 palaces of sports and riding schools, about 3,500 stadims. 110,000
soccer fields, 710,000 gymasilnns, 6,300 ski centers, 8,500 track arenas and 1,700
swining pools in the Soviet Union. About 318,000 staff workers are teoyed in
the physical culture movement. More than 220 higher and secondary specialised edu-
cational institutions, including 26 institutes and 26 tekhnikums of physical cul-
ture, carry out the training of physical culturalists and athletes.

More than 70 types of sports are well developed in our country. Up to 500 different
all-union meets are held annually, while the Sports Festivals of the Peoples of the
USSR are held once every lo years. About 100 million people took part just in the

mass starts of the Seventh Sumner Sports Festival of the Peoples of the USSR (1979).

The broad scope of the physical culture movement is the basis of the successes of
Soviet athletes on the international arena. Convincing evidence of this is the
32d Olympic Games in Moscow.

The Commist Party and the Soviet state are striving to provide everything neces-
sary for the improvement and protection of the health of the working people. [Dur-
ing the years of Soviet power a unified state systes of health care, which provides
all citizens with free skilled medical help, as well as ensures the implementation
of effective steps on the prevention and decrease of the illness rate, the improve-
ment of the health and the lengthening of the life of the population, has been cre-
ated in our country under the supervision of the party/ [in boldface].

Its creation col-enced with Lenin's decree on the expropriation from the bourgeoisie
of all medical institutions and enterprises. which was promulgated in December 1918,

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and with the establishment in July 1918 of the People's Comissariat of Public
Health. The property of all medical and public health institutions of the repub-
lic, drugstores, health resorts and so on were placed at its disposal. In just a
year and a half after the revolution V. I. Lenin had signed about 300 different
government documents which to one extent or another concerned questions of the pro-
tection of the health of the working people.

The development of Soviet public health began under exceptionally difficult condi-
tions. The country was experiencing great difficulties with medical personnel.
Many physicians had not yet determined definitively their position. The measures
of the party and state in the area of public health were sabotaged by medical offi-
cials hostile to the Soviet regime.

The young Soviet Republic was surrounded by interventionists. the civil war was
under way. The medical service of the Red Army was among the most important aims
of the Cos-mist Party. V. I. Lenin personally kept an eye on the dispatch of
medical personnel to the front. The care of the sick and wounded was constantly
monitored by the party Central Cosmittee.

In the country industrial and agricultural production declined sharply, the popula-
tion was starving. In early 1918 the daily bread ration even for workers of the
first category was only 200 g. Epidemics of cholera, disentery, typhoid fever and
typhus broke out. In addition to the military danger. the decline of the physical
strength of the working people and the chaos of contagious diseases, which affected
hundreds of thousands of people. threatened the revolution. "...The typhus among
the population, which is exhausted from hunger, is sick and does not have bread,
soap, fuel," V. I. Lenin said with alarm, "may becose the disaster which will not
enable us to cope with any building of socialism."9

The party took vigorous steps. The All-Russian Comission for the Improvement of
the Health Conditions of the Republic was founded. The offensive on a broad front
against‘typhus and other infectious diseases, the drive for health order and the
participation of the working people in the ilplementetion of these measures were
the first steps of young Soviet public health.

The basic principles of the protection of the health of the people were fornulated
in the second Party Program. It envisaged first of all the implementation of ex-
tensive health and sanitary measures which had as a goal the prevention of the
spread of diseases. In particular. the sanitation of populated places (the protec-
tion of the soil. water and air), the organization of public dining on the scien-
tific hygienic basis and the establishment of public health legislation were in-
tended. Our party set as its insediate tasks the control of social diseases (tu-
berculosis, venereal disease, alcoholism and so on), the provision of generally
available. free and skilled medical and medicinal help.lo

Of course. during the first years of Soviet power medical help could not always
be provided due to the shortage of Iedical institutions and specialists. Therefore
the party and the state took steps on the increase of the network of medical insti-
tutions and the expansion of the training of medical personnel. In 1928 the number
of physicians and intermediate medical personnel had increased as compared with
1913 nearly 2.3-fold, there were 39,000 more hospital beds. By this time it had
been possible to slisinate such especially dangerous diseases as smallpox, plague
and cholera.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
klﬂ!1)Fi1L1AL.USt.(NULY

The First, and then the Second and Third Five-Year Plans became important stages in
the matter of radically improving the organization of public health. The decrees
of the party Central Committee "On the Medical Service of workers and Peasants”

(1929) and "On Medical Personnel" (1931) were of fundamental importance in this
respect.

As the national income increased, more and more assets were allocated for the pur-
poses of public health. The number of medical institutions in the city and the
countryside and medical educational and scientific research institutes increased
rapidly. Preventive health measures were increased, medical help improved. Steps
were taken on the organization of the dispenary method of serving the population,
the setting up of health centers at enterprises and so on.

By the end of 1940 there were already 155.00 physicians, or nearly 5.5-fold more
than before the revolution. The supply of hospital beds was #0 per 10,000 people.
There were about 16,000 hospitals in the country.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War the Communist Party and the Soviet
state took steps to create the necessary conditions for the treatment of the
wounded. In addition to military hospitals, an extensive network of evacuation
hospitals was developed in the rear. Much work was carried out on protecting the
health of the workers of the rear. Medical and paramedical health centers and pub-
lic health units were set up at many enterprises. Dispensaries, which enabled the
workers to maintain their health without leave from work, were organized at large
enterprises. Extraordinary anti-epidemic commissions were organized everywhere for
the stepped-up medical monitoring of the state of sanitation. The concern of the
party about the health of the defenders of the homeland and the workers of the rear
becsue one of the important sources of the victory of our people in the Great Patri-
otic Her.

In subsequent years the tasks of improving public health were discussed at all the
party congresses. Specific steps in this regard were specified in a number of

joint decrees of the CPSU Central Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers. The
approval of the Fundamentals of Public Health Legislation in our country (1969) was
an act of great sociopolitical importance.

The rapid development of the socialist economy made it possible from five-year plan
to five-year plan to increase the expenditures on public health and the strengthen-
ing of its material and technical base. In the past 15 years alone they have in-
creased more dwu12.5-fold and in 1980 exceeded 18 billion rubles. This is more than

70 rubles per person.

During the years of the building of socialism and communism our country has been
covered by a dense network of medical inetitutions-fron the rural outpatient clin-
ic to specialized centers. Great changes, quantitative and qualitative, have oc-
curred in the training of medical personnel. Medical science and industry have
been developed intensively, hospitals and polyclinics have been furnished with mod—
ern equipment, the production of drugs has increased, major prophylatic measures

on the prevention of diseases were implemented.

Under the conditions of mature socialism an extensively branched system of public
health, which is based on the latest achievements of world medical science, was

56
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(MNLY
formed in the USSR. The right of the Soviet people to the protection of health be-
came a reality and was sanctioned for the first time in the USSR Constitution of
1977.

How is this right guaranteed in our country?

In conformity with the USSR Constitution [the right to the protection of health is
guaranteed first of all by free skilled medical help, which is provided by state
public health institutional [in boldface]. This humane principle. which was imple-
mented back during the first years of Soviet power, is the most inportant principle
of the socialist public health system. >

More than 2 billion visits and calls of doctors to the home are registered annually
at the preventive medical treatment institutions of our country. Moreover. when
going to a physician or summoning him to the home, no one has to see how much money
he has. Every type of nedicsl help-from a simple bandage to the most compli-
cated operation-is provided in our country free of charge. The state bears all
the expenses on the prevention and treatment of diseases. This pertains to medical
consultations, the consultations of specialists, "first aid" calls and laboratory
analyses and examinations. While in a hospital or specialized clinic, the patient
does not even ponder the fact that his stay there costs the state on the average
more than 8 rubles a day.

At the same tine in the capitalist countries a significant sector of public health
is private business. In the United States, for example, the total expenditures of
the population on medical service yearly come to an amount which exceeds the expend-
itures on the purchase of clothing and shoes. A surgical operation in an American
hospital costs the patient fron $2,500 to $10,000. Moreover, medical businessmen con-
tinue to inflate the fee for nedical help. As a result, according to the testimony
of the 0.3. press. half of the sick Americans do not turn to physicians. Senator

2. Kennedy, being the chairman of the Senate Subcommittee for Health, wrote concern-
ing this: "The public health system in the United States is based on the pursuit

of a profit and ignores the needs of the people."11

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the right to the protection of health by the ex-
pansion of the network of institutions for the treatment and improvement of the
health of citizens] [in boldface]. At present in our country there are about
60.000 hospitals, outpatient clinics, polyclinics, dispensaries and other state
health institutions, which are furnished with modern equipment. The value of
their fixed capital is 35 billion rubles. The number of hospital beds in the past
15 years alone has increased nearly 1.5-fold and has reached 3.3 million. He have
6 million nedical personnel who have a high level of occupational knowledge and
skill. Among them there are almost 1 million physicians, or 1.8-fold more than

there were, for example, in 1965.

One-third of all the physicians of the world work in the Soviet Union, while our
country accounts for 6 percent of the population of the world. In the number of
physicians, hospital beds and other indicators per 10,000 people we have for a long
time now considerably surpassed the capitalist countries.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F081DFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

[The Soviet Constitution guarantees the right to the protection of health by the
development and improvement of labor safety practices and production hygiene/ [in
boldface]. In conformity with the instructions of the party Central Committee all
ministries and departments are obligated with the consent of public health organs
and trade unions to draft regularly comprehensive plans of sanitation and health
measures, which are aimed at the improvement of labor safety regulations and labor
safety practices, the prevention of occupational diseases and the reduction of the
causes of production injuries. The state annually allocates more than 2 billion
rubles for these purposes.

The requirements of labor safety practices are included without fail in all state
standards for machine tools and machines. "Our goal," L. I. Brezhnev said, "can
be formulated as follows: from labor safety practices 50 safe equipment. Re have
embarked on this path and will follow it steadfastly."l

Strict monitoring of the observance of the requirements of labor safety procedures
and labor safety regulations has been organized in all the sectors of the national
economy. In addition to specialists, about 6 million public inspectors, members of
commissions and supernumerary inspectors for labor safety procedures are engaged in
this.

As a result. the level of production injuries and occupational disease in our coun-
try is one of the lowest in the world.

[In conformity with the USSR Constitution the right to the protection of health is
guaranteed by the implementation of extensive preventive medical measures] [in bold-
face]. Preventive treatment is the leading direction of Soviet public health. Its
goal is the timely identification of the ill and the implementation of extensive
sanitary measures. In our country more than 110 million people, first of all chil-
dren, pregnant women, adolescents and the students of secondary and higher educa-
tional institutions, undergo preventive checkups annually.

A new type of medical institutions--dispensaries-has been set up. They identify
ill people by means of medical checkups. organize highly skilled medical help and
systematically observe patients. The dispensary network is making it possible to
wage in our country a planned campaign against such diseases as tuberculosis,
cancer, neuropsychological diseases and others.

The state sanitary and epidemiological service carries out the regular supervision
of the implementation by all institutions and departments of the public health and
anti-epidemic regulations and norms, which have been established in the country.

A well-balanced system of health education institutions, which includes special
Houses of Health Education, exists in the USSR. Annually Soviet medical men de-
liver hundreds of thousands of lectures on medical themes. The press, radio, tele-
vision, the movies, clubs, libraries and so on are devoting serious attention to
this work.

[In accordance with the USSR Constitution, the right to the protection of health is
guaranteed by measures on the improvement of the environment] [in boldface]. This
is a long-term problem, the solution of which the Comunist Party regards as an

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
important socioeconomic task. Especially great attention has been devoted to it in
recent years. "When taking steps for the acceleration of scientific and technical
progress," 1.. I. Brezhnev indicated, "it is necessary to do everything so that it
would be cowined with a practical attitude toward natural resources and would not
serve as a source of the dangerous pollution of the air and water and the exhaus-
tion of the 1and."13

For the first time in constitutional practice our Fundamental Law specifies both
the responsibility of the state for the protection of the environment and the duty
of citizens to guard nature and to protect its resources. In the USSR the neces-
sary steps are being taken for the protection and the scientifically sound, effi-
cient use of the land and its mineral resources, water resources, the plant and ani-
mal world, for keeping the air and water clean, for the assurance of the reproduc-
tion of natural resources and the improvement of man's environment. During the
10th Five-Year Plan alone, in conformity with the decisions of the 25th party con-
gress, more than 9 billion rubles were spent for these purposes.

Our state regulates legislatively the use of natural resources and establishes the
rules of environmental protection. The Fundamentals of Land, Timber and Water Leg—
islation, legislation on mineral resources and laws on the protection of the air
and the animal world, which have been passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet, in particu-
lar serve this.

Strict sanitary requirements on the layout and building up of population centers
have been established. The master plans and the plans of the location of the sec-
tors of the national economy and large industrial complexes, zones of mass recrea-
tion and park grounds are being drafted from the point of view of nature conserva-
tion. Not a single built enterprise can be started up without treatment facilities.

Just a list of the decrees of the CPSU Central Connittee, which have been adopted
in recent years: on the intensification of the protection of nature, mineral re-
sources and forests; on the protection of the Caspian and Black Seas and the Sea of
Azov, the basins of the Volga and Ural Rivers: on the protection of the resources
of Lake Bath and many others, attests to the constant attention of the Columnist
Party to questions of the protection of the natural environment.

[The USSR Constitution guarantees the right to the protection of health by special
concern about the health of the rising generation, including the prohibition of
child labor which is not connected with training and labor education/ [in boldface].
The party considers the formation of a physically strong young generation from the
youngest age to be one of its most inortant tasks.

Child consultation center-polyclinics, which operate according to the district prin-
ciple, register with the dispensary children of all ages, who suffer from various
chronic diseases, monitor neonatn and children of early age especially carefully
and carry out anti-epidemic vaccinations. School physicians carry out the medical
service of school children. Along with treatment work they implement an extensive
set of public health and sanitary measures.

In addition to conventional medical institutions, in the country there are about

1,200 children's sanetoriums where there are children who require the special care
and observation of physicians. The network of sanetoriums and holiday hotels for

69
FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
I'UK UIHLIAL use UNI—Y

treatment, at which children live along with their parents, and of specialized year-
round Pioneer camps of the sanatorium type has undergone greater and greater devel-
opsent in recent years.

l'l’he right to the protection of health is guaranteed, according to the USSR Consti-
tution, by the development of scientific research which is aimed at the prevention
and decrease of morbidity and the assurance of a long active life of citizens] [in
boldface]. Soviet medical scientists have been provided with the latest equipment
and instruments. Programs of scientific research in the area of cardiovascular, on-
cological, viral, endocrine and other diseases, the protection of the health of
mother and child, the scientific principles of the diet of man, environmental hyb-
giene, as well as a number of other urgent problems of medicine have been elaborated.

During the years of Soviet power much has been done in the USSR in the area of the
protection of the health of the working people. Child mortality has been decreased
to nearly one-tenth, the life expectancy has increased. Wrens at the end of the
last century it was only 32 years in the most developed. European part of Russia,
now for the country as a whole it is 70 years.

The 25th CPSU Congress named the concern about the health of the Soviet people as
one of the most important social tasks. Much attention was also devoted to this
question at the 26th party congress. The congress demanded the substantial improve-
ment of the work of polyclinics, dispensaries and outpatient clinics. In many
places medical institutions have lagged behind the potentials of medicine, there are
not enough personnel, especially intermediate and junior personnel, the equipment is
obsolete, there are not enough modern-medicines. Shortcomings exist in the fulfill-
ment of the plans of the construction 'of hospitals and ssnatorimns, there are cases
of the violation by individual medical personnel of their official duty and lack of
consideration for people. "Everything must be done," 1.. I. Brezhnev emphasized,

"so that the Soviet individual could always and everywhere receive timely, skilled
and responsive nedicsl help."l4

FOOTNOTES

1. SOVKBOZNAYA GAZBTA, 28 October 1937.

2. ISKRA, 1 February 1902.

3. See "KPSS v rezolyuteiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenmss
of the Central Cox-ittee], 8th edition, Vol 1. Moscow, 1970, p 6b.

4. Ibid., p 65.

5. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 22, p 62.

6. Ibid., Vol 65, p 266.

7. See "ICPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tali,"
8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 58.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. 30cm," Vol 2, p 299.
9. 11:16., Vol 39, p 359.

10. See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh...." Vol 2, p 59.
11. See HBDI'ISINSKAYA GAZB'IA, 24 January 1973.

12. L. I. Brezhnev, "Lnninnun Inn-con" [By the Minis: Course], Vol 6, Houcov,
1978. p 329.

13. I... I. Brezhnev, "muslin harm," Vol 3, 110.com 1972, p 257.

lb. "mutiny XXVI 1"yezda KPSS" [mtcruln of the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow.
1981, p 61.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5. WEEKLY AT THE EXPENSE OF THE STATE AND SOCIETY

USSR citizens have the right to material
security. . . .

Prom Article 43 of the USSR Constitution

At the beginning of the century the working people in Russia did not have at all
any natarial security in case of illness, unemployment and disability and in old
age. If a worker became disabled. his employer threw him out the gate. Poverty
and death under a fence awaited him in old age.

A fanily which had lost its breadwinner was left without any means of existence.
Here is one of the many petitions addressed to the director of the Khar'kov Loco-
motive Building Plant, which dates back to 1910: ".. .Hy husband Andrey Antonovich
Sidorov, having worked for about 4 years at the locomotive building plant entrusted
to you, at Founding Shop No 2661, from heavy and difficult work in February of this
year became seriously ill and on the 13th of this April died, leaving no and two
young children without any nesns of living.... Do us a great favor, aid a poor
widow with children, so that they would not be left without their daily bread."

The reply stated: "It is ispossihle to give anything."1

The wretched wages did not enable the worker to create savings in case of illness,
injury or old age. The circumstances of the proletariat urgently dictated the need
for the introduction of material security through social insurance.

The demands of the working class in the area of social insurance were formulated in
the first Party Program, and then. to the fullest extent, in the resolution of its
Prague Conference (1912). They called for the introduction of the insurance of all
people of hire» labor at the expense of esployers and the state; the provision of
insurance to workers in all instances of disability; couplets self-governnent in
this matter. At the same time the party emphasized that it is possible to achieve
the realization of these denands only by the overthrow of tsarism and the victory
of the proletarian revolution.2

In 1912 the tsariat government, frightened by the tension of the revolutionary move-
ment, hastily promulgated a law on the insurance of workers in case of illness and

injury. Here state insurance was not extended to agricultural and construction
workers, railroad workers, sailors and others, as well as to entire regions of the

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
country (Siberia, the Far East, Central Asia). Old-age and disability insurance
was not provided for at all. The main burden of the expenses on insurance rest on
the shoulders of the workers themselves, whose insurance premiums were 1.5-fold
higher than those of employers and were up to 3 percent of the wage. The bene-
fits were extremely low, were paid only beginning on the fourth day of disablement

and only within a limited period. The law in fact also pieced the mnagement of
insurance in the hands of the ewloyers.

H. I. Kalinin. an outstanding figure of our party and state, told how difficult it
was for a worker during an illness: "I was a skilled worker, my wage exceeded the
average wage of workers. Once I became sick at the plant. I was sick for 2 months
and during that time received only 15 rubles from the insurance office.... Add to
this the payment to the doctor, the cost of medicine, and it will be clear to you

in what position I. a skilled worker, was. The 2 months of illness, as they used
to say, cleaned me out."3

The tsarist insurance law aroused the justified indignation of the proletariat. In
Lenin's words. it was "a law which mocks in the grossest manner at the most vital
interests of the workers.“

The party exposed the true essence of the bourgeois reforms which were intended to
deceive the working masses, explained extensively to the workers that the promulga-
tion alone of insurance laws could not eliminate neediness, poverty and the lack of
rights, and directed their attention to the subordination of the struggle for so-
cial insurance to the general political struggle of the proletariat.

After the Great October Socialist Revolution the Comnist Party imediately began
to carry out the tasks formulated in its insurance program. The implementation of
this program was entrusted to the People's Couissarist of Labor.

State support of the unemloyed, as well as insurance in case of illness, the force
of which was extended to the entire territory of the Russian Republic, to all sec-
tors of labor and to all people employed for wages, were introduced by decrees of the
Soviet regime. The pensions of workers, who has suffered accidents. were increased
by 100 percent. Extensive work was carried out on the support of the disabled and
families which had lost their breadwinner.

Hospital funds for the payment of benefits for temporary disability, accidents,
pregnancy and birth, as well as for providing medical help to workers and their
families were set up everywhere with the active participation of the trade unions.
The assets of these funds consisted of mandatory contributions of employers. Work-
ers and employees were exempt from the payment of insurance premiums. All this was
imediately reflected in the improvement of the material status of the working

people.

During the first months after the victory of October, under the conditions of dis-
location and famine, resistance and sabotage, the Comunist Party and the Soviet
state performed much work on the implementation of the program in the area of so-
cial insurance. However, it was not possible at that time to implement it com-
pletely.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the conditions of the struggle against foreign interventionists and the do-
mestic counterrevolution. social insurance was replaced by social security. It
covered all workers and employees, as well as craftsmen and peasants, who had not
exploited the labor of others, and was aimed first of all at providing material as-
sistance to the families of Red Army members, orphans and the needy ill and aged.
Insurance premiums were replaced by direct financing of the state, which by means
of its own allocations met the expenditures on social security. The People's Com-
missariat of Social Security, the work of which was organized with the extensive
participation of the trade unions, was set up in 1920.

The 10th party congress adopted the decision on the transition to the New Economic
Policy. It was aimed at the building of the foundations of a socialist econony.

State enterprises were-converted to cost accounting, the existence of small private
enterprises was permitted.

The system of universal social security of the working people at the expense of the
state budget was not able to handle the new tasks. A decree, which restored the so-
cial insurance of people, who were engaged in hired labor at state, cooperative,
public, concessionary, leased and private enterprises, and extended it to all in-
stances of temporary and permanent disability, in case of unemployment, as well as
death. was prepared and adopted on the instructions of the party Central Committee.
The payment of insurance premiums was assigned to enterprises and institutions, and
in a higher amount for the private sector.

The difficult economic situation of the country did not make it possible to immedi-
ately implement social insurance to the full extent. Support for temporary disabil-
ity, pregnancy and birth and unemployment were introduced at first. The support of
retirees and a portion of the expenditures for financing medical help to the popu-
lation were also entrusted to social insurance.

Along with the development of the national economy the Communist Party and the Sovi-
et state from year to year extended and increased the support through social insur-
ance. Social insurance put into its budget the support at higher norms of all in-
valids of the civil war from among the workers and employees. The pensions, which
were previously paid in equal amounts, were recalculated on the basis of the aver-
age wage for the given occupation, while those newly assigned were recalculated on
the basis of the individual wage. The pensions for those disabled as a result of

a work injury were increased, old-age pensions were introduced for workers of the
textile industry.

However, by the early 1930's the nonconformity of the organization of social insur-
ance to the tasks of building socialism began to be felt. The party demanded the
radical improvement of the work of the organs of social insurance, its subordina-
tion to the tasks of increasing labor productivity and the tightening up of the
monitoring on the part of the working masses. The 16th party congress indicated
that the trade unions should be the deciding authority in the matter of the dis-
tribution of the vast amounts of social insurance. A new procedure of social secur-
ity with allowance made for the importance of the works, the length of service and
the attitude of a person toward labor was established. Central funds, which oper-
ated under the immediate supervision of the trade unions, were organized in the
leading sectors of industry and in transportation.

56

IN)I‘0FINCJAI.IEHE(MNLY
In 1933 all the management of the organs of social insurance, their assets and prop-
ery were turned over to the trade unions, for which the Communist Party set respon-
sible tasks. It was a question not of the mechanical transfer of social insurance,

but of its drastic reorganization in the interests of production on the basis of the
extensive involvement of the working people themselves in this work.

During the years of the first five-year plans the group of workers, who had the
right to old-age pensions, was enlarged considerably, then it was extended to all
workers and engineering and technical personnel. In accordance with the budget of
social insurance assets began to be allocated for diet therapy and for the extra-
curricular care of children.

The USSR Constitution of 1936 sanctioned the right of Soviet citizens to material
security in old age, as well as in case of illness and disablement. The previously
existing restrictions in the support through social insurance of individual cate-
gories of working people were repealed. Employees also acquired the right to old-
age pension security.

In conformity with the instructions of the party Central Committee substantial
changes were made in the provision of benefits for temporary disability. The
amounts of the benefits were made more dependent on the length of continuous work
at the given enterprise or institution. Restrictions were imposed in the payment
of such benefits to workers and employees, who had left a job at their own request,
as well as had been dismissed for the violation of labor discipline or in connec-
tion with the commission of a crime. The worker acquired the right to benefits for
temporary disability after 6 months of work at the new place.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War social insurance was subordinate to the
interests of the rout of the enemy. In spite of the difficulties of war times, the
pensions of all working retirees were increased. They were paid without regard for
the wage. This stimulated the return of many thousands of retirees to enterprises.
The benefits for temporary disability for the invalids of the Great Patriotic war
were established in the maximum amounts. Assistance was provided to the families
of servicemen at the expense of the assets of social insurance.

After the end of the war in conformity with the decisions of party congresses and
plenums of the Central Committee important measures on the improvement of the sys-
tem of social insurance and material security of the working people were imple-
mented in the country.

In 1956 the USSR Supreme Soviet passed the Law on State Pensions. This was the
practical implementation of the decisions of the 20th party congress on the improve-
ment of the matter of the pension security of the working people. In subsequent
years the minimum amounts of pensions were repeatedly increased, the system of bene-
fits for working retirees was gradually enlarged.

The 1eVel of the provision with benefits for temporary disability increased sub-
stantially. The minimum amounts of the benefits were increased. some previously
existing restrictions were repealed, additional benefits were introduced.

The Law on Pensions and Benefits to Members of Kolkhozes, which was passed by the
USSR Supreme Soviet in 1964. was an important social measure. In accordance with

55

FIIICﬂﬂHCJAI.USEi(”¢LY
FOItOFFﬂﬂAl.USE20NL¥

this law kolkhoz farmers began to be provided with old-age and disability pensions,
while the members of their families began to be provided with pensions hlcase of

the loss of the breadwinner according to uniform conditions and norms for the entire
country. Maternity benefits were established for female kolkhoz farmers.

Subsequently the retirement age of kolkhor farmers was lowered, a uniform system of
social insurance, which envisages their provision with benefits for temporary dis-
ability and several other types of benefits, was introduced, the minimum amounts of
old-age pensions were increased and others. The procedure of calculating pensions,
which was established for workers, employees and their families, was extended to
the members of kolkhozes and their families.

Now a uniform system of the social security of the working people in practice has
been formed in the country. The USSR Constitution guarantees every Soviet individ-
ual the right to material security in old age. in the case of illness, complete or
partial disablement, as well as the loss of the breadwinner.

From what units is this system formed?

[First of all the USSR Constitution guaranteees the right to material security by
the social insurance of workers, employees and kolkhoz farmers and by benefits for
temporary disability] [in boldface]. Social insurance automatically applies to
every person as soon as he has gone to work. Due to social insurance no one re-
mains without material security. And no one at the same time bears any costs. the
state assumes them entirely.

The assets of social insurance are formed from the contributions of enterprises and
institutions, the amount of which is set by the government (from 6 to 9 percent of

the wage fund). As for kolkhoz farmers, a centralized fund formed from the contri-
butions of kolkhozes exists for them.

Through state social insurance in the Soviet Union benefits are issued for tempor-
ary disability, pregnancy and birth and pensions are paid. Sanatorium and health
resort treatment is also provided, the vacation of children at Pioneer camps is
organized, the extracurricular care of the children of workers and employees is car-
ried out and so on by means of the assets of state social insurance.

Vast alounts of assets are being allocated for these purposes. In 1980, for exam-
ple, their amount was 65.6 billion rubles. This exceeds by nearly threefold the
expenditures on social security and social insurance in 1965 and by 48-fold those
in 1940. In 1980 pensions and benefits in the amount of 5 billion rubles. or 5.3-
fold more than in 1965. were paid to kolkhoz farmers from the union social security
fund.

Social insurance in our country is characterized by a high level of material secur-
ity. Minimum amounts of benefits, less than which they cannot be paid, have been
set. with a continuous length of service of 8 years or more the members of trade
unions receive them in the amount of 100 percent of the wage. The benefits for
temporary disability as a result of a job injury or occupational disease are always
paid in the same amount.

56
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Benefits are paid. as a rule, from the first day of disablement until recovery or
the detemination of disability and regardless of how much time has passed since
the worker or esployee went to work. Only those dismissed from a former job for
violations of labor discipline or in connection with the emission of a crime are
an exception. however, benefits for tenorary disability by reason of job injury

or occupational disease are also issued to these workers regardless of the length
of service. -

Such is the state of affairs in our country today. In the capitalist countries so-
cial insurance to this day suffers from many defects. In particular, it does not
apply to all categories of working people. The social insurance funds to a signif-
icant extent are formed from contributions of the workers themselves. The legisla-
tion of the capitalist countries is larded with a large number of norms, which
greatly limit the possibility of the receipt by working people of support through
social insurance, and often completely deprives them of this opportunity. In many
cases the requirement of the existence of a specific period of the payment of in-
surance premiums by the worker has been established for the right to benefits. The
benefits for illness are issued not from the first day of disablement, but only
after a "waiting period," the length of which is up to 7 days, and, as a rule, does
not exceed 50-60 percent of the wage.

As was already noted, /in the Soviet Union the right to material security is guaran-
teed, in accordance with the USSR Constitution, by the payment at the expense of

the state and kolkhozes of pensions for age, disability and in the case of the loss
of the hreadwinner/ [in boldface]. They are also paid to some categories of work-
ing people for seniority.

Pensions make up the largest iten of expenditures in the budget of social insur-
ance--more than 70 percent. And this is understandable. In 1980 the number of re-
tires in our country came to b9.9\aillion, or 19 percent of the population, while,
for example, in 1941 it was lo million, or 2 percent of the population.

[Old-age pensions] [in boldface] are granted in our country to all workers and em-
ployees of a specific age and length of service. The age of men is 60 years, the
length of service is 25 years; the age of women is 55 years, the length of service
is 20 years. There are preferential exceptions which lower these limits by

5-10 years--work underground, harmful working conditions, the regions of" the Far
North and others. Old-age pensions amount to 50 to 100 percent of the wage, and
the lower the wage is, the higher the percentage of the pension is.

Let us note in this connection that in the majority of capitalist countries the re-
tirenent age is higher than in the USSR. For example, in the United States, the
ms, the Netherlands and Sweden it is 63-65 years, in Norway-~66 years. Here sig-
nificant amounts are withheld from the wages in the form of insurance premiums (in
the United States—6.6 percent, in the PKG—13.2 percent). The minimum old-age
pensions in the developed capitalist countries to a significant extent do not come
up to the offically recognized level of income, which is considered the poverty
level. According to the data of the American press, at present 22 million elderly
U.S. citizens have incomes less than the official "poverty line."

- In our country under the conditions of the steady improvement of health and the in-
crease of the length of life many retirees are continuing labor activity. At

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

present they make up nearly a third of the retirees. The Colllunist Party and the
Soviet state are creating the necessary conditions for their more extensive involve-
ment in socially useful labor, especially in the sphere of consumer service. To
some extent this is decreasing the shortage of manpower resources.

[Disability pensions] [in boldface] are granted in the case of permanent or long-
term disablement. A specific length of service is necessary for this. louver,
those who have become disabled due to a job injury or in connection with an occupa-
tion disease receive pensions regardless of the length of service and, moreover,
larger pensions.

In general the amounts of the pension are determined subject to the degree of dis-
ablement and the sector of industry, in which the insured worked. The time of the
onset of disability (before the start of labor activity, during it or after its
end) does not play a role in its granting.

The members of the family of a deceased worker or employee, who are unable to work
and were his dependents. have the right to /a pension owing to the loss of the
breadwinner/ [in boldface].

lThe USSR Constitution guarantees job placement for citizens who have become par-
tially disabled] [in boldface]. The duty to provide such people with work within
their power is assigned to the administration of enterprises and institutions. If
no such opportunities exist at the enterprise or institution, at which the person
worked prior to the determination of disability, the organs of social insurance
assume the trouble of finding him work. They are guided by the recomndations of
expert medical and labor conisaions. For the disabled an incomplete workday or an
incomplete work week is established, special shops are organized and vocational
training is conducted.

In accordance with the USSR Constitution, the right to material security is guaran-
teed by the concern about elderly citizens and the disabled/ [in boldface]. For

this purpose a network of boarding homes, which are maintained entirely at state
expense, has been created in our country.

The Comunist Party and the Soviet state surround with special care and attention
the disabled and participants in the Great Patriotic Her and the families of dead
servicemen. In the USSR all the necessary steps are taken to improve their every-
day material living conditions. ”The respect for veterans of historic battles and
concern about them," 1.. I. Brezhnev said, "are a moral law of our life, a law both
for the authorities and for every citizen."5

It should be emphasized that support through social insurance is carried out in the
Soviet Union not in equalizing (identical for all) norms and amounts. here the
amount of the wage, the length of service, working conditions and others are taken
into account. This is fully in keeping with the principle "from each according to
his ability, to each according to his labor." Precisely for this reason, for ex-
ample, the suggestions received during the discussion of the draft of the new USSR
Constitution on the introduction of identical pensions for all or on the fact that
their amount should be determined exclusively on the basis of the length of service,
without consideration of the skills of the workers and the nature of their labor,
were not adopted.

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The management of social insurance has been organized on a broad democratic basis.
The main work here is performed by the factory, plant and local conittees of the
trade unions. They grant benefits, grant workers and anloyees travel authoriza-
tions for sanstoriun and health resort treatment, to holiday house, tourist and
convalescent institutions and children's s1-er ems, check the organization of
medical service, keep an eye on the timely payment by enterprises, institutions and
organizations of the contributions for social insurance. workers and employees
participate in this work through the trade union col-issions for social insurance.
The rights of the trade unions on this account are established by legislation.

The governnent--the services of the ministries of social security of the union re-
publics—are directly engaged in the granting of pensions and the determination of
disability, while the right to monitor this activity belongs to the trade unions.

Let us note for cowarison that in the capitalist countries the decisive role in
the councils of insurance offices belongs to employers and their agents, who man-
age the contributions of the workers at their own discretion.

Social insurance in our country is being constantly improved and developed. In con-
formity with the decisions of the 26th party congress the minimum amount of old-age
and disability pensions for workers, emloyees and the nenbers of kolkhozes will be
increased, while other measures on the further inrovement of the social security

of the population will also be implemented. Concrete measures on this account were
specified in the decree of the CPSU Central Couittee and the USSR Council of Hin-
isters "0n Measures to Further Improve the Social Security of the Population," which
was adopted inasdiately after the congress. Our goal is the gradual transition to
the complete support of those unable to work at the expense of society.

FOOTNOTES
1. PRAVDA, 11 October 1937.
2. See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyekh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenunov Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenums

of the Central Cousittee], 8th edition, Vol 1, Moscow, 1970, pp 336-339.

3. H. l. Kalinin, "Izbrannyye proisvedeniya" [Selected Works], in lo volumes,
Vol 3, Moscow, 1962, pp 272-273.

lo. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. aobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 21, p 1107.

S. L. I. Brezhnev, "beninskim kursom” [By the Leninist Course], Vol 5, Moscow,
1976, p 288.

59
FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
EUR WI'I‘JAI. U51; UNLI

088R citizens have the right to housing.
Pros Article 46 of the USSR Constitution

The right of the Soviet people to housing, just as the right to the protection of
health, was sanctioned for the first tine in the new USSR Constitution. This be-
came possible as a result of the consistent inplenentation in our country of the
enormous program of housing construction, which was elaborated by the Con-unist
Party and was implemented under its supervision during the years of Soviet power.

In order to fully appreciate the scale of the work which was done, it is useful to
recall what the "housing question" was in prerevolutionary Russia. The development
of capitalisn was accompanied by the rapid growth of the urban population. At the
ease tine, of course, there arose an enornous denand for housing, which developed
at the end of the last century and the beginning of this century into a most acute
housing crisis. Everywhere, as V. I. Lenin wrote, "alongside the luxurious pal-
aces of the wealthy (or on the outskirts of cities) there arose the shacks of
workers, who were forced to live in base-eats, in overcrowded deep and cold apart-
ments, or else directly in dugouts near new industrial establish-exits."l

In Moscow in 1912 nearly 850,000 people, or 70 percent of the population, lived in
extremely crowded conditions, in basements and barns. In Petersburg, according to
inconplete data, there were 150,000 "corner" and "bed" tenants, 63,000 lived in
base-ents, about two-thirds of the single workers rented one double bed. The chair-
man of the health connission of the State Duns, after visiting the workers' dwell-
ings, noted that "the living population on the Vyborg Side is quartered more close-
ly than the dead population in a censtery."2

In other industrial cities the situation was even worse. Nearly half of the miners
of the Donbass in 1912 lived in deep dugouts without floors and windows. concerning
which the journal RUSSKOYB BOGATSTVO wrote that these are "sore of a den of ani-
nals than a hunan dwelling."3 The great proletarian writer Haksin Gor'kiy compared
the huts of the Baku oil workers with a heap of ruins after an earthquake, the
dwellings of prehistoric people. The Ural miners and nstalworkers, the Ivanovo-
Voskresensk textile workers and the workers of many other industrial cities and
regions lived under sinilar conditions.

60

I!"l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1AI.USEtoﬂlY
In the overcrowding of workers' dwellings tsarist Russia held first place in Europe
and was at the level of the most backward colonial countries. The state of munici-
pal services and the civic improvement of cities corresponded completely to this.
The working people lived, as a rule, in the outskirts, without lighting, water and
a sewer system. under the conditions ofappalling unsanitsrineas.

In the budget of the family of a worker the expenditures for a roof over the head
made up 20-25 percent, while in the case of the rental of a separate room or two
rooms they increased respectively to 60-60 percent. According to official data, in
1903 Moscow landlords received from the rental of dwellings a net profit of 1&7 mil-
lion rubles, or two-thirds of the received amount of rent. The cost of dwellings,
which was excessive even for skilled workers, made inaccessible to the working
people apartment houses furnished in the slightest degree with amenities. In 1910,
when the need for housing in Moscow had become especially acute. about 5,000 multi-
room apartments with all the amenities were vacant in the prosperous districts of
the city.

The countryside also had its contrasts. while the kulaks, priests and merchants
built for themselves large houses roofed with iron, the poor peasants lived in small
huts with straw roofs and dirt floors, many of which were heated, as they said in
those times, in the black manner-the smoke came out the door. During the cold
winter months along with the people the animals were also accommodated here.

The basic principles and directions of the policy of the Communist Party in the
area of housing were elaborated by V. I. Lenin back before the Great October Social-
ist Revolution. He, in particular, emphasized that /“only the abolition of the
private ownership of land and the construction of inexpensive and sanitary apart-
ments can solve the housing quastion"/‘ [in boldface], that "the proletarian state
must forcibly quarter the extremely needy family in the apartment of a rich man,"5
that the working people "can and should themselves set about the /proper/ [in ,
italics], most strictly regulated, organized distribution... of apartments... /in
the interests of the poor/"[in italics].6 During the period of the building of
socialism, V. I. Lenin wrote, "the leasing of apartments belonging to all the people
to individual families for a fee presumes the collection of this fee, some monitor-
ing and some standardization or other of the allocation of apartments," and only
under communism "will it be possible to turn over apartments free of charge"7 for
the use of each family.

Our party set about solving the housing problem hmnediately after the victory of
October. By the first decrees of the Soviet regime the houses belonging to capi-
talists and aristocrats were expropriated, hundreds of thousands of workers received
well-appointed housing. Low-paid workers and employees, as well as the families of
Red Army soldiers were completely exempt during the war from rent. Landlords were
forbidden to make any increase of the rent whatsoever.

In the pursuit of the housing policy the decree "0n the Abolition of the Right of
the Private Ownership of Real Estate in Cities" was of great importance. In con-
formity with this decree developed and undeveloped lots and all more or less large,
so-called profitable, apartment houses passed into the hands of the Soviet state.
The management of the expropriated apartment houses was entrusted to the house com-
mittees, which were elected at general meetings of the tenants.

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI¢MNWCIAL.US£(NNLY

The "housing reallotment" took place under the conditions of a fierce class strug-
gle. The former owners attempted with all their might to retain their possessions.
Frequently bureaucrats and the middle bourgeoisie seized control of municipal-
ized apartment houses and sabotaged the decisions of the Soviet regime.

Of course. the redistribution of housing alone was far from sufficient to solve the
housing crisis, which was aggravated even more as a result of the civil war and for-
eign intervention, which did considerable harm to the available housing.

"The task of the Russian Communist Party." it was stated in the second Party Pro-
gram, "is... to strive with all its might for the improvement of the housing condi-
tions of the working masses; for the elimination of the overcrowding and unsanitari-
ness of old blocks, the rating of unfit dwellings, the rebuilding of old ones, the
building of new ones. which are in keeping with the new living conditions of the
working masses, for the rational settlement of the working people."8

In order to solve the urgent housing question, it was necessary to launch the con-
struction of apartment houses on an extensive scale. However. the economic base of
the young Soviet state was too weak for this. the construction industry in prac-
tice was nonexistent. After the civil war the efforts of the party were focused
first of all on the restoration of industry, transportation and agriculture. Hous-
ing construction was carried out in small amounts. for the most part by the individ-
ual method with the aid of state credit (assets were allocated primarily for the
repair of wrecked buildings).

At the same time the Communist Party and the Soviet state sought every means which
made it possible to ease the housing situation of the working people. For this
purpose, in particular, the above-standard surpluses of living space were confis-
cated from institutions and individual citizens, steps were taken to combat the de-
struction of dwellings and so on.

Under the conditions of the economic difficulties the party recognized it to be nec-
essary to use in the interests of the development of housing construction the initi-
ative of the population with the attraction of their physical assets. As was noted
at the 13th party congress, “the housing cooperative is the best form of such initi-
ative 1n the elimination of the need of the working people for housing."9 Coopera-
tive construction was carried out on a proportionate basis using the assets of the
state and the members of the cooperatives.

Following the conclusion of the restoration period and in connection with the tran-
sition to socialist industrialization the housing question acquired paramount im-
portance. The growth rate of housing construction lagged significantly behind the
growth rate of the working class. Owing to this the average norms of living space
decreased. The housing shortage, moreover. checked the development of industry and
the increase of production personnel.

In this connection the July (1926) united Plenum of the Central Committee and Cen-
tral Control Coulission of the All-Union Col-unist Party (of Bolsheviks) elaborated
urgent measures on the improvement of workers' housing construction: the creation
of a permanent fund of financing; the drawing up of plans of the construction of
housing, which were coordinated with the plans of the restoration of industry in the
largest industrial centers and regions; the consolidation and decrease of the cost

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of construction; the streamlining of the work of state construction offices; the de-
velopment of the production of construction materials; the developnent of the least
expensive type of dwellings, which was tailored for the needs of the workers, with
allowance made for the possibility of using local construction materials; the de—
crease of the cost of credit.10 The decisions of the plenum were the basis for the
planned development of all housing construction in our country. Industrial and
transportation enterprises, as well as the local soviets became the min builders
of workers' dwellings.

During those years the construction of temporary dwellings was carried out on a
large scale. This stemmed from the need for the quickest possible provision of
housing to the workers coming to plants and construction projects, as well as from
the saving of physical assets which were allocated first of all for the development
of industry. Many construction workers had to live at first in plank barracks,

tents. or else in dugouts. But the Soviet people consciously agreed to these tem-
porary difficulties.

The decrees of the 16th party congress, which advanced the task of "the decisive
speeding up of the changeover to industrial methods of construction by means of
standardization, the use of type designs and timely designing, as well as the maxi-
mum mechanization of construction operations and the transition to year-round con-
struction and the creation of permanent staffs of construction workers,"11 were of
great importance for the further development of housing construction. The deci-
sions of the congress marked the beginning of a qualitatively new stage. The con-
struction materials industry began to be developed more rapidly, equipment set off
for construction projects.

The development of old industrial centers and the rapid growth of new cities and
workers' settlements raised for the party the task of the renovation of municipal
services as applied to the scale of industrial construction, the size of the urban
population and the cultural and personal needs of the working people. These ques-
tions were examined thoroughly at the June (1931) Plenum of the Central Committee
of the All-Union Commist Party (of Bolsheviks), which adopted the decree "0n
Moscow Municipal Services and on the Development of lhmicipsl Services in the USSR."
The implementation of this decree cosmenced the socialist renovation of Moscow and
other cities.

With the strengthening of the socialist economy the state obtained the opportunity
to assme almost entirely the concern about urban housing construction. The man-
agement of all available state housing, the technical and sanitary inspection and
nonitoring of the maintenance and repair of buildings were entrusted to the local
:oviets and to those state enterprises and institutions. which had apartment houses
under their jurisdiction.

during the first years of Soviet power the legislation on rent was steadily in-
armed. Its amount was made dependent upon the social status of the tenant, his
income and wages. the quality and amenities of the housing, the self-sufficiency
and profitability of the housing services and so on. This system was completely
formed in 1926-1929, when rent laws, which specified the general procedure of its
calculation, were promulgated. The state assumed the basic housing costs.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the years of the first five-year plans 129.6 million In2 of housing were

built by state enterprises and institutions, local soviets, as well as the working
people by means of their own savings and state credit. The scale and rate in—
creased steadily. the quality of housing construction improved. By the end of 19é0
the total amount of available urban housing came to 421 million m2 and had increased
more than 2.3—fold as compared with 1913. Moreover, apartment houses with a total
area of 254 million I:2 had been built in rural areas since 1918.

The provision of cities with amenities improved appreciably. At the beginning of
1940 in cities and workers' settlements 67 percent of the dwellings were provided
with water pipes, 40 percent-~sswer systems, 18 percent-central heating.

The increase of housing construction. which was enormous according to that scale.
at the same time was not able to adequately meet the need for well—appointed hous-
ing. The ranks of the working class, employees and the intelligentsia increased.
Thus, whereas in 1926-1930 the number of urban residents increased on the average
by 1.5 million a year, in 1931-1932 it was already increasing by 3.3 million. By
1940 the size of the urban population came to 63 million. Therefore the average
provision of housing during this period still remained low.

It must be borne in mind that the party and state. in spite of the steadily in-
creased capital investments in housing construction, were able to allocated only
limited assets for these purposes. Every "extra" ruble was allocated for the in-
tensive development of heavy industry and the strengthening of the defense of the
country.

During the years of the Great Patriotic War the entire economy of the country was
subordinate to the needs of the front, and it is quite understandable that the
amount of housing construction declined sharply. Housing was built mainly in the
eastern regions of the country, to which more than 10 million people were evacuated.
In the new regions it was necessary to hastily build temporary dwellings for them
and to accounodate people by means of the considerable reduction of the space per
person in the available housing.

The war greatly aggravated the housing question. The fascists destroyed and burned
on the territory of the Soviet Union 1,710 cities and workers' settlements, more
than 70,000 villages and towns and 6 million buildings. In Belorussia, for example,
they destroyed three-fourths of the available housing. Kiev, Minsk, Stalingrad,
Novogorod, Sevastopol', Smolensk and many other ancient and new cities were turned
into ruins. About 25 million people were left homeless.

After the victory in the Great Yatriotic "or restoration work was launched on an ex-
tensive scale in the country, new housing construction took on a large scope. The
Law on the Five-Year Plan of the Restoration and Development of the National Econ-
omy for 1946-1950 advanced the task "to carry out the restoration of the wrecked
available housing of cities, workers' settlements and villages in the regions which
had been subject to occupation and to launch new housing construction on a scale
which ensures the considerable improvement of the housing conditions of the working
people."12 During those years 200.9 million In2 of living space were built in the
cities and rural areas, the restoration of the destroyed available housing was near-

ly completed.

65
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLV
The high rate of development of the USSR national economy created the conditions

for the further development of housing construction. The following figures elo—
quently testify to its pace: whereas in 1961-1965 the state capital investments in
housing construction came to 33.6 billion rubles, in 1976-1980 they came to 68.1 bil-
lion rubles. The capacities of construction and installation organizations are in-
creasing, the level of the industrialization and mechanization of construction and
installation work is rising, advanced technology and new, modern designs are being
introduced, the practice of prefabricated housing construction is being extended.

It has become the rule to put into operation annually approximatel 100 million In2

of housing. In all during the years of Soviet power 3.5 billion m of it have been
built in our country.

/The development of available state and public housing was a reliable material
guarantee of the right of the Soviet people to housing] [in boldface]. During the
past 15 years the growth rate of available housing has exceeded by many times the
rate of increase of the urban population. About 11 million people annually improve

their housing conditions. In the scale of housing construction the Soviet Union
holds first place in the world.

The task of providing every Soviet family with a separate well-appointed apartment
is being gradually accomplished. By the end of the 10th Five-Year Plan the propor-
tion of these families had increased in the cities to 80 percent. The resettlement
of all families, who live in semibasement, barrack and dilapidated buildings, in
apartment houses with all modern conveniences is approaching completion.

The steady increase of the volumes of housing construction is being accompanied in
our country by a significant improvement of its quality. Now more than half of the
housing is being built according to new standard designs, which are distinguished
from their predecessors by a more convenient layout and larger sizes of apartments.
The engineering equipment has become more perfect.

The dwellings in cities and urban-type settlements at the end of 1980 were complete-
ly electrified, 89 percent were provided with water mains, 86 percent-centra1 heat-
ing, 87 percent--sewer systems, 55 percent--hot water, 79 percent-gas service.
Mainly one- and two-apartment houses with utility rooms and outbuildings are being
built in the villages.

lThe USSR Constitution guarantees the right to housing by a low fee for the apart—
ment and municipal services/ [in boldface]. Our state provides the bulk of apart-
ments to working people free of charge. The rent has remained unchanged since 1928
and along with the charge for municipal services amounts on the average to 3 percent
in the budget of the family of the worker and employee. Meanwhile the set of modern
conveniences cannot be compared with what it was in the past.

In no capitalist country do the people receive housing from the state free of charge
and pay so little for it. In the ERG, for example, a skilled worker is forced to
spend on housing a third, at best a fourth cf his wages. Rent amounts to 20-30 per-
cent of the family budget ixlother capitalist countries as well. Tens of thousands
of apartments are vacant in New York, London and Tokyo. because simple workers can-
not afford them. According to UN data, at present 180 million people in the world
are totally without shelter.

6S

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/The right to housing is guaranteed, in accordance with the USSR Constitution, by
the fair distribution of the living space under public control/ [in boldface]. The
procedure of registering citizens, who need to improve their housing conditions,
and of granting housing and the norms of living space are established by state
organs. The registration of citizens. who need to improve their housing conditions,
the establishment of the order of priority in the receipt of living space, as well
as its allocation in apartment houses of the available state and public housing are
carried out under public control and with the observance of publicity. An impor-
tant role in this belongs to the trade unions and other public organizations.

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the right to housing by the preservation of avail-
able state and public housing] [in boldface]. Along with increasing it the state
has to allocate more and more assets for the maintenance of housing and for municiw
pal services. Hhereas in 1960 these expenditures came to 100 million rubles, in
1965 they came to 2.3 billion rubles, in l975--b.9 billion rubles, in 1980-

6.9 billion rubles. Let us note that the rent of the population along with the

payment for municipal services covers less than a third of the expenditures for
these purposes.

In our countries the soviets of people's deputies with the participation of trade
unions and other public organizations monitor the use and safe keeping of housing.

/The state, in accordance with the USSR Constitution, promotes cooperative and in-
dividual housing construction/ [in boldface]. House building cooperatives are set
up within the executive committees of the local soviets, as well as at enterprises,
organizations and institutions. Citizens, who need to improve their housing condi"
tiona, may join a cooperative and receive a well-appointed apartment for permanent
use. The state grants them credit in the amount of up to 60-70 percent of the esti-
mated cc t of construction for 10-15 years. The construction of cooperative apart-
ment houses is included in the state plan of contracting construction and installa-
tion work and is provided with materials and equipment. The state provides house
building cooperatives with aid in the operation and repair of their apartment
houses, as well as provides assistance in the construction and repair of individ-
ual houses and their provision with amenities.

The strenghtening of legality in the area of housing relations is of great impor-
tance for the guarantee of the right to housing. The Fundamentals of Housing Legis-
lation of the USSR and the Union Republics, the draft of which was submitted for
national discussed. and then was passed in June 1981 by the USSR Supreme Soviet,

are called upon to play an important role in this.

Everything that has been said, of course. does not uean that the housing problem in
our country hasbeen completely solved. There are many families who still live in
communal apartments lacking amenities. The state for the present is unable to
grant housing immediately to the families of young couples. Moreover, the steadily
increasing needs of the Soviet people are making greater and greater demands on the
quality and comfort of housing. That is why housing, as was noted at the 26th
party congress, occupies the most important place in our social program, the great
scale of housing construction will also be maintained in the Soviet Union in the
future.13 The party is setting the goal to achieve for the most part during the
1980's the provision of every family with a separate apartment.1‘

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.
2.
3.
6.
S.
6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

110.

was
V. I. Lenin, ”Poln. oobr. ooch." [Co-plate Works], Vol 2, p 90.
See STROITBL'RAYA GAZBTA, 13 August 1967.
RUSSKOYB BOGATSTVO, 110 6, 1907.
V. I. Lenin, "Poln. oobr. noel..." Vol 32, p 159.
Ibid., V01 34, p 314.
Ibid., Vol 34, p 316.
Ibid., V01 33, pp 58, 59.
"st v rezolyutoiyakh i rcshaniyakh 3"yezdov, koaferentoiy i plem-ov Tel!"
[The CPSL: in Resolutions and Dccinionn of Coast-«us, Conferences 1nd Plenum
of the Central Committee], 8th «lition, Vol 2, Hoocov, 1970, p 57.

"USS v rezolyutaiyakh i tuhcniyakh 0"yczdov, kouferentaiy i planunov Tax,"
8th edition, Vol 3, Hoscow, 1970, p 74.

Ibid., pp 352-353.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i reaheniyakh 3"yezdov, konfcrcntoiy i plenunov Tax,"
8th edition, Vol 6, Moscow, 1970, pp 639-1060.

MST! vzmovnoco SOVB‘I'A 888R, No 11, 19106.

See "Haterialy XXVI 3"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CTSU Congress],
Moscow, 1981, p 60.

Ibid., p 136.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI UI'I'ILIAI. U3}. ONLY

PART III. RIGRTS IN THE AREA OF CULTURE

The USSR Constitution provides the Soviet people with extensive rights and freedons
in the area of culture. Among than are the right to an education, the right to use
the achievements of culture and the freedom of creative scientific, technical and
artistic work. These rights and freedoms are the natural result of the truly cul-
tural revolution, which was carried out in our country, and the creation of a new,
socialist culture.

Great October was the starting point and a necessary condition of the spiritual
emancipation of the working people. As V. I. Lenin noted, "in our country the po-
litical and economic change was a predecessor of that cultural change, that cultur-
a1 revolution, which we nevertheless now face."1

The cultural revolution was an inseparable conponent of Lenin's plan of the build-
ing of socialism. In specifying its tasks, the Communist Party proceeded from the
fact that the new culture could not be created in a void, in isolation fro. all the
material and spiritual values of the past. The party fought most resolutely against
the advocates of what was called "pure proletarian culture," the talk about which
V. I. Lenin called "pure nonsense." Not to invent some special culture, but "to
take that culture, which was created by all social relations and was left as the
material basis of socialism"2--thus V. I. Lenin set the goal. "Proletarian cul-
ture," he indicated, "should be the natural development of those stores of knowl-
edge, which mankind developed under the yoke of capitalist society, the society of
landlords, the society of bureaucrats."3

The difficulty was to approach correctly, practically and critically the question of
the use of culture of the past and not to stray from class positions. It was neces-
sary not to miss anything valuable and at the sane time "not to cram one's mind
with junk which is not necessary."‘ "...He take [from each/ [in italics] national
culture," V. I. Lenin stressed. "/only/ [in italics] its democratic and its social-
ist elements, we take them [only] [in italics) and lunconditionslly/ [in italics]

to counterbalance bourgeois culture...."5

Thus, in setting about the cultural revolution, the party advanced a three-in-one
task: to eliminate the reactionary content of bourgeois-landowner culture; to
seize and place at the service of the people all the achievements of culture of the
past; to create on this basis socialist culture.

68

FOIIOFFNJA1.USE(HNLY
Lenin's program of the cultural revolution included both the creation of the body
of the new national intelligentsia and the enlistment of old specialists in the
building of socialism. "Every specialist," V. I. Lenin indicated, "must be valued

as the only property of technology and culture. without which there cannot be any-
thing, any communism."6

The Communist Party and the Soviet state exerted much effort to enlist the old in-
telligentsia in cooperation, firmly and persistently pursued the policy of winning
it over and gradually involved it in the building of a new life. As a result, a
larger and larger number of specialists shifted from sentiments of animosity, dis-
trust and temporizing to active participation in the common causes of the people.

Questions of the building of culture were constantly in the purview of the Commu-
nist Party. They were examined at party congresses and conferences and Central Com-
mittee plenums and were given concrete expression in special decisions. Relying on
the triumph of socialism in the political and economic fields, the Soviet people

under party supervision successfully carried out the cultural revolution in a his-
torically short period.

During those years the body of the new, Soviet intelligentsia was trained, a radi-
cal change occurred in the matter of the convergence of the old intelligentsia with
the working people. Speaking in 1936 at the All-Union Congress of Soviets, Vice
President of the USSR Academy of Sciences V. L. Komarov said: "...Ths Soviet intel-

ligentsia is a completely new intelligentsia, an intelligentsia which serves the
people.“

With each new stage in the development of socialist society the amount and scope of
the building of culture increased, its content became more profound. Along with the
strengthening of the economy and the increase of the well-being the cultural level
of the Soviet people rose. In the lifetime of just one generation they not only

got rid of illiteracy, but also became an active creator of spiritual values.

Mature socialism provides the working people with extensive access to the riches of
culture. The material base of institutions of culture and education has been
strengthened considerably. In our country numerous members of the intelligentsia
have been trained, advanced science, literature and art. which are making a signifi-
cant contribution to world civilization, have been developed. The differences in
the cultural character of the different classes and social groups are gradually be-
ing obliterated, the process of the mutual enrichment of national cultures is taking
place. Socialist culture has become a culture of millions and for millions. It is
the fundamental fusion of the spiritual values created by all the peoples. Concern
about their preservation, augmentation and extensive use for moral and esthetic edu-
cation and the increase of the cultural level of the Soviet people is the constitu-
tional duty of our state.

The interests of the building of coalaunism require the further cultural development
of the people. "without a high level of culture, education, social consciousness
and inner maturity of people," L. I. Brezhnev said, "communism is impossible, gust
as it is also impossible without the appropriate material and technical base."

The basic tasks and trends of the formation of the spiritual culture of communism
were examined at recent CPSU Congresses and were developed in many of its

69

INIR‘OFFWCJAL.USIZ(MVLY
FilliﬂﬂQLJAl.UBLIJNLY

decisions. Ihe enhancement of the role of culture in the communist education of

the working people, the utmost development of the spiritual potential of socialist
society and its maxim utilizatioa for the purpose of the formation of the harmoni-
ously developed individual, the elaboration of new moral and esthetic values and

the affirmation of comuniat ideals—such are the min tasks of culture at the pres-
ent stage. The realization of the rights and freedoms in the area of culture. which
are guaranteed by the USSR Constitution, is called upon to promote the successful
accomplish-eat of these tasks.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. aohr. aoch." [Complete Works], Vol 1'05, p 377.
2. Ibid., Vol 36, p 263.

3. Ibid., Vol 41, pp 304-305.

lo. Ihid., Vol 101, p 305.

5. Ibid., vol 26, p 121.

6. Ibid., Vol 40, p 217.

7.‘ PRAVDA, 29 November 1936.

8. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursou" [By the Leniniat Course], Vol 3, Moscow,
1972, p 287.

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHAPTER 7. FROM ILLITBRACY 1‘0 A UNIVERSAL mason! SECONDARY EDUCATION

USSR citizens have the right to an educa-
tion.

Prom Article 1:5 of the USSR Constitution

We are by right proud of the fact that the Soviet people are called today the lost
educated in the world. This is a great achievement of our revolution.

In tearist Russia nearly four-fifths of the adult population did not know how to
read or write, there were only 67 students at educational institutions of all types
per 1,000 inhabitants. There were only 290,000 people, less than 0.2 percent, with
a higher, inconplete higher and secondary specialised education in the country of
160 nillion. Among many non-Russian peoples the literate anounted literally to a
handful. According to the data of the 1897 census, among Kazakhs they came to

2.1 percent, Uzbek-4.6 percent, Turbaens-‘OJ percent, Kirghiz—0.6 percent and
Taj iks--0.5 percent. Kore than 60 nationalities did not have their own writing sys-
tem. "...Such a wild country, in which the mass of people have been [robbed] [in
italics] in the sense of education, society and Imowledge," V. I. Lenin wrote, "not
one such country renains in Europe. except for Russia."

At the beginning of the century the journal VBSTNIK VOSPITANIYA. touching upon the
prospects of the development of Russian culture, forecast that 180 years would be
needed for the achieve-ant of the universal literacy of men and 280-300 years for
women. There were sufficient grounds for such a forecast. Tsarist Russia spent
considerably less for the needs of education than for the maintenance of prisons
and the police force, education was the privilege and exclusive right of the ruling
classes.

The peasant women Anan‘yeva, who was arrested for taking part in the revolutionary
novensnt, wrote in her deposition that she dreamed of sending her son to a gymn-
siun. Having read this deposition, Tsar Aleksandr III made the note: "This is
terrible. A peasant, but gets into a gymnasim!" The Ministry of Education, but
more correctly of "public disenlightennent," as V. l. Lenin called it, issued a
special circular which prohibited the admission to gymnasium of “children of coach-
nen, footnen. cooks, laundresses, small shopkeepers and similar people, whose chil-
dren should not aspire at all for a secondary and higher education."

The demands of the working class in the area of education were set forth in the
first Program of our party. They included "free and conpulaory general and

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OII'HCIAL USE ONLY

vocational education for all children of both sexes up to 16 years of age; the pro-
vision of poor children with food, clothing and textbooks at state expense," as

well as "the right of the population to receive an education in their native lan-
guage, which is ensured by the building of the schools necessary for this at the ex-
pense of the state and organs of self-government."‘ The party linked the realiza—
tion of these demands with its immediate political task-~the overthrow of the tset-
ist autocracy and its replacement with a democratic republic.

The Great October Socialist Revolution cleared for the working people a broad path
to knowledge.

The People's Commissariat of Education was created by one of the first decrees of
the Soviet regime. All elementary, secondary and higher, opened and closed, gener-
al educational and specialized educational institutions were placed under its jur-
isdiction, the tasks, rights and duties of the organs of public education were spe-
cified; the interference of the church in school affairs was completely eliminated.
Access to a higher education was afforded to the children of workers and peasants
by the decree "0n the Rules of Admission to Higher Educational Institutions of the
RSFSR." Education at higher educational institutions became free, stipends were
established for needy students, the representatives of the propertied classes were
deprived of all privileges when enrolling in higher educational institutions.

The Soviet regime created a fundamentally new, socialist system of education, which
affords all working people the opportunity to receive a general and specialized edu-
cation. The basic principles of this system, which were elaborated by the Commu—
nist Party back before the revolution, were formulated in its second Program. Among
them are free and compulsory general and polytechnical education for all children

up to 17 years of age; instruction in the native language; the joint education of
children of both sexes; freedom from any religious influence whatsoever; the close
connection of education with socially productive labor; comprehensive state assist-
ance to the self-education of workers and peasants; the extensive development of
vocational education for people 17 years of age and older; wide access to the high-
er school for all those who wish to study, and first of all for workers; the mate-
rial support of students and others.5

There served as the fundamental basis for the development of the Soviet school
Lenin's instructions on the need to link it with life, with the policy of the so-
cialist state. V. I. Lenin viewed the mastering of the fundamentals of the sci-
ences, extensive polytechicsl education, the formation of a scientific world out-
look and the cultivation of communist morale in fundamental unity. He especially
stressed the need to combine training with daily practical work on the building of
a new life.

The party set for itself a priority task: to eliminate a disgraceful legacy of
tsarism—-the illiteracy of the adult population. V. I. Lenin stressed that "the
campaign against illiteracy is a task /more important than others/"6 [in italics],
that in "an illiterate country it is impossible to build a communist society,"7
that "the illiterate person stands outside politics...."8

This was a difficult task. Tens of millions of people had to be taught, a writing
system has to be created for the nationalities not having it, numerous national,

72

FOIIOFTWCJAI.USIi0NLY
religious and everyday prejudices had to be overcome. The party and the Soviet

regime began this work under the most difficult conditions of the civil war and
foreign intervention.

The decree "0n the Elinination of Illiteracy Among the Population of the RSFSR" was
adopted in January 1919. The entire population of the republic from 8 to 50 years
of age, who did not know how to read and write, was obligated to learn to read and
write in their native language or Russian, as desired.

The number of illiterate people was so great that it was impossible to solve the
problen only by means of professional teachers. The Col-unist Party appealed to the
public to organize a "literacy caspaign." The All-Russian Extraordinary Conission
for the Elimination of Illiteracy was formed within the Council of People's Canis-
sars, the voluntary society "Down Hith Illiteracy" was founded. Party, Komsomol
and trade union organizations, «missions for work among women and many prominent
figures of the young socialist culture actively participated in this movement. The
organs of public education acquired the right to enlist the entire literate popula-
tion by way of labor service in this work. The workday for illiterates was short-
ened for study time by 2 hours with the retention of pay.

There were not enough writing accessories, paper, fuel, lighting, school equipment
and textbooks. They often wrote on posters and newspapers with charcoal and ink
made from beets or soot. But there was not a corner in the country, where people

were not studying. In just 1 year about 3 million people were taught to read and
write.

In the process of eliminating illiteracy the foundations of the adult education sys-
tem were laid. Schools with a 10-month period of instruction at the level of

2 years of the elementary school and schools for the semiliterate with a complete
course of elenentary education began to appear. At that tine adult schools of a
higher type, which provided knowledge to the extent of the incomplete secondary and
secondary school, were also set up.

Immediately after the revolution work was begun on the development of the network
of elenentary and secondary schools. Comne schools were set up for children who
had been left parentless. The Communist Party and the Soviet state tried persist-
ently to see to it that the education of children and adolescents would be univer-
sal.

Many teachers, especially of elementary schools, who were close to the people,

greeted the new regime and viewed with approval the actions and ideas of the com-
nists in the area of public education. However, the instructors of secondary edu-
cational institutions, and especially the representatives of old pedagogy, at first
were for the most part hostile-minded. Their mouthpiece was the journal PEDAGOGI—
CHBSKAYA MYSL', which in 1921 wrote that the creation of the new Soviet school was
ostensibly one of the greatest disasters to have fallen upon Russian education.

The party launched an active campaign for teachers. It helped teachers to under-
stand the essence of the revolutionary changes, the domestic and international situ-

ation, and to determine their place in the building of the new life and the new,
Soviet school. At the same tine the party was concerned about the moral prestige

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the teacher. about his material circumstances and everyday living conditions.
"The public teacher should be placed in our country at such a level," V. I. Lenin
demanded,"at which he never was, is not and cannot be in bourgeois society."9

In the end the party won the battle for the largest detachment of the intelligent-
sia. In the declaration of the First All-Union Congress of Teachers (I925) it was
stated: "Here, there and everywhere we will be the loyal assistants of the Soviet
regime and the Cosmonist Party in their world historical work, for we now know that
the cause which the party is making is the cause of all working mankind."10

The higher school was radically reorganized. The reactionary portion of the bour-
geois professors, who were hostile-minded to the Soviet regime, openly sabotaged

the measures being implemented andtookevery step not to allow the working people
to enter science.

The party enlisted in the work the professors and instructors who were loyal to the
Soviet regime. and devoted great attention to conducting political educational work
among them. At the same time institutes of red professors were organized in Moscow
and Petrograd for the training of instructors in the social sciences. A consider-
able group of highly skilled party workers was sent as lecturers and directors of
higher educational institutions.

Of course. during the first years of Soviet power the attraction of working people
to higher educational institutions encountered serious difficulties. For the over-
whelming majority of workers and peasants did not have the proper general education-
al training. Therefore. in 1919 workers' faculties, which enabled young workers and
peasants to receive a secondary education and to enroll in higher educational insti-
tutions, began to be created on the initiative of V. I. Lenin. During the 1925/26
school year the graduates of these faculties made up about 26 percent of all those
who enrolled in higher educational institutions. The sending of workers and peas-
ants to study at higher educational institutions through party, trade union and
Komsomol mobilizations was of great importance.

During the first years of Soviet power much work was done to expand the training of
specialists of the highest. as well as intermediate skills. At the same time the
Communist Party and the Soviet state attached great importance to the training of
the regular force of skilled workers. For these purposes a new type of vocational
and technical educational institutions-schools of factory and plant apprentice-
ship--was created in 1920.

By the early 1930's new tasks in the area of education faced the Communist Party
and the Soviet state.

The need for skilled personnel increased under the conditions of the restoration of
the national economy. The party Central Committee considered it necessary to re-
organize radicallytheentire system of work on the elimination of illiteracy on the
basis of a unified plan and the pooling of all forces and assets. Practical meas-
ures on this account were specified in the Central Committee decree "0n the Hork on
the Elimination of Illiteracy" (1929). By the 15th anniversary of October a writing
system had been created for all the nationalities which had not had it before the
revolution. Before the Great Patriotic Her our country had in essence approached
the complete elimination of illiteracy.

7‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
School construction acquired an especially extensive scale during the years of the
first five-year plans. In conformity with the decisions of the 16th Congress of the
All-Union Communist Party (of Bolsheviks) the party Central Committee adopted the
decree "0n Universal Compulsory Elementary Education." It was introduced every-
where, beginning at 8 years of age, as well as for all over-age children 11-15 years
of age, who had not received it earlier. This major state reform, which H. Cor'kiy
characterized as the equalization of all youth in the rights to the development of
the mind. was carried out in 3 years. The universal compulsory education of boys
and girls to the extent of the 7-year school was introduced in industrial cities,
factory and plant regions and workers' settlements.

During the years of the first five-year plans the network of 7-year and secondary
schools grew rapidly. During the 1940/61 school years 7-year education had basical-
ly been introduced in the cities. the number of teachers came to more than 1.2 mil-
lion, or 4.4-fold more than there were of them before the revolution.

The network of secondary specialized and higher educational institutions, which ex-
isted by the early 1930's, did not meet the needs of the national economy, science
and culture. The Commist Party and the Soviet state took steps to increase con-
siderably the graduation of specialists. During the 1940/41 school year there were
already 3.773 secondary specialized educational institutions and 817 higher educa-
tional institutions in the country with about 1.8 million students and undergradu-
ates. The need for workers' faculties disappeared with the development of the sec-
ondary general educational school and the important changes in the class structure
of Soviet society.

In the 1930's the system of the vocational and technical education of young people
underwent further development. However, at that time the schools of factory and
plant apprenticeship were under the jurisdiction of individual enterprises and
trained personnel on the basis of departmental needs. Here the needs of the rapid-
ly growing new industrial enterprises were not always taken into account.

Three new types of educational institutions: 2-year trade and railroad schools and
6-month schools of factory and plant training, were created by the ukaze of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet "0n the State Labor Reserves of the USSR"
(1960). For the management of this system the Main Administration of Labor Reserves
was formed within the Council of People's Couldssars.

The 18th party congress outlined a 5-year program of the further development of
public education: to introduce universal secondary education in the cities and
7-year education in the countryside and in all the national republics, to increase
the number of students at general educational schools to $0 million and at higher
educational institutions to 650,000.

The war prevented this program from being completely fulfilled.

Under wartime conditions steps were taken, which ensured the uninterrupted opera-
tion of schools in the rear, in regions near the front and in partisan areas. Even-
ing schools were created for young people and adolescents. who in connection with

the war were unable to continue their education in the ordinary school. The opera-
tion of higher and secondary specialized educational institutions and the network

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run oer-tum. use ONLY

of vocational and technical education was not halted. In all 302,000 specialists
with a higher education, 540,000 specialists with a secondary specialized education
and nearly 2.5 million skilled workers were trained.

in our country by the implementation of the universal compulsory secondary educa-
tion of young people/ [in boldface]. The Communist Party and the Soviet state

gradually approached the accomplishment of this task from five-year plan to five-
year plan, developing and strengthening the material and technical base of public
education, expanding the training of educators and taking steps to improve educa-
tional work. During the years of the first postwar five-year plan the changeover

provides a secondary education. came to 99.2 percent.

Now more than 80 percent of the workers employed in the USSR national‘economy have
a higher or secondary (complete and incomplete) education, 100.2 million people
are covered by all types of education. In the past 15 years alone 60.3 million
boys and girls have received a secondary education (general and specialized). In
the level of education of the population the USSR holds first place in the world.

1980/81 school year there were 1&5.000 schools in the country with 44.3 million
students and spore than 2.6 million teachers. Under present conditions the tasks of
the development of school education are specified in the decree of the CPSU Central
Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n the Further Improvement of the In-
struction and Education of Students of General Educational Schools and Their

76
FOR OFT-10M. USE ONLY
Training for Labor." The decree "0n the Changeover to the Free Use of Textbooks of
Students of General Educational Schools," which was adopted in 1977, is also of
great importance.

[The USSR Constitution guarantees the right to an education by the extensive devel-
opment of vocational and technical, secondary specialized and higher education/ [in
boldface], on the basis of the connection of education with life and production.

During the 60 years of its existence [the state system of vocational and technical
education] [in boldface] has become the main school of the training of the skilled
regular labor force for all the sectors of the national economy. The number of
students of this system as compared with the 1960/é1 school year has increased
5.5-fold and during the 1980/81 school year came to 4.0 million.

Vocational and technical schools are being developed and are changing in close
interconnection with the general educational school. Thus, since 1959 they have
been converted for the most part to a uniform general educational basis-en 8-year
education. Somewhat earlier technical schools were created for young people who
had graduated from the secondary general educational school.

Secondary vocational and technical schools, which simultaneously provide an occupa-
tion and a complete secondary education, arose in connection with the changeover to
universal secondary education. During the past 10 years the number of these schools
has increased 10-fold, about 2.2 million people are studying at them. The network
of technical schools has been enlarged. Today 90 percent of the students of voca-
tional and technical education study at secondary and technical schools.

ISecondery specialized educational institutions] [in bolface] are playing an impor-
tant role in the public education system. Boys and girls, who have completed not
less than the 8th grade of the secondary general educational school, are admitted
to them. Here they not only complete their secondary education, but also become
skilled specialists of various sectors of the national economy and culture. Sp:-
cial groups with a shortened training period have been created at many tekhnikums
and schools for the graduates of secondary school. The graduates of secondary spe-
cialized educational institutions successfully occupy the positions of junior tech-
nical managers at plants, factories, construction projects, kolkhozes and sovkhozes
of our country. At the beginning of the 1980/81 school there were about 4,400 sec-
ondary specialized educational institutions in our country with more than 4.6 mil-
lion students.

/The higher school/ [in boldface] is the concluding unit in the USSR public educa-
tion system. At the beginning of the 1980/81 school year there were 883 higher edu-
cational institutions in the Soviet Union with more than 5.2 million students. This
is (01-fold more than there were in prerevolutionary Russia. Annually industrial

and agricultural enterprises and institutions of science and culture receive about
800,000 specialists of the highest skills, while in 1918-1979 16.5 million of them
in all were trained. In the level and scale of the development of higher education
the USSR long ago surpassed the leading capitalist countries. The Soviet higher
school, which was created under the supervision of the Communist Party, for the

most part is completely meeting the needs of the national economy and culture.

Under the conditions of mature socialism the party and state are focusing the at-
tention of the higher school, secondary specialized and vocational and technical

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a VA on a “any van. VIVLI

educational institutions on the further improvement of the quality of the training
of specialists and on the strengthening of the relations with production and the
practice of building communism. In particular, the decrees of the CPSU Central
Coumuttee and the USSR Council of Ministers: "0n the Further Development of the
Higher School and the Increase of the Quality of the Training of Specialists," "0n
Measures on the Further Improvement of the Management of Secondary Specialized Edu-
cational Institutions and on the Improvement of the Quality of the Training of Spe-
cialists With a Secondary Specialized Education," "0n the Further Improvement of
the Process of Educating and Training Students of the System of Vocational and
Technical Education," which were adopted in recent years, are aimed at this.

Evening, shift and correspondence schools of working and rural youth and evening

and correspondence divisions of secondary specialized and higher educational insti—
tutions have become firmly established in the public education system. This af-
fords vorking people an opportunity to study without leave from wtrk. During the
1980/81 school year about 8.7 million people were covered by these forms of training.

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the free nature of all types of education] [in
boldface]--from school to graduate atudies--at the expense of public consumption
funds. The expenditures of the state per student at general educational schools
come to more than 180 rubles a year, at secondary specialized educational institu-
tions--more than 680 rubles and at higher educational institutions--over 1,000 ru-
bles. Moreover, state stipends and benefits are granted to undergraduates and stu—
dents. Stipends are paid, as a rule, to those who are studying successfully--this
is more than 70 percent of the students of secondary specialized and higher educa-
tional institutions. Nearly all those needing housing are provided with dormi-
tories, for the use of which, it can be said, a symholic payment--1 ruble 50 ko-
pecks a month--has been established. At educational institutions there are dining
rooms and snack bars, the cost of eating at which is less than at ordinary city
dining rooms.

Undergraduates and students, who are studying without leave from work, enjoy great
benefits. For the period of the taking of tests and examinations and the prepara-
tion of graduation projects additional leave with the retention of pay for up to

40 days is granted to them, half of the cost of travel to the educational institu-
tion and back is paid to them, if it is located in another city. While in the final
year, correspondence students and evening students can take in addition 1 free day
a week with the retention of 50 percent of the pay.

/Horeover, the possibility of instructionzm school in one's native language, as
well as various forms of self-education/ [in boldface] (lecture bureaus, people's
universities, courses and so on), for the development of which all the necessary
conditions are being created in our country, [are constitutional guarantees of the
right to an education/ [in boldface].

The equality of opportunities for receiving an education are what sharply dietin-
guishcs the USSR from the western countries. As, for example, the data of a report
prepared by the College Board attest, in the United in the past 10 years alone the
tuition at colleges has increased by 90 percent. A student has to pay on the aver-
age about $10,000 for a year of schooling. In all 60 percent of the boys and

60 percent of the girls from families with "a low socioeconomic status" cannot af-
ford this.

78
FORIOFTHCIAI.USEGMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 8. THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF CULTURE TO THE PEOPLE

USSR citizens have the right to use the
achievements of culture.

From Article 46 of the USSR Constitution

The Tret'yakov Gallery in Moscow, which is now world-famous, was opened to the
public back before the socialist revolution, but at that time not more than 300
people visited it daily (now more than 4,000 do). The collections of the Hermitage
in Petersburg in general were inaccessible to the masses. Its last prerevolution-
ary director, for example, declared: "The very idea of assigning to the museum
the task 'to open to the popular masses a source of esthetic pleasure' does not
stand up to cr:l.ticislll...."l

It is possible to judge the status of the theater in tssrist Russia if only from
the fact that it was under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Court (what were
called "imperial theaters") and police organs (all other theaters). Book publish-
ing was a private business. The working people were deprived or had limited oppor-
tunities to read the fine works of A. Pushkin, N. Gogol', F. Dostoyevskiy, L. Tol-
stoy, H. Cor'kiy and other great writers.

The Great October Socialist Revolution transformed all the achievements of human
culture into the property of the working people. Smarizing the results of Octo-
ber V. I. Lenin said at the Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets in January 1918:
"Previously all man's intelligence, all his genius created only in order to give
some all the benefits of technology and culture, and to deprive the others of what
is most necessary-~education and development. Now all the wonders of technology,
all the achievements of culture will become national property, and henceforth never
will man's intelligence and genius be turned into means of coercion, into means of
exploitation."2

During the first months of Soviet power the Comunist Party began the practical ac-
complishment of what had been outlined. Museums, including the Tret'yakovskiy Gal-
lery and the Hermitage, and the largest private art collections were nationalized.
Tens of the most valuable monuments of architecture and decorative art became the
property of the state. Many former nobles' palaces and estates, which surrounded
Petrograd and Moscow, were converted into museums.

The Communist Party and the Soviet state assisted in every possible way so that the
workers and peasants would actually take advantage of these spiritual benefits. "It

80

FOR OFFKJAI. U ‘ ONLY
According to the testimony of the American journal v.8. NEWS AND HORLD REPORT, the
tuition per student at U.S. private schools during 1962-1980 increased more than
fivefold--fron $519 to $2,015 a year. There is also added to this the crisis of

the Anerican secondary school: the decline of the level of education, uncontrollable
classrooms, the despair of teachers, the idleness and indifference of students.
Today one student in four quits school before graduation. "He risk losing a gen-
eration of young people, if we do not quickly improve the situation at secondary

schools," warns Stanford University Education Professor R. (Kelfi).
The example of the USSR shows that only the socialist revolution destroys for work-
ers and peasants all the obstacles in the way to knowledge, while the very matter

of public education is becoming one of the most important functions of the social-
ist state and an integral part of the struggle of the working people for the build-

ing of communism. ~

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 23, p 127.
2. See VESTNIK VOSPITANIYA, No 1, Section III, 1906, p 42.

3. V. A. Karpinskiy, "Konstitutsiya 8883" [The USSR Constitution], Moscow, 1937,
p 132.

4. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenums
of the Central Committee], 8th edition, vol 1, Moscow, 1970, p 63.

5. See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK,"
8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, pp 68-49.

6. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 51, p 257.
7. Ibid., Vol 61, p 315.
8. Ibid., Vol 41., p 171..
9. Ibid., Vol 65, p 365.

10. PRAVDA, 20 January 1925.

79

Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬂﬂE(ﬂVLY
is necessary." it was stated in the second Party Program, "to reveal and make ac-

cessible to the working people all the treasures of art, which were created on the

basis of the exploitation of their labor and were until now at the exclusive dis-
posal of the exploiters."3

Being concerned about familiarizing the popular masses with culture, the proletar-
ian state during the first postrevolutionary years made the visiting of museums and
theaters free. In spite of the exceptional financial and economic difficulties, thl
necessary steps were taken to ensure the normal operation of museums, art galleries,
libraries and other cultural and educational institutions. It is noteworthy that
at the very height of the civil war (November 1919) the Council of People's Commis-
sars specially discussed the question of supplying them with fuel.

The working people made extensive use of the opportunities for unrestricted access
to the treasures of art. In 1919 alone 500,000 visitors want to Moscow museums.

The "intrusion" of workers and peasants into culture evoked a storm of indignation
among the supporters of the capitalist system. The "defenders of true civilization'
gave a heart-tending cry about the fact that the Bolsheviks were destroying cultur-
al values, predicted "the death of culture" in Russia and prophesied to the whole

world; "The fear for the very existence of our culture is arising in all its hor-
ror."

Life has refuted these fabrications. Beginning with the first days after the vic-
tory of October the Communist Party and the Soviet state did everything necessary
to preserve cultural values and to save them from destruction and theft. In Novem-
ber 1917 on the instructions of V. I. Lenin the Collegium for Museum Affairs and
the Preservation of Monuments of Art and Antiquity was organized within the Peo—
ple's Commissariat of Education. The decrees "On the Prohibition of the Export and
Sale Abroad of Items of Particular Artistic and Historical Value," "0n the Regis-
tration, Acceptance for Registration and Preservation of Monuments of Art and An-
tiquity, Which Are in the Possession of Private Individuals, Societies and Institu—
tions," "0n the Preservation of Libraries and Book Depositories" and others were
promulgated. During 1918-1920 the state registered more than 550 ancient estates,
about 1,000 private collections and nearly 200,000 works of art. The owners of the

estates and the most valuable collections received hundreds of governmental pro-
tective charters.

RSPSR Deputy People's Commissar of Education H. N. Pokrovakiy wrote at that time:
"We go about without boots, while the Hermitage, during the revolution and owing to
it, is becoming the foremost collection of the world following the Louvre and the
Vatican.... One day monuments to the Russian proletariat will be raised both be-
fore the Academy of Sciences and before the Academy of Arts precisely because it,
being thrown far from science and art by its entire difficult past and, it would
seem, being entirely alien to them, at the critical moments did not let all our
rare hothouse plants perish and, being hungry and cold itself, warned and cared

for them for future generations."5

Now /the concern about the preservation of spiritual values and monuments of cul-
ture and the historical past is the constitutional duty of the Soviet state/ [in

italics]. More than 150,000 monuments of history, archeology and architecture are
on the state books. Much work is being carried out on the collection of works of

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

art, implements and oral folk art. New museums of famous writers, composers, art-
ists and actors are being set up. The state is allocating enormous assets for re-
storation work. Not only individual monuments, but also entire architectural en-
sembles and even cities are being restored. Among them are such world-famous ones
as Suzdsl', Bukhara, Samarkand, Khiva and many others.

The reconstruction and restoration of the monuments of culture and history, which
were destroyed by the fascists during the years of the Great Patriotic War, should
especially be discussed. The palaces of Pavlovsk, Pushkino and Petrodvorets, the
monuments of Smolensk, Pskov and Novgorod, the museum-estate of Mikhaylovskoye and
many other pearls of culture were reconstructed from ruins and ashes.

Societies for the protection of monuments of history and culture are working active-
ly. "Concern about the preservation of historical monuments and other cultural
values is the duty and obligation of USSR citizens,” the Soviet Constitution states.

Such is our reality. But there is a reality of a different kind.

"How Is the Museum to Be Saved?", “How Are Works of Art and Architecture to Be Pre-
served?"-today the newspaper of all the bourgeois states abound in such headlines.
In Italy, for example, in the summer of 1977, at the very height of the tourist
season, such world-famous museums as the Egyptian Museum in Turin, the Museum of
Oriental Art in Venice and the Uffizi Gallery in Florence were closed. It is a
typical case. The Italian Government allocated 200 million lira for the restora-
tion of the (Bret) Picture Gallery in Milan, where the ceilings leaked in the halls
with pictures of Titian. Raphael, Veronese and other great masters. However, at.
the last minute these assets were transferred for the upkeep of the San Vittore
prison.

It must be said that the Soviet regime inherited from old Russia a very mediocre
material base for the spiritual development of the working people. For example,
there were only 213 museums, 177 professional theaters and about 14,000 libraries
with a book collection of 9.4 million copies (6 books per 100 people) in the coun-
try in 1913. The material base of culture, which was weak as it was, was consider-
ably weakened by the imperialist, then the civil war and foreign intervention.

Starting with the first days of Soviet power the workers' and peasants' state took
steps to strengthen the material base of the building of culture. In the second
Party Program it was stated that one of the immediate tasks in this area was "com-
prehensive state assistance to the self-education and self-development of workers
and peasants (the creation of a network of institutions of education outside of
school: libraries, schools for adults, people's houses and universities, courses,
lectures, movie theaters, studios and so forth)."6

An acute "book famine" was felt in the country, there were a negligible number of
books which would have met the needs of the new, Soviet reader. It was necessary
first of all to take into one‘s hands and organize book publishing. For this pur-
pose the nationalization of the paper and printing industry, the largest publishing
houses and printing houses was carried out.

The Comunist Party and the Soviet state devoted much attention to the radical re-
organization of the entire publishing business. The Decree on the State Publishing

82
FOR OFFICIAL USEGDNLY
House (1917) required that, along with educational, political and other literature,

the publication of inexpensive editions of the classics of fiction, which the broad
masses could afford, should be set up.

The publication of a series of the "World Literature" library, which was undertaken
in 1918 on the initiative of H. Gor'kiy, was one of the first cultural measures of
the young Soviet state. Translations of works of the peoples of Persia, Turkey,
Arabia, China and Japan and works of Byron, Dickens, V. Scott, Heine, Voltaire,
Balzac, Stendhal and many other writers of Europe and America were included in it.
Concerning this undertaking Romain Rolland wrote: "...A series of very carefully
prepared editions of the classics of Russian and world literature is being pub-
lished-~at a very low price.... The state is incurring a material loss, and it
knows this. But it does not attach importance to this. It wants the people to

read. And it is managing to accomplish this. The people are reading an incredibly
large amount."7

In 1918-1919 about 500 different editions of the classics of domestic and foreign
literature, textbooks, party documents and other books saw the light. However,
under the conditions of the civil war and foreign intervention the Soviet publish-
ing house was unable to ensure the publication of books in the necessary quantity.
By the middle of 1921 the Soviet Republic had one twenty-fifth the annual supply of

paper that tsarist Russia had in 1916. Wrapping paper came into use, but this did
not save it from the "paper famine."

Under these conditions it was necessary to organize the rational and efficient use
of the stocks of books, which existed in the country. The Soviet regime national-
ized private book collections and libraries, with the exception of the libraries of
scientists and figures of literature and art. Millions of books went fron them
into scientific, public and general libraries.

The party constantly kept an eye on the organization and development of the library
business and on the enhancement of the role of libraries in the cultural life of
the working people and strove to see to it that as many readers as possible could
make use of every useful book. "The main task of our revolution," V. I. Lenin in-
dicated, "is reflected in this small matter."8

As the economic situation of the USSR grew stronger, the number of publishing
houses grew, the publication of literature increased from year to year, the library
network expanded. In 1940 there were 95,400 general libraries in the country with
a book collection of about 200 lillion copies.

The national publishing house made especially great gains. Whereas in 1937 the
number of copies of book printed in Russian had increased as compared with 1913 by
6.7-fold, the number of copies in the languages of other peoples of the USSR had
increased 21-fold. By the beginning of the Great Patriotic War all the union re-
publics had become equal in the provision of libraries, everywhere their stocks had
increased considerably.

The party also placed such means of spiritual influence on man as the theater and

the movies at the service of the cultural enlightenment and education of the work-
ers and peasants.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum Uta-“Jan. var. 0341.!

The Bolshevist PRAVDA back in 1912 wrote that the new workers' and peasants' thea-
ter "will develop a repertoire in conformity with its ideals and aspirations for
freedom and true beauty. will become generally comprehensible and dissimilar to
the present urban city, which strives uwre for amusement than for art."9

After the victory of October, along with nationalization, the profound reorganiza-
tion of the theater began. The party guided its development in the interests of
the new, mass audience member, who wanted to see on the stage the affirmation of
the truth and the embodiment of the thoughts and feelings which were disturbing
him. Struggling against the trends of demoralizing bourgeois art, it demanded con-
sideration for the leading traditions of the Russian theater, educated and enlisted
in the service of the people the old theatrical intelligentsia. This fundamental
policy gained sincere recognition on the part of many outstanding figures of cul-
ture, who sided with the Soviet regime.

The party attached enormous importance in the matter of cultural enlightenment and
education to the movie theater. The birth of the Soviet cinema is connected with
Lenin's decree on the nationalization of the film industry (August 1919).

During the first years of Soviet power V. I. Lenin directed particular attention to
the development of the newsreel. More than 50 agitation films, in which the tasks
of the Soviet regime, the class significance of the civil war, the importance of the
struggle against economic dislocation, speculation and so forth were explained, were
made during the period of the civil war and foreign intervention.

The decisions of the 12th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks).
which deemed it necessary to develop movie production in every possible way, to
make ideologically valuable movies and to develop the network of movie projectors
for the most complete service of the working people as possible, became the pro-
gram document for Soviet cinematic art. Guided by the decisions of the congress,
the Soviet cimena made great gains. The network of movie projectors, which in 1960
came to 28,000, was greatly enlarged.

It must be said that the building ofanew, socialist culture, especially at the first
stage following the October Revolution, was carried out under the conditions of a
fierce class struggle and the desparate resistance of the exploiting elements and
their ideologists. The overthrown bourgeoisie attempted by all means, including
ideological means, to counteract the Soviet regime.

The bourgeois press represented a great danger. The counterrevolutionary news-
papers and journals hurled at the Soviet regime streams of mud and slander and came
out with appeals to overthrow it.

It is quite understandable that the proletariat and its party needed to wrest these
means from the bourgeoisie. The Decree on the Press, which was signed by V. I.
Lenin, was published on 28 October 1917. In accordance with this legislative act,
there were liable to closing the organs of the press, "which call for open resist-
ance or disobedience to the Workers' and Peasants' Government"; "which sow discord
by the patently slanderous distortion of the facts"; "which call for acts of an
obviously criminal, that is, criminally punishable nature."lo By the end of 1918
all the bourgeois newpapers (with the exception of some Henshevik newspapers) had
been closed.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the same time the closing of the hostile bourgeois newspapers by no means in-
plied a deviation from the couunist principle of the freedom of the press for the
working people. The Comunist Party and the Soviet state at the same time as the
elimination of the counterrevolutionary press took vigorous steps to create and de-
velop their own, Soviet press. The Bolshevik newspapers headed by PRAVDA, which

played a leading role in the preparation for and accomplishment of the October Revo-
lution, constituted its nucleus.

The 12th Congress of the Russian Commist Party (of Bolsheviks), taking into ac-
count that "the press is one of the most important tools of agitation and props-
ganda, while playing at the same time the role of a transfer device between the
party and the working class," deemed it necessary "in the quickest manner to take
a number of steps on the increase of the circulation... of newspapers and to organ-
ize the matter of disseminating the press...."11 Numerous new newspapers and
journals. including KRBST'YANSKAYA GAZBTA, the military-political newspaper ms-
NAYA ZVBZDA, the newspaper of Soviet youth MML'SKAYA PRAVDA, the theoretical
and political journal of the party Central Connittee BOL'SHBVIK (now KOHHUNIST) and
others. were founded. The party treated with special attention the creation and
development of the national press.

With the strengthening of the printing base the number of published newspapers and
journals increased. their circulations rose. In 1950 8.806 newspapers with a
single run of 38.4 million copies were published in the USSR (against 859 news—
papers with a single run of 2.7 million copies in 1913).

Along with the periodic press the Conunist Party devoted much attention to the de-
velopment of radio broadcasting, which V. I. Lenin regarded as one of the mighty
levers of the cultural and political education of the people. "A newspaper without
paper and ”without distances'...," he wrote, “will be a great matter."1

The beginning of regular radio broadcasting in the USSR dates to the end of the
period of reconstruction. Since that time it has gradually become a part of the
daily life of the urban and rural population and has become one of the most effec-
tive means of contact of the party with the masses and of their familiarization
with culture and politics. Before the Great Patriotic War the number of radios in
the country exceeded 1 million.

The revolution also brought into being such previously unheard of mass centers of
culture as workers' and rural clubs, reading rooms, mobile libraries, agitation
trains, agitation steamships and so forth. The Communist Party showed great con-
cern about the expansion of the network of cultural and educational institutions
and the improvement of their operation. Starting with the 10th congress these is-
sues were reflected in one form or another in the decisions of nearly all the par-
ty congresses and conferences. The party strove to transform and actually did
transform clubs into centers of the communist education of the working people, the
development of their creative initiative and the organization of wise recreation
and entertainment. In 1940 there were 118,000 clubs, houses and palaces of culture
in the USSR.

Thus. in the prewar period a firm material base of the new, socialist culture had
already been created in our country.

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nut urnuM. use UNL!

During the years of the Great Patriotic War enormous harm was done to cultural and
educational institutions, as well as to the entire USSR national economy. The
fascist invaders stole and destroyed more than 100 million volumes of books, which

belonged just to general libraries, and turned thousands of libraries, museums,
theaters, club' and so on into ruins.

The restoration of cultural and educational institutions became one of the priority
and urgent tasks in the area of the building of culture following the war. Trade

unions, Komsomol, cooperatives and the broad masses of the working people took part
in this patriotic cause.

Subsequently the material and technical base of culture was steadily broadened and
strengthened. The expenditures from the state budget and other sources for educa-
tion, cultural educational work and art increased steadily. Whereas, for example,
'in 1965 they came to 16.1 billion rubles, in 1980 they came to 37.5 billion rubles.
On a per capita basis this is 160 rubles a year.

Let us note for comparison that in 1976 in the wealthiest capitalist country-~the
United States--with an astronomical defense budget ($94 billion) $18 per person
were allocated for cultural needs (parks and institutions of recreation).

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the right of the Soviet people to use the achieve-
ments of culture by the general accessibility of the values of domestic and world
culture, which are in state and public funds; by the develop-ant and uniform dis-
tribution of cultural and educational institutions over the territory of the coun-
try; by the development of television and radio, the book publishing business and
the periodic press, the network of free libraries] [in boldface].

In 1980 there were 607 theaters and more than 1,500 museums, 137,000 clubs, houses
and palaces of culture and 152,000 movie projectors in the Soviet Union. In the
number of attendances of entertainment establishments the USSR holds, according to
the data of UNESCO, first place in the world. In 1980, for example, the number of
attendances of theaters cane to 120 million, museums-156 million, movie showings-
k.3 billion.

According to the data of UNESCO, our people also read the most in the world. Dur-
ing the years of Soviet power 52 billion copies of books and pamphlets have been
published in the USSR. And with each year the publication of scientific and polit-
ical literature and fiction is increasing. In 1980 alone more than 80,000 titles of
books and pamphlets with a total run of 1.8 billion copies were published.

At present we have 132,000 general libraries with a book stock of more than 1.8 bil-
lion copies. More than 700 million books have been collected in the libraries of
general educational schools and more than 2 billion books in the repositories of
scientific, technical and other specialized libraries. More than half of the popu-
lation of our country uses the stocks of general libraries. Moreover, there are
more than 30 billion books and pamphlets in the private collections of the working
people. The stock of home libraries increases annually by 700-800 million copies.
And nevertheless the deeand of the population for books is still not being com-
pletely met.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In 1979 in the USSR more than 13,000 newspapers, journals and other periodic pub—
lications were published, more than 200 publishing houses and 2 information agen-
ciesnTAss and NOVOSTI PRESS AGmCY-dwere in operation. The annual circulation of
journals and other periodic publications came to 3.2 billion copies, while the

single run of newspapers came to 173 million copies. 0n the average per family in

our country there are about six newspapers, journals and other periodic publica-
tions.

The entire territory of the Soviet Union is covered by radio broadcasting, while
more than four-fifths of the population can watch television broadcasts. In 1980
68 million radios and 67 million televisions were in use by the Soviet people.

Via space comunications satellites the achievements of artistic culture, theatri-

cal and musical art, the best plays and concert programs reach the most remote
corners of the USSR.

Our party is devoting constant attention to the uniform distribution of cultural
and educational institutions on the territory of the country and to the convergence
of the cultural level of the city and the countryside.

/The expansion of cultural exchanges with foreign countries serves as an important
constitutional guarantee of the right of USSR citizens to use the achievements of
culture/ [in boldface]. True to the obligation seamed at the Helsinki Conference
and on the basis of the interests of the meeting of the cultural demands of the
working people, the party and the state are encouraging cultural exchanges in every
possible way and are reinforcing them by intergovernmental agreements. The USSR
maintains cultural contacts with 120 countries of the world.

During the years of Soviet power the works of foreign authors from 136 countries
have been published in the USSR. The mnber of titles of these works comes to
77,500, while the total circulation comes to 2.42 billion copies. According to the
data of UNESCO, fi'vefold more translated literature is published in our country
than in England and twofold more than in Japan, the United States and France. The
journal INOSTRANNAYA LITERATURA, which has a circulation of 600,000 copies, ac-
quaints Soviet readers with recent publications of contemporary foreign literature.

The international contacts of Russian art are constantly being expanded. During
1977-1979 40 major exhibits of western art were held in the USSR. Among them were
American painting of the second half of the 19th century and the 20th century,
pictures from the French Centre National d'Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou, from
the collection of Royal Academy of Arts of Great Britain and others.

Plays staged in accordance with more than 130 works of foreign authors are
being performed in Soviet theaters. In 1980 alone more than 130 foreign artistic
troupes and acting groups, which presented more than 6,000 concerts and plays in
more than 170 cities of the country, appeared in the USSR.

The Soviet Union annually purchases and releases for mass showing approximately

60 movies from the socialist countries and just as many from capitalist and devel-
oping countries. International film festivals, which have become traditional, have
been held in our country for a long time now. In recent years Soviet television
viewers have become acquainted with a number of western made-for-television films

and series programs.

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us noted here that whereas in Soviet file distribution the proportion of films
from capitalist countries comes to about 10 percent, the proportion of films of all
the socialist countries, which are shown in the Heat, comes to not more than 5 per-
cent. Por example, the film "And the Dawns Are Quiet here," which received an hon-
orary Oscar, was not allowed on 0.8. screens. The film "Liberation," which went
around the screens of the entire world, was also not released here for mass showing.
The movies purchased in our country are shown in the United States at small movie
theaters, without the proper advertising and reviews. The situation in the PRC,
Italy and England is no better.

The impression is being created that the opponents of detente are afraid of the
expansion of cultural contacts with the socialist countries and are doing everything
to hinder the extensive acquaintance of the working people of the capitalist coun-
tries with socialist art. On the other hand, they are striving in every way, under
the pretext of cultural exchange, to impose upon the socialist countries a product
which promotes violence, pornography, racism, aggression and so forth. It is quite
understandable that we oppose such a "freedom" of cultural exchange. This is fully
in keeping with the spirit and letter of the decisions of the Helsinki Conference.
Our country has never hid and is not hiding the ’uct that we give extensive access
only to that culture, that art, which are permeated with the ideas of humanism and
democracy and with faith in man and which serve the strengthening of mutual under-
standing and trust among peoples.

FOOTNOTES

1. Quoted from Yu. Lukin, "Pravo na kul'turu" (The Right to Culture], Moscow, 1978,
pp 10-11.

2. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. aoch." [Complete works], Vbl 35, p 289.

3. “KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentaiy i plenuaov Tax”
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenuns
of the Central Counuttee], 8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 49.

4. RUSSKIYE VBDOHOSTI, 26 November 1917.

S. "Intelligentsiya i revolyutsiya. Shornik statey" [The Intelligentsia and the
Revolution. A Collection of Article], Moscow, 1922, pp 8-9.

6. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tax,"
Vol 2, p 49.

7. EUROPE, November-December 1965, p 203.
8. V. 1. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 38, p 332.
9. PRAVDA, 6 May 1912.

10. See SOBRANIYE UZAKONENIY..., No I, 1917-1918, p 6.

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
ll. "KISS v rezolyutoiyakh 1 reckoniyakh o"yczdov. konfcrcntuiy 1 plenulov Tax,"
Vol 2, p 662.

12. V. I. Lnnin, "Poln. Iobr. soch.," Vol 51, p 130.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
#0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 9. THE FREEDOM OF CREATIVE “ORR

The freedom of scientific, technical and

artistic creative work... is guaranteed to
USSR citizens.

Prom Article 67 of the USSR Constitution

The fruits of culture are a matter of the hands of man, his mind and talent. "The
people," H. Gor'kiy wrote. "are not only the force which creates all physical as-
sets, it is the only and inexhaustible source of spiritual values, the first philos-
opher in time, beauty and genius of creative work and the first poet. who composed
all the great poems, all the tragedies of the world and the greatest among them-
the history of world culture."1

The culture of mature socialism is deeply rooted in the "popular soil." The Great
October Socialist Revolution for the first time in the history of mankind removed
the obstacles before the mighty spring of popular talents which, to use the expres-
sion of V. I. Lenin, "capitalism crushed. oppressed, suppressed by the thousands
and millions.“2 It not only afforded the working people extensive access to the
riches of culture, but also made them the unnediate creators of spiritual values
and created unlimited opportunities for the display of their creative forces, abil-
ities and talents. In our country, in the words of K. Marx and P. Engels, "every-
one in whom there is a Raphael" has the opportunity "to develop freely."3

The Communist Party always devoted much attention to the solution of this creative
problem of the cultural revolution. Under the conditions of mature socialism the
freedom of creative work was sanctioned in the Constitution as one of the inalien-
able freedoms of each Soviet individual.

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the freedom of creative work first of all by the
extensive development of scientific research] [in boldface]. At present the number
of scientists in our country comes to about 1.6 million, of whom 635,000 have the
academic degree of doctor or candidate of sciences. As for the achievements of So-
viet science. today they are well known.

It must be said that a pleiad of outstanding scientists, who made the most valuable
contributions to world science, worked under the conditions of prerevolutionary
Russia. Among them are P. L. Chebyshev, A. M. Lyapunov. P. N. Lebedev, A. G. Sto-
letov. D. I. Hendeleyev, I. I. Nechnikov. A. 0. Kovalevskiy. A. H. Butlerov, I. H.
Sechenov, K. A. Tiniryazev. I. P. Pavlov, N. Ye. Zhukovskiy and many others. But

90
POI OFFICIAl.lEﬂE(N‘LY
their discoveries were made not owing to but, rather, in spite of the organization
of scientific research, which existed at that time.

Tsarism regarded the Academy of Sciences only as an attribute which was necessary
for the external embellishment of the smite. The Russian capitalists and land-
owners preferred to purchase the latest machines and other equipment abroad, and
not to finance the appropriate research and development in their own homeland. In

1913 there were only 298 scientific institutions in the country, while the number
of scientists came to less than 12,000.

One of the members of the State Dune, having investigated shortly before World War I
the situation of the Academy of Sciences, expressed his impressions as follows:

"If it were not for my own conviction on the spot, it would be difficult to believe
that such an attitude toward science and its temple-the Academy--is possible in
our capital. in the city of Peter the Great, on the bank of the Neva.... The aca-
demician and the rural teacher in the circumstances of their work have not gone far

from each other, and it is difficult to say for when of them it is more convenient
to work."‘

The Great October Socialist Revolution commenced a qualitatively new stage in the
development of domestic science. placed it at the service of the interests of the
people and transformed it into a most important factor of the economic, social and
cultural transformation of society. During the years of the civil war and economic
dislocation the Communist Party and V. I. Lenin personally devoted much attention
to the creation and development of the network of academic, higher educational and
sectorial scientific institutions. The allocations for scientific research were
increased considerably.

The most important directions of the policy of the party and the state in the area
of science were formulated in V. I. Lenin's work "A Draft of the Plan of Scientific
and Technical Hark," in the second Party Program, which was adopted by the Eighth
Congress of the Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks), and in a number of other
party documents. Scientific institutions were oriented toward the systematic

study of natural resources and toward research connected with the efficient loca—
tion of productive forces, the supply of raw materials, the electrification of in-
dustry, agriculture and transportation and the reorganization of the entire nation-
al economy on the basis of the latest technology. "The Russian Communist Party,"
it was stated in the Party Program, "...is striving for... the creation of the most
favorable conditions of scientific work in its connection with the rise of the pro-
ductive forces of the country."5

After the end of the civil war the network of scientific institutions began to be
developed rapidly. At the same time, effective steps aimed at the formation of
scientific personnel were taken. In 1925 the system of graduate studies, which be-
came the leading form of their training, was established. With each year the ex-
penditures for the needs of science were increased, the material and technical base
of scientific research was enlarged. The activity of the Academy of Sciences be-
came fundamentally different in its nature and scope. Its role in the solution of
the most important national economic problems especially increased after the adop-
tion in 1925 of the decree of the Council of People's Commissars "0n the Recogni-
tion of the Russian Academy of Sciences as the Highest Scientific Institution of
the USSR."

91

FOR OFIWCJAL USII€NVLY
l-UK urn-lust USE ONLY

In the 1920's the unified statewide network of scientific centers and institutions
was created in the country on the basis of academic and sectorial institutes and
laboratories. By 1929 the number of scientific institutions (including higher edu-
cational institutions) came to 1,600, while the number of scientists came to
63.000. All this was one of the important prerequisites of the reconstruction of
the national economy of the country on the basis of the latest scientific and tech.
nicsl achievements.

In conformity with the decisions of the 15th party congress the expenditures on
science were increased by many times. scientific institutions were reinforced by
new skilled personnel. In 19é0 there were 2,359 scientific institutions (including
higher educational institutions) in the country, the number of scientists came to

98.300. The national republics accounted for nearly half of the scientific insti-
tutions.

During the first months after the start of the Great Patriotic War the party Cen-
tral Committee and the Soviet Government took the necessary steps to evacuate the
most important scientific organizations from the European part to the eastern re-
gions of the country. As a result, in spite of the enormous harm done to our sci-
ence (the German fascist invaders destroyed 60$ scientific research institutes).
the scientific potential of the country was not only retain, but also strengthened.

During these harsh years the scientific research institutes and laboratories of the
USSR successfully solved problems of the improvement of combat materiel and devoted
much attention to questions of the search for and development of natural resources
in the eastern part of the country and the creation of new medicinal compounds.
Basic theoretical research was also continued.

During the postwar period research was launched in a number of new fields of the
natural, technical and social sciences. Here much attention was devoted to the
solution of scientific problems connected with the strengthening of the defensive
capability of the country. In August 1949 an end was put to the 0.8. nuclear monop-
polyn in 1948 the first Soviet long-range guided ballistic missile was launched;

in 1950 the first Soviet electronic computer was installed; in 1956 the first nu-
clear electric power station in the world was put into operation in our country.

The needs of the socioeconomic development of the country and the scientific and
technical revolution, which was launched on a large scale in the middle of the
1950's, were the main factors, which were responsible for the considerable accelera-
tion of the rate of development of the network of scientific institutions and the
increase of the number of scientists of the USSR in the subsequent decades. The ex-
penditures on science increased from five-year plan to five-year plan. As compared
with 1965 they have increased twofold and in 1980 came to 21.3 billion rubles.

Under the conditions of mature socialism science is becoming to a greater and great-
er extent a direct productive force. At this stage of the development of our so-
ciety its tasks are specified in the decisions of party congresses and are defined
more accurately in a number of decrees of the CPSU Central Committee.

The party of communists, it was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, is proceeding on
the basis that the building of a new societv without science is simply inconceivb
able. The CPSU Central Committee supports the further increase of the role and

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
responsibility of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the improvement of the organization
of the entire system of scientific research and a more attentive attitude toward
the needs of science.6

The party is directing the attention of Soviet scientists to the even greater sub-
ordination of the development of science and technology to "the solution of the
economic and social problems of Soviet society, the acceleration of the changeover
of the economy to the path of intensive development, the increase of the efficiency
of social production." The USSR Constitution sanctions legislatively the duty of
the socialist state to ensure the planned development of science, the training of
scientists and the introduction of the results of scientific research in the na-
tional economy and other spheres of life.

Historical experience attests that under socialism science becomes a mighty means
of the increase of the material and spiritual wealth of the people. The best re-
presentatives of the scientific forces of prerevolutiona'y Russia dreamed precisely
about this. The letter of K. E. Taiolkovskiy, which the great Russian scientist
addressed to the party Central Committee a few days before his death, is a moving
document which expressed their thoughts and feelings. "Only October," it is stated
in the letter, "brought recognition to the works of a self-educated person; only
the Soviet regime and the party... gave me effective assistance. I sensed the love
of the popular masses and this gave me the strength to continue working, while
already being ill. But now the disease does not permit me to complete the begun
work.

"I am turning over all my works on aviation, rocket gliding and interplanetary com-
munications to the party of Bolsheviks and the Soviet regime--the true leaders of
the progress of human culture. I am confident that they will successfully complete
these works."8

Only 25 years had passed, and the Vostok spacecraft manned by Soviet pilot-
cosmonaut Yu. A. Gagarin made the first orbital space flight in the work. The date
of 12 April 1961 has gone down in history and is celebrated annually as the World
Day of Aviation and Astronautics.

/The extensive development in our country of inventing and rationalization is an
important constitutional guarantee of the freedom of creative work] [in boldface].
The development of mass creative scientific and technical work is a regularity
which is characteristic only of socialism. The traits of the new, communist atti-
tude toward labor, the activeness and creative energy of the Soviet people and the
process of obliterating the differences between mental and physical labor are mani-
fested especially vividly precisely in it.

Beginning with the first years after the victory of October the Communist Party at-
tached great importance to the development of mass creative technical work. In the
inventing of the workers it saw an important factor of the acceleration of techni-
cal progress and the increase of labor productivity, the overall development of the
national economy of the country. "...The work on the promotion of capable... in-
ventors from among the masses of workers and peasants should be systematized, ex—
panded and developed,"9 V. I. Lenin wrote.

93

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USEZONLY
‘.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The Statute on Inventions" (June 1919) specified the principles of state policy in
the area of inventing. Inventing was declared state property, while inventions
were placed at the general use of all citizens and institutions. Soviet legisla-
tion ensured on a socialist basis the protection of the copyrights of inventors and
provided for mandatory rewards for inventions. The management of creative techni-
cal work was assigned to the specially crea'ed Committee for Inventions.

The first legislative acts of the Soviet state an invention found the support and

lively response of the working people. For example, in 1922 twofold more applica-
tions for inventions were submitted than in 1919.

Having adopted the policy of the industrialization of the country, the Communist
Party took over the leadership of the organization of a mass movement for the ra-
tionalization of production. The 15th Congress of the All-Union Communist Party
(of Bolsheviks) placed this question at the center of attention of the party and
the country. The work on rationalization, it was emphasized in the resolution of
the congress, "has as its primary and decisive prerequisite [the extensive involve-
ment in it of the masses of workers and peasants/Mo [in italics]. The decree of
the party Central Committee "On the State of Mass Invention From the Standpoint of
Its Influence on the Rationalization of Production" (1930) played an especially im-
portant role in the development of creative technical work, rationalization and in-
vention.

For the purposes of developing the movement of rationslizers and inventors the
party recommended that production conferences and reviews, competitions and ex-
changes, technical circles and circles of rationalizers and inventors be used ex-
tensively. The All-Union Society of Inventors, of which 500,000 people became mem-
bers, was founded in 1932.

Mass creative technical work was developed in the campaign for the affirmation of
the socialist attitude toward labor. The party indicated that the work on ration-
alization should be linked as closely as possible with socialist competition andthe
shock labor movement. It contributed to the development of mass forms of competi-
tion for the mastery of new equipment, helped to generalize advanced know-how and
to clear the obstacles in the way of the creative technical work of the working

The rapid increase of the technical equipment of industry, the increase of the
well-being and cultural and technical level of the working class, the national
scope of socialist competition and the enthusiasm which arose from the great con-
struction project brought forward thousands and thousands of rationalizers and in-
ventors, shock workers and production innovators. The names of miner Aleksey Sta-
khanov, forge worker Aleksey Busygin, machine operator Petr Krivonos and many
others became well known to the entire country. They broke the old technical norms,
came forth as the creators of machines and mechanisms, new, advanced technology.

During the postwar years the All-Union Society of Inventors and Rationalizers, de-
partments and bureaus for invention and rationalization at enterprises and organiza—
tions and mass scientific and technical societies by sectors of production were
founded on the initiative of the Communist Party. The Committee for Inventions

and Discoveries, which was formed in the USSR Council of Ministers, began to carry
out the general supervision of creative technical work.

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The decisions of recent party congresses. as well as the decree of the CPSU Central
Committee and the USSR Council of Ministers "0n the Further Development of Inven-
tion in the Country, the Improvement of the Use in the National Economic of Die—
coveries, Inventions and Rationalization Proposals and the Enhancement of Their
Role in the Acceleration of Scientific and Technical Progress" (1973) played an im-
portant role in the development of rationalization and invention.

Whereas in 1960 the number of subnitted rationalization proposals and applications
for inventions came to 591,000, in 1980 it came to more than 5 million. The eco-
nomic impact from the use of inventions and rationalization proposals increased
from 90 million rubles to 6.3 billion rubles. Horkers of the new type, who have
extensively technical erudition and an inventive frame of mine and combine occupa-
tional skill and the talent of a researcher, developed during those years.

At present the All-Union Society of Inventors and Rationalizers unites more than

11 million people. In all 23 scientific and technical societies, which unite in
their ranks 9.3 million engineers, technicians, scientists, specialists of agricul-
ture, worker-innovators, leading kolkhoz workers, undergraduates and students of
higher and secondary specialized educational institutions, operate in the USSR. In
conformity with the USSR Constitution the state is creating the necessary material
conditions for the development of mass creative technical work, is giving support
to voluntary societies, is organizing the introduction of inventions and rationali-
zation proposals in the national economy and other spheres of life and is protect-
ing the rights of inventors and rationalizers.

[The USSR Constitution guarantees the freedom of creative artistic work/ [in bold-
face]. A broad field of activity has been opened for Soviet writers, artists, mu-
siciana, playwrights and cinematographers. This finds embodiment in noteworthy
works of fiction, the best productions of operas, ballets and plays, the flourish-
ing of symphonic music and singing, painting and sculpture.

Lenin's principles are the basis for the policy of the Communist Party in the area
of literature and art. During the years of the first Russian revolution in the
article "Party Organization and Party Literature" V. I. Lenin stressed that a
writer cannot at all be free from society and the social struggle, that the so-
called freedom of the artist from the requirements and dictates of the times is an
illusory freedom. In such a great struggle between socialism and capitalism, which
mankind had entered, each artist should have specified his stand and should have
chosen with whom he sided-with the forces of the reaction or with the working
class, which was struggling for a new life. In revealing the true essence of bour-
geois literature and art, which hypocritically proclaimed their own "freedom," but
in fact expressed the class interests of the bourgeoisie, V. I. Lenin opposed to
them the literature and art. which were openly connected with the revolutionary
proletariat. He appealed to writers, artists and actors to understand all the
falsity of the stand of feigned neutrality and to join in the struggle for a new
Russia and a new culture.

While raising the question of the ideological self-determination of the masters of
art, V. I. Lenin at the same time categorically opposed any attempts whatsoever at
a vulgar interpretation of the slogan of adherence to party principles and the dis-
regard of all the complexity and specificity of creative artistic work. He empha-
sized that literary work lends itself least of all to mechanical equalization and

95

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

leveling and that here, undoubtedly, it is necessary to provide room for personal
initiative, individual inclinations, thought and fantasy, searches in the area of
form and content.

The main demand, which V. I. Lenin made on truly socialist art, is to serve the
common proletarian cause, "not 'the upper ten thousand, who are bored and suffer
from obesity,‘ but the millions and tens of millio' s of working people."11 "Art,"
he said, "belongs to the people. It should be most deeply rooted in the very midst
of the broad working masses. It should unite the feeling, thought and will of

tzeseuﬁsses and lift them. It should awaken the artists in them and develop
t em.

During the first years of Soviet power the party promoted in every possible way

the creation and strengthening of special proletarian organizations in the area of
literature and art. During those years the Proletkult (the proletarian cultural
and educational organization), which united all types of artistic activity and a
large army of professional and semiprofessional writers, who came primarily from a
working class environment, was the most massive of them and the closest to the revo-
lutionary tasks.

However, the leaders of the Proletkult took stands alien to Marxism-Leninism and in
fact opposed the guiding role of the party in the building of culture. On 1 Decem-
ber 1920 PRAV'DA published the resolution of the Central Comittee of the Russian
Communist Party (of Bolsheviks) "0n Proletkults," in which the policy of the party
in matters of literature and art was stated exhaustively. While categorically
condeming the erroneous stand of the Proletkult members, the Central Consittee at
the same time came out against petty tutelage and pressure on the creative work of
writers and artists.

The resolution of the Central Comittee of the Russian Connunist Party (of Bolshe-
viks) "0n the Policy of the Party in the Area of Belles Lettres" (1925) was also of
great importance in this respect. It was emphasized in it that the campaign for
socialist ideology in literature should become a campaign for genuine belles let-
tree, which are close and "comprehensible to [the millions/" [in italics] and that
"the party as a whole can in no way bind itself by adherence to any trend [in the
area of literary form/"12 [in italics].

Following Lenin's principles, the Communist Party at all the stages of the building
of socialism and comunism skillfully and tactfully directed the efforts of writers,
artists and composers toward the comprehensive satisfaction of the spiritual needs
of the Soviet people, the formation in them of lofty artistic tastes and the crea-
tion of works worthy of our people. From Lenin's documents to the materials of
congresses and decrees of the CPS!) Central Comittee of recent years the concern
about the ideological orientation of literature and art was and remains the main
thing in the party supervision of their development. 0“. course, this concern has
nothing in comon with oversimplification and administrative methods of solving
questions pertaining to creative artistic work.

Our party combines great demandingness on the ideological stand of creative workers
and the concern about the cultivation among them of a sense of responsibility to
society with consideration for talent. It supports, L. I. Brezhnev stressed, "an
attentive attitude toward creative searches. the complete revelation of the

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
individuality of gifted and talented people, the diversity and richness of the forms
and styles which are developed on the basis of the method of socialist realism."1’0
Soviet writers and artists have complete freedom in the choice of material and ar-
tistic form and have a real basis for the exercise of their rights to creative 1a-
bor and the free embodiment of artistic ideas and conceptions.

The workers of Soviet literature and art live by the deeds and thoughts of their
people, by the interests of the socialist homeland. Responding to the recrinina-
tions coming from the Heat that Soviet writers write "on the instructions of the
party," Mikhail Sholokhov said: "The situation is somewhat different: each of us
writes at the bidding of our heart, while our hearts belong to the party and our
own people, whom we serve with our art.”15

In the Accountability Report to the 26th CPSU Congress 1.. I. Brezhnev emphasized
that the national character of art, the genuine adherence of art to party principles
consist in "living by the interests of the people, sharing joy and sorrow with them,
affirming the truth of life and our humanistic ideals." Speaking about the atti-
tude of the party toward the artistic intelligentsia, he noted: "True to Lenin's
cultural policy. our party treats the artistic intelligentsia considerately and

respectgully and directs its attention to the solution of lofty creative prob-
lems."

Creative unions--the voluntary associations of the figures of artistic culture by
occupations--play an important role in public life. At present there are 68,000
members in the USSR Union of Journalists, about 17,000 in the Union of Artists,
nearly 16,000 in the Union of Architects, about 9,000 in the Union of Writers, near—
ly 6,000 in the Union of Cinema Workers and more than 2,000 in the Union of Com-
posers. Republic theatrical societies unite more than 50,000 people.

The creative unions and societies are carrying out active publishing work. The
USSR Union of Writers has at its disposal 105 newspapers and journals with a total
single run of 13.6 million copies. The "Sovetskiy pisatel'" Publishing House in
1980 published 463 titles of books with a run of 21 million copies. The provision
of the USSR Constitution concerning the fact that the state creates the necessary
material conditions for the development of literature and art, gives support to
creative unions and protects the rights of authors, is permeated with concern about
the labor of writers, composers and artists.

The network of educational institutions of art is being expanded. Whereas in 1960
there were 1,750 children's music, art and dancing schools with 315,000 students in
the system of the USSR Ministry of Culture, in 1980 their number had increased
4.4-fold, while the number of students came to 1.3 million. Whereas in 191.0 the
higher and secondary specialized educational institutions of art and cimenatography
graduated 3,000 specialists, in 1980 they graduated about 36,000.

/ In accordance with the USSR Constitution, in our country the development of not
only professional art, but also popular creative artistic work is encouraged in
every possible way/ [in boldface].

The Great October Socialist Revolution gave scope for the liveliest participation
of the broad masses in amateur artistic work. People's Comissar of Education A. V.
Lunacharskiy noted back during the first years of Soviet power "an enormous

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rum art-nuns. not. UIVIJ

instinctive outburst of the masses in the direction of art, and particularly in
the direction of the theater. workers' and peasants' theatrical groups blossomed
throughout Russia by the thousands, if not the tens of thousands. Young people
rushed by the thousands into all kinds of studios and schools, of which an incred-
ible number developed."l7

From the first days after the victory of October the Communist Party and the Soviet
state displayed and are displaying constant concern about the development of popu-
lar amateur art, about the fact that the talents. creative forces and abilities of
people of different occupations, nationalities, education, age, social status and
level of culture would be revealed more and more completely. Amateur artistic
work. having passed through the decades, has developed into the most diverse forms
of folk art and has assumed a truly massive nature.

In our country rayon, city, oblast and republic reviews of collectives of amateur
artistic work are held everywhere, in 1976-1977 the First All-Union Festival of the
Amateur Creative Artistic Work of the working People, which was devoted to the 60th
anniversary of Great October, was held. The All-Union Review of Amateur Films and
the All-Union Exhibition of the Works of Amateur Artists and Masters of Applied
Decorative Art became events in the cultural life of the country.

The traditional artistic crafts are the most valuable property of our culture.
Lacquered miniatures and painting on wood, lace and engraving, rugs and amber
adornments enjoy universal recognition only only in our country, but also abroad.
At present in the USSR there are more than 200 traditional crafts, in which tens

of thousands of masters are employed.

Under the conditions of mature socialism amateur creative artistic work, just as
professional art, is actively involved in the formation of the spiritual culture of
communist society and serves as a source of joy and inspiration for millions, a
means of their ideological enrichment and moral education, a spokesman of their
will, feelings and thoughts. The decrees of the CPSU Central Omanittee "0n Artis-
tic Folk Crafts" (l97h), “0n Measures on the Further Development of Amateur Crea-
tive Artistic Activity" (1978) and others, in particular, are aimed at this.

During the years of Soviet power, L. I. Brezhnev noted, "the working people have
become active participants in cultural life, the creators of spiritual values. From
the midst of the people came a new, socialist intelligentsia which won fame for the
homeland by outstanding achievements of science and technology, literature and art.
The meeting, about which the best minds of mankind dreamed, the historical meeting
of labor and art took place. In the history of our country, in the history of all
world culture this was a turn of enormous importance."

FOOTNOTES

1. M. Gor'kiy, "Sobr. soch. v 30-ti t." [Collected Works in '50 Volumes], Vol 21.,
Moscow, 1953, p 26.

2. V. l. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.“ [Complete Works], Vol 35, p 195.

3. K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch." [Horks], Vol 3, p 392.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘-

Se

6.

8.
9.

10.

ll.

12.

l3.

14.

IS.

l6.

17.

G. A. Knyazev and V. A. Kol'tsov, "Kretkiy ocherk istorii Akedeeii nsuk $88!!"

[A Short Outline of the History of the USSR Academy of Science], Moscow, 1964,
p 50.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov. konferentsiy 1. plenum: Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenuns
of the Central Couittee]. 8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 53.

See "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress], Pbscow,
[981, p 42.

Ibid., p 143.
PRAVDA, 17 September 1935.
V. I. Lenin, "PoIn. sobr. soch.," Vol 42, p 14.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyskh i resheniyakh e"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumv Tex,"
8th edition, Vol 4, Moscow, X970, 1) 47.

V. I. Lenin, "Fain. sobr. soch.," Vol 12, p 104.

"V. I. Lenin 0 literature 1 iskuestvs" IV. I. Lenin on Literature and Art],
Moscow, 1976, p 657.

"0 pertiynoy 1 eovetskoy pecheti" [0n the Party and Soviet Press], lbscow.
1954, pp 346-347.

L. I. Brezhnev, "beninekin kureos" [By the Leninist Course], Vol 3, lbscov,
1972, p 294.

H. Sholokhov, "Po veleniyu duehi. Stat'i, ocherki, vystuplenfya, dokunenty"
[At the Co-and of the Heart. Articles, Essays, Speeches, Doculente], lbscow,
1970, pp 265-266.

"Msteriely XXVI s"yezda 988," p 63.

A. V. Lunacherskiy, "0 teatre i draneturgii" [0n the Theater and Drsnsturgy],
in 2 volumes, Vol 1, Moscow, 1958, p 141.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kursos," Vol 6, “oscov, 1978, p 580.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run onlulu. use ONLY

PART IV. POLITICAL RIGHTS AND FREEDOMS

Socialism will trimph only when, V. I. Lenin emphasized, "the 10-fold and loo-fold
broader masses than before will begin themselves to build estate and to build a
new economic life."1

The USSR Constitution guarantees the Soviet people an extensive set of political
rights and freedoms: the right to participate in the management of state and pub-
lic affairs, in the discussion and adoption of laws and decisions of statewide and
local importance; the right to submit to state organs and public organizations pro-
posals or. the improvement of their activity, to criticize shortcomings in work; the
freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, street marches and demonstrations; the
right to unite in public organisations. All these rights and freedoms have a pro-
nounced goal—to enlist the broadest masses of working people in the running of the
state and society. The essence of socialist democracy consists precisely in this.
For us, V. I. Lenin indicated, "political freedom means the freedom of the people
to manage their own national, state affairs."2

Harxism—Leninism teaches that there can be no "pure democracy," political rights
and freedoms for man in general. They invariably serve class interests and are de-
termined by the social nature of the social system. The possibility and degree of
participation of the masses in the running of the state and whether they have demo-
cratic rights and freedoms depend on in whose hands the means of production are.
"Freedom, indeed, for any revolution, whether it be socialist or democractic." V. I.
Lenin stressed, "is a slogan which is very, very essential. But our program de-
clares: freedom, if it is at variance with the liberation of labor from the yoke
of capital. is a deception."3 The experience of history has confirmed the utter
correctness of Lenin's i:aa--real political rights and freedoms of the working
people are possible only under the conditions of socialism.

"All power in the USSR belongs to the people," the USSR Constitution reads. Our
political system is a set of state and public organizations, by means of which the
working masses manage the affairs of society and the state. The Conuniet Party.
which fuses together the will and actions of all state and public organisations, is
the guiding and directing force of Soviet society, the nucleus of its political
system.

Our party was placed by history itself at the head of the popular msses. It proved
capable, in Lenin's words, of "/lesding all the people] [in italics] to socialism,
of directing and organizing the new system, of being a teacher, a director, a leader
of all the working and exploited people in the matter of arranging their own pub-
lic life without the bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie."

Having arisen before the state and public organizations, the party, it can be said,
stood at their cradle. helped them to grow strong and to develop into mighty fac-
tors of public life. Historical experience convincingly attests that the main
source of their strength and the decisive condition of the success of their activ-
ity lie in party supervision. The provisions of the USSR Congress: "The Communist
Party of the Soviet Union is the guiding and directing force of Soviet society, the
nucleus of its political system, state and public organizations. The CPSU exists

for the people and serves the people," serve as national recognition of the role
and importance of the party.

The leadership on the part of the party is first of all political leadership. The
CPSU determines the general prospect of the development of society and the course
of USSR domestic and foreign policy. For state and public organisations it serves
as a reference point which makes it possible to maintain the correct course, to

avoid a narrow departmental and regional approach to a matter and to organize their
activity in the interests of all the people.

The work of the party has nothing in common with compulsion and high-handed meas-
ures. but is based entirely and completely on persuasion and ideological influence.
State and public organizations settle independently questions which belong to their
competence. The Communist Party pursues in them its own policy first of all
through the communists who work in state and public organs.

Party organizations in the USSR operate within the framework specified by the Con-
stitution. Party members do not enjoy any privileges as compared with nonparty
citizens. The CPSU does not pass laws-in our country the USSR Supreme Soviet en-
gages in this. The party does not issue any instructions to the courts—-this would
be an infringement upon the independence of the courts and the people's assessors,
which is sanctioned by Article 155 of our Constitution.

Under the conditions of mature socialism the further expansion of socialist democ-
racy is the msin direction of the development of the political system of ioviet so-
ciety. The party has been tirelessly concerned about the more and more extensive
involvement of the working people in the management of the affairs of society and
the state, the improvement of the state machinery, the increase of the activeness of
public organizations, the strengthening of the legal basis of state and public life,
the extension of publicity and the constant consideration of public opinion. "With
the development of socialist democracy," L. I. Brezhnev noted, "the gradual develop—
ment of our state system into communist public self—government is occurring. This
process, of course. is lengthy, but it is steadily advancing."5

FOOTNOTES
1. v. 1. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 37, pp 425-a26.
2. Ibid., Vol 7, p 134.

3. Ibid., Vol 38, p 346.

[01
FKIICNWWC1A1.lEﬂE(MVLY
rm: UI‘I'ILIAI. UM. ONLY

1.. 11:14.. Vol 33, p 26.

5. l... I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kurm" [By the Lenin“: Course]. V01 6, Ibscow,
1978. p 534.

102
FIIICNHHCJA1.USE(MVLY
CHAPTER 10. THE SOVIET PEOPLE ARE THE MASTER OF THEIR COUNTRY

USSK citizens have the right to participate
in the management of state and public af-
fairs....

From Article 68 of the USSR Constitution

The right of citizens to participate in the management of state and public affairs
is one of the most important achievements of socialism. Precisely under socialism,
as V. l. Lenin foresaw, "for the first time in the history of civilized societies
the /mess/ [in italics] of the population will rise to [independent/ [in italics]

participation not only in votes and elections. /but also in everyday management/"1
[in italics].

After the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution the enlistment of the
working people in the management of state and public affairs was a necessary pre-
requisite of the creation of a new society. Our party saw its task first of all

in helping the workers and peasants to realize: only they are now the absolute
masters of the country and all its wealth. "Remember," V. I. Lenin said in the ap-
peal "To the Population," "that/you yourselves] [in italics] now run the state. No
one will help you. if you yourselvesbnot unite and take [all the affairs] [in
italics] of the state into [your own/ [in italics] hands."2

of course, the working people, when they came to power, did not yet have experi-
ence in running a state. Therefore the party, when elaborating the socialist prin-
ciples of the management of the state, at the same time directed efforts. in
Lenin's words, at "teaching the mass management, not book management, not by lec-
tures, not by meetings, at teaching by experience."3

The first socialist transformations showed the inexhaustible creative and organiz-

ing strength and possibilities of the working people. their ability not only to de-
stroy bourgeois orders, but also to organize life independently on a new, socialist
basis. The promotion of workers and peasants to managerial posts in state and eco-
nomic organs formed among them the sense of being the master of the country and the
awareness that they were now also the power.

In its second Program the Communist Party set as a goal "the gradual involvement of
the entire working population to a man in the work on the management of the state."“

It invariably pursued this goal at all the stages of the building of socialism and
communism.

103

FOI‘OFFNJAJ.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the years of Soviet power the consciousness and political activeness of the
working people increased immeasurably. The people promoted from their midst mil-
lions of able organizers and workers of the state machinery, the economy, science
and culture. A system of political institutions, which provides the working peo-
ple with every opportunity for direct participation in the management of all state
and public affairs, was created and stood up to the test of time.

Our country is frequently called simply the "Soviets." Such an identification is
nature. /The soviets of people's deputies are the political basis of our state.

They are organs of representative democracy, through which the people exercise
their state power/ [in boldface].

The entire history of our socialist state is inseparably connected with the soviets.
They came into being on the initiative of the workers three quarters of a century
ago, in the fever of the first Russian revolution, as organs of the struggle of the
working people against the autocracy and the protection of the interests of the
popular masses. V. I. Lenin perspicaciously saw in the soviets the embryo of a
revolutionary government. new organs of the power of the people and the state form
of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Under the slogan "All Power to the Sovi-
ets!" the party inspired the working class and the poorest peasantry to the over—
throw of the power of landowners and capitalists and led then to the victory of the
Great October Socialist Revolution. This celebrated slogan was the basis for Le-
nin's plan of the building of a new state as a republic of soviets "throughout the
country, from the bottom to the top."5

"For the first time in history," V. I. Lenin noted, "the power of the state has
been organized here in Russia in such a way that only the workers, only the working
peasants, with the exception of exploiters, are forming mass organizations-the so-
viets, and all state power is being transferred to these soviets."6 Lenin's prin-
ciple of the sovereignty of the soviets was sanctioned legislatively in the RSPSR
Constitution of 1918, in the constitutions of the other union republics, and then
in the USSR Constitutions of 1924 and 1936. While preserving the continuity of the
first Soviet Constitutions, the Fundamental Law of 1977 reads: "The people exer-
cise state power through the soviets of people's deputies.... All other state
organs are under the control of and accountable to the soviets of people's deputies.

Everything connected with the soviets and Soviet power always was and remains a
matter of the entire party. In defining the place and role of the party and the
soviets in the state of the dictatorship of the proletariat, V. I. Lenin indicated
that "the proletariat, which has been organized in soviets and which the Communist
Party guides, carries out the dictatorship," that "all the work of the party takes
place through the soviets, which unite the working masses regardless of occupa-
tions."7 Here the party endeavored "to [direct] [in italics] the activity of the
soviets, but not to replace then."8

Beginning with the first days after the victory of October the Communist Party di-
rected efforts toward the fullest realization of the enormous potentials which

were incorporated in the Soviet form of state power, toward the increase of the

role of the soviets in the revolutionary reorganization of society on a new, social-
ist basis. and contributed in every possible way to the elaboration of the princi-
ples, forms and methods of their activity. It devoted constant attention so that
the soviets would operate as "working institutions," which united legislative and

104

F08‘0F11CLAI.USE(NVLY
executive functions, so as to enlist "/all/ [in italics] the members of the sovi-
ets in practical participation in government,"9 so that their contacts with the
masses would be continuously strengthened.

In overcoming backwardness and illiteracy, the lack of confidence of the population
in everything of the state, numerous national and patriarchal prejudices, the party
endeavored to adapt the organization and nature of the activity of the soviets as
much as possible to the abilities of the deputies, to make them such organs of

power, in which, as V. I. Lenin indicated, "the population truly Ito a man/ [in
italics] would learn to govern."10

Under the conditions of mature socialism, while creatively embodying Lenin's prin-
ciples of the sovereignty of the soviets, the party is promoting in every possible
way the strengthening of the organs of state power, the enhancement of their role
in the life of society and the development of their initiative and activeness.
These questions occupy an important place in the decisions of party congresses and
have been repeatedly examined in the CPSU Central Committee. In recent years on
the initiative of the party major measures on strengthening the legal and material
base of the soviets have been implemented, laws concerning all the units of the So-
viet representative system have been passed.

In conformity with the USSR Constitution the USSR Supreme Soviet, the Supreme Sovi-
ets of the union and autonomous republics, the kray, oblast, okrug, city, rayon,

settlement and rural soviets of people's deputies constitute the unified system of
organs of power in our country. In all more than 51,000 soviets, which form as if

a multistory building which is crowned by the USSR Supreme Soviet, are now in opera-
tion.

The soviets manage all sectors of state, economic and sociocultural construction
directly and through the organs created by them. Of course, they differ in their
"rank," scale of activity and internal organization. However, any soviet is an
element of state power. It not only is empowered to settle all questions belonging
to its competence, but also acts as a transmitter of statewide decisions.

In our country the USSR Supreme Soviet is the highest organ of state power. It re-
views and approves the state plans of economic and social development and the USSR
state budget, improves Soviet legislation and carries out active and productive
foreign policy activity. The USSR Supreme Soviet exercises control over the work
of all the state organs accountable to it, including the USSR Council of Ministers
which is formed by it--the highest executive and administrative organ of state
power.

The Supreme Soviets of the union and autonomous republics are competent to settle
all question which belong to the jurisdiction of the corresponding republic, while
the local soviets are competent to settle those which belong to the jurisdiction
of the kray, the oblast, the city and so on.

/The USSR Constitution provides the Soviet people with the opportunity to vote and
to be elected to the soviets of people's deputies] [in boldface]. This is one of

the most important guarantees of their right to participate in the management of
state and public affairs.

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. -.. -a..~u-.. -ua. wavul

It should be noted that the first Soviet Constitution assigned to the working peo-
plc the right to vote and to be elected to organs of state power. However, it
disfranchised those who lived on unearned income and used hired labor, as well as
the ministers of religious cults, former policemen, gendarmes and others. More-
over, not entirely equal suffrage was established: the norms of representation for
workers in the elections to the soviets were slightly higher than the norms of re-
presentation of the peasants. Only the city and rural soviets were chosen by di-
rect election. All other organs of state power were formed at the corresponding
congresses of the soviets. The voting in all elections was open.

The restrictions of suffrage stemmed from the historical circumstances under which
the Soviet Republic was. The exploiting classes. relying on the support of foreign
imperialists, waged an open war against the working people and fiercely opposed So-
viet laws. The peasants were small holders, the influence of the kulaks was still
great in the countryside. Under these conditions the disfranchisement of the non-
working elements was one of the means of suppression of the exploiters, while the
introduction of not entirely equal elections strengthened the leading role of the
working class in the state.

However, even at that time V. I. Lenin stressed that the restrictions of suffrage
in the Soviet Republic were of a temporary nature, that after the exploiting
classes in our country had been eliminated and the cause of socialism had become
firmly established, the Soviet state would be able to introduce and is introducing
universal suffrage without any restrictions.

The restrictions, which had existed in suffrage for the former exploiting elements,
were abolished when the USSR Constitution of 1936 came into force. All the soviets
began to be elected on the basis of universal, direct and equal suffrage with se-
cret voting. This means that the right to vote is granted to all USSR citizens who
have reached the age of 18; that each voter has one vote; that the deputies of all
soviets are elected directly; that control of the will of the voters is not allowed.

The formation of the organs of USSR state power is carried out on a broad democrat-
ic basis. The right to nominate candidates for deputies belongs to party, trade
union. Komsomol, cooperative and other public organizations, labor collectives, as
well as meetings of servicemen. The USSR Constitution guarantees the free and
thorough discussion of the political, business and personal qualities of the can-
didates for deputies, as well as the right of agitation at meeting, in the press,
on television and radio. The state assumes all the costs connected with the con-
ducting of elections.

The working people themselves take an active part in the preparation for and con-
ducting of the election campaign. Thus, more than 936,800 election commissions, in
the work of which 8.6 million representatives of public organizations and labor col-
lectives participated, were formed for the holding of the elections to the Supreme
Soviets of the union and autonomous republics and to the local soviets of people's
deputies, which took place in 1980. In all 176.6 million voters (99.9 percent). or
practically the entire adult population of the country, directly participated in

the elections.

As is known, western propaganda represents universal suffrage as one of the highest
manifestations of the democratisn of bourgeois parliaments. Here it is not

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mentioned that the restrictions with respect to property status, sex, education,
age and so on, which were used for centuries to keep the working people from the
elections, were abolished or relaxed in the capitalist countries only in recent
years, and then under the pressure of the working people. As in the past an ex-
tensive set of means, which interfere with the will of the voters, is being used--
the artificial recarving of districts, manipulations with various voting systems,
the bribery of voters, the falsification of voting results and so forth.

As a result people are losing interest in the elections, many evade voting. Only
52.3 percent of the voters participated in the 1980 presidential elections in the
United States. This is the lowest percentage of participation of Americans in
elections in the past 32 years. Mass absenteeism is not simply indifference to the
"political process," as western sociologists like to explain this phenomenon. It
is a distrust, which is becoming inveterate, of a system which does not provide an
opportunity for a real choice. The failure of tens of millions of Americans to
appear at the polls shows the progressive devaluation of those very civil rights
which on the initiative of the Washington administration have become the main item
of the ideological exports of imperialism.

.r .

The social base of the Soviet'form of democracy was continuously broadened as so-
cialism and communism were built in our country. This also found reflection in the
name of the soviets. Being initially the soviets of workers', peasants' and Red
Army deputies, with the building of socialism they began to be called soviets of
workers' deputies, while with the development of the state of the dictatorship of
the proletariat into the national socialist state they began to be called soviets
of people's deputies.

The composition of the soviets convincingly attests to genuine democracy in our
country. At present nearly 2.3 million deputies, who represent all the social
groups, all the nations and nationalities of the USSR, have been elected to them.
They are truly people of labor, "the mighty collective brain of the Soviet re-
gime,"ll as L. I. Brezhnev called the deputies.

More than two-thirds of all the deputies are workers and kolkhoz farmers, about
one-third are teachers, physicians, figures of science and culture, workers of par-
ty and public organizations, managers of enterprises, students, servicemen and re—
presentatives of other categories of the working people. Nearly half of the depu-
ties are women, one in three is under the age of 30, 43 percent are members and
candidate members of the CPSU. Here it should be emphasized that professional de-
puties, who are characteristic of bourgeois parliamentarianism, do not exist in

the USSR. The deputies perform their duties without breaking with production or
official activity, with those with whom they work together, whose concerns, hopes
and needs are close and understandable to them.

The composition of the USSR Supreme Soviet makes it possible to express most fully
the general will of the Soviet people and at the same time to take into account

the specific interests of the different classes and social groups, nations and ne—
tionalities of our country. Among the 1,500 deputies of its two chambers workers
and kolkhoz farmers make up more than half. The intelligentsia--workers of the
national economy, science, literature and art, education and public health, serv-
icemen--is widely represented. Prominent figures of the party and the state, work-
ers of trade union, Komsomol and other public organizations are included in the

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

highest organ of state power. One deputy in three is a woman, one in five is under
the age of 30, more than two-thirds are communists. Among the deputies there are
people of 6| nationalities.

Let us note for comparison that, for example, among the 535 members of the U.S.
Congress, which Americans themselves call "the club of the rich," there are 253
lawyers, 140 businessmen, 47 workers of the educational system, 30 government em-
ployees, 25 farmers, 18 journalists and so on, not a single worker being among them.
Of the members of Congress, 95 percent are white. In the Bundestag of the PRC of
the 518 deputies only 30 come from a working class environment.

Lenin's principle of the unity of legislative and executive power is in effect in
our country. The deputies not only discuss and adopt laws and decisions at the
sessions of the soviets, but also perform daily practical work on the management of
state and public affairs. They organize and monitor the fulfillment of the adopted
laws and decisions, check the work of enterprises, organizations and institutions,
review the complaints and petitions of the working people, strive for the implemen-
tation of the mandates of voters and so on. In the past 10 years the soviets have
accepted for fulfillment 3,250,000 mandates, of which 2,950,000 have been fulfilled.
The deputies make extensive use of the right of inquiry as a leans of monitoring
the work of executive organs and officials.

The standing commissions of the soviets for various directions of their activity
are an important form which ensures the effective participation of the deputies in
the work of the organs of power. At present there are more than 330,000 such com-
missions, which unite more than 1.8 million deputies. The preliminary examination
and preparation of questions, which are submitted to the sessions and meetings of
the executive committees of the soviets, the monitoring of the fulfillment of the
adopted decisions and other things are entrusted to them. The creation of deputy
groups is being used extensively in practice for the purpose of uniting the efforts
of deputies at the place of residence of the voters and at enterprises.

The Law on the Status of the Deputies of Soviets clearly defines their rights and
duties, as well as the duties of state and public organizations with respect to
then. The basic powers granted to the deputies by this law have been sanctioned
in the USSR Constitution.

All the activity of the soviets is carried out on a truly democratic basis and is
constantly under the supervision of the masses. It is carried out openly, in view
of all the working people, under the conditions of extensive publicity. The sovi-
ets inform the population about the decisions being made and the results of their
fulfillment. The practice of reports of the executive committees, as well as of
deputies to the voters and at meetings of the working people has become widespread.
For example, in 1979 the deputies of local soviets delivered reports at 3,767,000
meetings, in which 198 millionvoterstook part. The right of the voters to recall
their deputy at any time, if he does not justify the confidence shown to him, is
of great importance.

After each election the composition of the soviets is considerably refreshed. In
1980 in the elections to the Supreme Soviets of the union and autonomous republics
and the local soviets 47 percent of the deputies were elected for the first time.
Thus, newer and newer millions of Soviet people are going through the school of
state government directly in organs of power.

108
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
The socialist mode of production requires the strictest accounting of the output
being produced and the monitoring of its distribution in conformity with the prin-
ciple "to each according to his labor. ” "Until," V. I. Lenin indicated, "the high-
est phase of communist begins, socialists demand the [strictest] [in italics] noni-
toring on the p;rt of society [and on the part of the state/ [in italics] of the
measure of labor and the measure of consumption...."I

From the first steps of the Soviet regime the party attached enormous importance to
the organization of effective accounting and monitoring and to the enlistment of

the broad masses of the people in this work. From the simplest functions of the
supervision of the distribution of products and fuel, the operation of dining rooms,
which are entirely within the reach of "every honest, capable, practical worker and
peasant,"13 to the analysis of the most difficult questions of economic and cul-
tural construction, the work of the administrative staff-such is the path which
was traversed in our ccuntry by the people's controllers.

People's control has firmly taken its place in the Soviet political system and has
become truly massive and comprehensive. The organs of people's control are formed
by the soviets of people's deputies and combine state control with public control.
The groups and posts (1.3 million) at industrial enterprises and construction proj-
ects, kolkhozes and sovkhozes, institutions and educational institutions, in mili-
tary units, as well as in ministries and departments constitute the basis of this
system. The members of the groups and posts (9.7 million people) are elected at
the meetings of collectives and are accountable to them. Millions of activists
from among the HOELers, kolkhoz farmers and employees participate in the inspec-
tions organized by these groups and posts. The people's controllers act on the
basis of extensive publicity. Their rights are specified by the Law on People's
Control in the USSR.

The main tasks of people's control is to strive for the implementation of the deci-
sions of the party and the government and the plan assignments, to combat viola-
tions of state discipline, mismanagement and displays of bureaucracy and red tape.
"Not one violation, not one case of abuses. extravagance and lack of discipline."
L. l. Brezhnev emphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress, "should slip by the practical
eye of the people's controllers. To act more vigorously, to act more aggressive-
1y--that is what the CPSU Central Committee is orienting them toward."

/The Soviet Constitution guarantees the right of citizens to manage state and pub-
lic affairs by the opportunity to vote and to be elected not only to organs of
state power, but also to the courts/ [in boldface].

On 22 November 1917 V. I. Lenin signed the Decree on the Court, by which the truly
democratic principles of the Soviet judicial system were established legislatively:
the appointment of judges and people's assessors by election, the open hearing of
cases. the guarantee of the right to defense, the participation of citizens in the
administration of justice.... These basic principles have stood up to the test of
time and are sanctioned in the USSR Constitution.

109
FOR 0FFHJAI.USEIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The USSR Supreme Court, the Supreme Courts of the union and autonomous republics,
kray. oblsst, city, okrug and rayon courts, as well as military tribunals in the
Armed Forces operate in our country. All the courts are formed on the basis of the
appointment of the judges and people's assessors by election. The people's judges
of the rayon courts are elected on the basis of universal, equal and direct suf-
frage in secret voting, while the people's assessors are elected at meetings of the
working people at the place of their job or residence by open vote. The higher
courts are elected by the appropriate soviets of people's deputies. The judges and
people's assessors are responsible to the voters orthe organs which elected them,

report to-them and can be recalled in accordance with the procedure established by
law.

/In accordance with the USSR Constitution, the right of citizens to participate in
government is guaranteed along the lines of not only state, but also public activi-
ty. They have the opportunity to take part in the work of public organizations

and organs of public initiative, in the meetings of labor collectives and at the
place of residence] [in boldface].

The Soviet people participate in government through trade union, Komsomol, coopera-
tive and other mass associations of the working people. These organizations will
be discussed in greater detail in the next chapter. here I would like to note the
right of legislative initiative, which is granted to public organizations by the
USSR Constitution and enables them to directly influence the policy of the state
and to participate in its formulation and implementation.

Various organs of public initiative--street and house committees, comrades' courts,
patrols for the maintenance of public order, parents' committees at schools, coun-
cils of libraries, clubs and houses of culture, women's councils and many others--
became widespread. These are voluntary assistants of the Soviet regime. Now more
than 31 million people are learning the art of participation in state management

at them.

An important place in the political system of Soviet society belongs to labor col-
lectives. In reality, they are the primary units of not only the economic, but
also the sociopolitical organism. Many important questions of state and public
life, the organization of production management, cultural and general construction
and others are discussed and settled at the meetings of labor collectives. The
rights and duties of labor collectives are set forth in the USSR Constitution.

During the years of the building of socialism and communism the practice of the di-
rect participation of millions of working people in the management of state and
public affairs was steadily extended. Now [the participation of USSR citizens in
the discussion and adoption of laws and the most important decisions of statewide
and local importance and in national votes is sanctioned as their constitutional
right/ [in boldface].

In our country it has become a tradition to discuss and settle all important ques-
tions of political, socioeconomic and cultural life with the direct participation
of the workers, the peasants and the intelligentsia. And when it is a question of
fundamental tasks of the development of the country, the drafts of decisions and
laws are submitted for national discussion. These drafts are published in the
press, and everyone is given a practical opportunity to express their opinion on
them.

110

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
The national discussion of the draft of the USSR Constitution of 1977, in which
more than 140 million people, or four-fifths of the adult population of the coun-
try, took part, can serve as a vivid example. It is also characteristic that not
one five-year plan of economic and social development has been adopted in recent
times without thorough discussion not only at sessions of the Supreme Soviets, but
also in collectives of the working people and through the mass media. The Soviet
people also discussed extensively the drafts of such major legislative acts as the
fundamentals of legislation on labor, marriage and the family, housing legislation,
laws on pensions, nature conservation and others.

of course, the forms of the direct will of the masses are not limited to the frame-
work of national discussions. The party is showing tireless concern about the de-
velopment of criticism as an effective means of the combatting of shortcomings and
the implementation of socialist democracy. [The right of citizens to submit to
state organs and public organizations suggestions on the improvement of their activ-
ity and to criticize the shortconings in their work is sanctioned in the new USSR
Constitution] [in boldface]. Our Fundamental Law obligates officials within a set
period to review the suggestions and statements of the working people, to issue re-
sponses to them and to take the necessary steps and prohibits prosecution for criti-
cism. Persons guilty of this are called to account.

/The Soviet people are using extensively the freedoms of speech, the press, as-
sembly, meetings, street marches and demonstrations, which are guaranteed to then
by the USSR Constitution] [in boldface]. Public buildings--c1ubs, palaces of cul-
ture, theaters, the streets and squares of cities and population centers-the press,
radio, television and other mass media are placed at their disposal for this.

The party makes great deamnds on the work with the letters and oral appeals of the
working people. "Every party worker, every executive," L. I. Brezhnev said at the
26th CPSU Congress, "is obligated to regard the sensitive, attentive treatment of
the Jettgrs, requests and conplaints of citizens as his duty to the people, to the
party."

For the party this work always was and is a matter of great political importance,
an effective means of the mass and direct participation of the working people in
the running of the state. V. I. Lenin repeatedly indicated this. The letters of
working people and the oral appeals of "petition bearers" were for him a most valu-
able source of infornation on "the topic of the day,"16 which he deemed necessary
to generalize and to turn into political decisions.

The very number of letters and statements of the working people testifies to the
importance of this work. For example, during the past 5 years (between the 25th
and 26th party congresses) the CPSU Central Committee received more than 3.2 mil-
lion letters and oral appeals, the party cmmmittees locally examined in all 15 mil-
lion. The suggestions and remarks, which are expressed by the authors of letters,
are used in the preparation of party and state decisions and in the practical ac-
tivity of management organs.

The more and more extensive and active participation of the masses in the manage-
ment of state and public affairs has become firmly established as the central di-

rection of the political development of Soviet society. "Our party," L. I. Brezh-
nev emphasized, "has and henceforth will displayed constant concern about the fact

11]
FIMI(HﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY
I'UK UtI'ICIAL USE ONLY

that the uprking people should not simply have the opportunities granted by the
Constitution to participate in the manage-en: of society, but should also actually

and genuinely take part in it."17
FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soeh." [Complete Works], Vol 33, p 116.

2. Ibid., Vol 35. p 66.

3. Ihid., Vol 37, p 451.

a. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"ye:dov, konferentsiy i plenunov TsK"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenuls
of the Central Connittse], 8th edition, Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 65.

S. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sohr. soch.," Vol 31, p 115.

6. Ibid.. Vol 38, p 238.

7. Ibid.. Vol 41, pp 30, 32.

8. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenulov Tex,"
Vol 2, p 77.

9. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 36, p 204.
10. Ibid., p 203.

11. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin hurson" [By the Leninist Course], Vol 6, Moscow,
1978, p 385.

12. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sohr. soch.," Vol 33, p 97.
13. Ibid., Vol 35, p 201.

16. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1981, p 65.

15. Ibid., p 7‘.
[6. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.,” Vol 54. p 166.

17. L. I. Brezhnev. "Leninskin kurson," Vbl 6, p 566.

112

FlilCﬂﬂﬂClAl.llﬂB(HVLY
CHAPTER 11. MASS ORGANIZASIONS OF THE HORKING PEOPLE

...USSR citizens have the right to unite in
public organizations....

From Article 51 of the USSR Constitution

Whereas the soviets, being a form of state power, first of all express the common
interests of all the Soviet people, trade unions, the All-Union Leninist Communist
Youth League, cooperatives, sports, defense, creative and other societies and organ-

izations express the specific interests and aspirations of different social, occupa-
tional, age and other groups.

Public organizations are created on a strictly voluntary basis, draft and adopt
their by-lawa themselves and settle independently the questions which are within
their competence. All their activity is organized on the basis of self-government,
democratic norms and principles. Soviet legislation provides public organizations
with the conditions for the successful iulfillment of their authorized tasks.
Buildings, transportation, printing houses, stocks of paper, means of information
and so on are provided to them.

In accordance with the USSR Constitution, the trade unions, lomaomol, cooperative
and other public organizations haconformity with their authorized goals participate
in the management of state affairs and in the settlement of political, economic and
sociocultural questions and have in the person of their all-union organs the right
of legislative initiative. Moreover. individual functions, which were previously
performed by state organs, have been turned over to them.

Public organizations set up their work in close cooperation vith the state. Their
representatives are included in the collegia of ministries and departments. State
organs submit the drafts of their decisions for approval to public organizations.
The practice of their adoption of joint decrees has also become widespread.

Each of the public organizations plays its own special role in the political system
of Soviet society and has its own specific tasks, nature and scope of work and pe-
culiarities of organizational structure. At the same time they all make their own
contribution to the common cause of building communism. Precisely this highest
goal serves as the decisive constitutional principle of their founding and activity.

[Trade unions hold an important place in the political system of socialism/ [in
boldface]. This is the most massive organisation of working people, there are more

113

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
run \JI'I'ILIAI. use UNLV

than 129 million workers, kolkhoz farmers, employees and students of higher, sec-
ondary specialized and vocational and technical educational institutions in it. As
was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, the party regards the trade unions as its own
reliable suuport among the masses and a powerful means of the development of democ-
racy and the involvement of the working people in the building of connunism.1

Trade unions are organized according to the production principle. All the workers
at one enterprise or institution belong to a single trade union. In turn, the
workers and employees of enterprises and institutions, who belong to one or several
sectors of the national economy, are united in sectorial trade unions.

Primary organizations, which are created in the collectives of industrial enter-
prises. construction projects, sovkhozes, kolkhozes, institutions and so on, are the
basis of each sectorial trade union. Factory, plant and local committees, which
are elected at trade union meetings or conferences, head them. The corresponding
trade union committees are elected for the management of the primary organizations
of one sector or another on the scale of the rayon, the city, the oblast, the kray,

the republic, as well as a single railroad or water basin. Bach sectorial trade
union has its own Central Committee.

In the republics, krays and oblasts the councils of trade unions carry out the coor-
dination of the activity of the sectorial trade unions and the settlement of inter-
union questions, while the All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions (ADCC'I'U) does
so on the national level.

In Russia trade unions emerged during the period of the upsurge of the first Rus-
sian revolution (1905-1907) under the imediate direction of the Com-mist Party.
The party contributed to their creation, saw its task in joining and Jerking in
them and educated "the workers involved in the trade unions in the spirit of a
broad understanding of the class struggle and the socialist tasks of the proletar-
iat."2 "The trade unions," it was emphasized in a resolution of the Sixth Congress
of the Russian Social Demcratic Workers' Party (of Bolsheviks), "being drawn more
and more by the logic of events into the struggle for socialism, should [in all
their statements] [in italics] be guided by /the principles of the consistent class
struggle] [in italics], should defend vigorously and systematically the common in-
terests of the working class. by spurning all attempts to restrict the professional
movement and to subordinate it to the interests... of the ruling classes."3

Under the direction of the Communist Party the trade unions took over the leader-
ship of the economic struggle of the Russian proletariat against the capitalists,
did much work on the organization and increase of the class consciousness of the
working people and took an active part in the preparation for and the carrying out
of the Great October Socialist Revolution.

After the victory of October a new type of trade unions in reality began to be
formed in our country. First of all, along with. the elimination of private proper-
ty the economic basis of the exploitation of the working people disappeared, the
working class became the master of production. As a result, the trade unions lost,
as V. I. Lenin noted, “such a basis as the /class/ [in italics] economic struggle.“

State power passed into the hands of the working class. Therefore the trade unions
inevitably became, to use the expression of V. I. Lenin, "an imadiate and

1110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
indispensable collaborator of state power, which the conscious vanguard of the work-
ing class, the Coemmnist Party, guides in all its political and economic work."5

Thus, the trade unions were transformed from a tool of the struggle against the

capitalists and the bourgeois state into a creative force of the building of social-
ism and communism.

V. I. Lenin substantiated thoroughly and comprehensively the role and place of trade
unions in the political system of Soviet society. The trade unions, he indicated,
"as an educational organization, an organization of involvement and training, they
are a school. a school of management. a school of communism."6 "Being a school of
communism in general," V. I. Lenin stressed, "the trade unions should be, in par-
ticular, a school of the management of socialist industry (and then gradually of
agriculture as well) for the entire mass of workers, and then for all working peo-
ple."7 Lenin's ideas were the basis for all the activity of Soviet trade unions.

Immediately after the October Revolution, when the state machinery of the manage-
ment of the national economy had not yet been set up, the trade unions were nearly
the only organs which, along with workers' control, were able to take upon them-
selves and should have taken upon themselves the work on the organization of pro-
duction and the management of enterprises. The First All-Russian Congress of Trade
Unions, which was held in January 1918, noted in its resolution: "The center of
gravity of the work of trade unions as this time should be shifted to the economic
organizational area. The trade unions as class organizations of the proletariat,
which have been set up according to the production principle, should take upon them-
selves the main work on the organisation of production and the reconstruction of
the severely damaged productive forces of the country."8 During the next period
the trade unions performed this work concurrent with and in conjunction with state
organs, the weakness'of which not only explained, but also justified such parallel-
ism.

As the state machinery of management grew stronger, the party pursued in itswork a
policy of the clear differentiation of the rights and duties of trade unions and
economic organs and fought resolutely against the attempts of some trade union work-
ers to interfere in the management of enterprises. It must be said that during the
first years of Soviet power the influence of petty bourgeois chaos was strong in
our country. It inevitably'evokedamong a portion of the proletariat vacillations
in the direction of anarchism. This found reflection, in particular, in the de-
mands of what was called "the workers' opposition," the essence of which reduced to
the transfer of the management of the national economy to "an all-Russian congress
of producers who are united in trade and production unions."9 These demands were
objectively aimed at the undermining of the leading role of the Communist Party in
the building of socialism and at the belittling and even the complete elimination
of the economic organizing activity of the Soviet state.

It is quite understandable that the anarcho-syndicalist view of "the workers' oppo-
sition" were condemned by our party. Along with them V. I. Lenin and the Communist
Party also fought irreconcilably with other political trends and deviations, which
were hostile to the cause of the working class: the attempts of the Trotskiyitea
to turn the trade unions into a simple appendage of the state machinery, the ideas
of the "freedom" of the trade unions from the struggle for the ultimate goals of

115

FOR OFI1CJAI.lEﬂ£(NVLY
the working class and of their ”independence" from the interests of all the working
people. V. I. Lenin called such views "either bourgeois provocation of the crudest

manner or-an extreme lack of understanding, servile repetition of the slogans of
yesterday."10

The party stressed that the trade unions should "vigorously support the undertak-
ings of managers, which are aimed at the increase of labor productivity, coordinat-
ing them with the interests of the workers represented by them and with the possi-
bility of the most successful limplementstion of these measures/"11 [in italics].
At the same time it opposed the indiscriminate approval by the trade unions of all
the measures and suggestions of the administration, while forgetting that their
most important function is to represent and defend the interests of the workers.

At all the stages of the building of socialism and communism the party has directed
and is directing the trade unions toward the effective defense of the rights of the
working people and constant concern about their vital interests. For this it has
extensive means--1ega1, organizational and material. In conformity with the law
not one measure, which concerns the interests of workers, kolkhoz farmers and em-
ployees, working conditions and wages, social security, the improvement of housing
and living conditions and the increase of the standard of living, is elaborated and
implemented in our country without the trade unions.

The drafts of the national economic plans by sectors and for the country as a whole
are reviewed by executive trade union organs. Jointly with the USSR State Commit-
tee for Labor and Social Problems the AUCCTU elaborates and approves the main stat-
utes on bonuses and the documents on the rate setting of labor. The wage rates and
salaries of workers, engineering and technical personnel and employees of all the
sectors of the national economy are approved by joint decrees of the government and
the AUCCTU. Many important laws and decrees of the party and government, which are
aimed at the improvement of the working and living conditions and the conditions of
the relaxation of the working people, have been adopted on the initiative of trade
unions.

Important rights in the settlement of questions of economic operations have been
granted to the primary trade union organizations. These rights are sanctioned in

a special statute, which has the force of law. The factory, plant and local oom-
mittees of the trade unions participate in the drafting of the plans of the socio-
economic development of collectives, as well as the plans of capital, housing, cul-
tural and general construction. They have the right to hear the reports of economic
managers on the fulfillment of plans, the results of production operations, the im-
plementation of measures on the improvement of the organization of labor and work-
ing conditions, the material, personal and cultural service of workers and em-
ployees.

An important aspect of the activity of trade union organizations is the annual con-
clusion of collective agreements between the administration and the collectives of
working people. They guarantee mutual responsibility in the relations of the rank
and file worker and the director, the managers and the executives. when concluding
collective agreements, the trade union committees jointly with the administration
determine how best to use the assets which are allocated for the development of the
enterprises, sociocultural measures, housing construction and material incentives.
If a difference of opinion arises between the administration and the trade unions,

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
superior trade union and economic organs review the draft of the collective agree-
ment.

The trade unions see to it that the labor collectives and the administration meet
their obligations. If economic managers violate the terms of the collective agree-
ment, they are held strictly accountable.

The right to monitor the observance of labor legislation and the organization of
labor safety procedures has been granted to the trade unions. An important role
here belongs to the 6.200 technical inspectors, who are not subordinate to managers
and are accountable only to the sectorisl and territorial trade union organs. The
orders of these inspectors are mandatory for the administrator of any rank. The
technical inspector has the right to go freely into any enterprise, he can fine
both the foreman and the general director and can raise the question of shutting
down a shop or even an enterprise. if he finds there violations of labor safety
practices and the requirements of labor safety procedures.

The administration cannot dismiss a worker from the enterprise or put into opera-
tion any production plant without the consent of the factory-plant and local com—
mittee of the trade union. If the administration introduces new norms of time or
output without approval from the trade union organization, they are invalid.

In 1979 for shortcomings in labor safety procedures, the allowance of injuries and
the failure to meet the obligations stipulated by collective agreements 6,174 man-
agerial workers were held administratively liable, while 156 of them at the re-
quest of the trade unions were released from the positions occupied by them.

The defense of the rights and interests of the working people always was and will
be the most important aspect in the activity of the trade unions. Of course, under
socialism this "protective function" has a different political and socioeconomic
basis than under the conditions of capitalism. For the director, who aspires for
the enterprise to derive a profit, serves the interests of the working people in
the same way as the trade union committee which strives for the increase of their
standard of living. In turn, while showing concern about the interests of the
workers and employees. the trade unions cannot but be concerned about the develop-
ment of the national economy, the increase of production and the improvement of
its qualitative indicators. "Such," L. I. Brezhnev stressed, "is the two-in-one
task of the trade unions."12

Trade unions effectively influence the activity of enterprises through permanent
production conferences, which are elected at workers' meetings. At present there
are more than 139,000 such conferences in the country. They unite about 6 million
people, nearly two-thirds of them are workers. The rights and duties of the pro-
duction conferences are specified by a special statute which was approved by the
USSR Council of Ministers and the AUCCTU. In conformity with this statute the con-
ferences review questions of planning and the introduction of new equipment, adopt
decisions and and make suggestions, the implementation of which is organized by the
economic managers. In the past 2 years the economic impact from the introduction
of these suggestions came to l.& billion rubles. By taking part in the work of
production conferences, workers learn the skills of the management of enterprises.

117
FOI‘OFFKJAI.USEINNLY
svn vs I'|\ulf\h was: UNLI

The All-union Society of Inventors and Rationalizers, scientific and technical so-

cieties and councils of innovators operate under the supervision of the trade
unions.

The trade unions in the USSR directly control state social insurance. Under their
jurisdiction there are 930 sanatoriums, holiday hotels and holiday homes, nearly
2,500 sanstorium-dispensarics, almost 1,000 tourist centers, hotels, camping
grounds and shelters and more than 57,000 Pioneer camps. There are 22,200 clubs,
houses and palaces of culture, more than 56,000 movie projectors and over 19,000
libraries at the disposal of the trade unions. In all 33 voluntary sports soci-
eties, at the disposal of which there are 2,800 stadiums, 12,300 gymnasiums, nearly
900 swimming pools, 5,300 ski centers and 4,800 therapeutic sports camps, operate
under the supervision of the trade unions. The trade unions publish theiromn news-
papers and journals.

The tasks and rights of the trade unions, it was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress,
are extremely broad. However, at times they still lack initiative in the exercise
of these extensive rights. The congress also demanded that the monitoring by trade
unions and labor collectives of the settlement of all questions of the labor, life
and way of life of the people be stepped up further, that their participation in
planning and production management, the selection and placement of personnel and the
efficient use of the assets of enterprises and organizations be expanded.13

Our party always considered and considers contact with the masses to be the most
basic, most important condition of the success of any trade union activity whatso-
- ever. Communists who are promoted to trade union posts, it was emphasized in the
decisions of the 11th party congress, "should live the life of a worker, know it
thoroughly, be able to determine accurately on any question at any moment the mood
of the masses, their actual aspirations, needs and thoughts, be able to determine
without a trace of false idealization the degree of their consciousness and the
strength of the influence of certain prejudices and vestiges of old times or others,
to be able to win the infinite trust of the masses by a friendly attitude toward
them and the careful meeting of their needs."14 These requirements of the party
are also in effect today.

[The mass youth organisation-the All-Union Leniniat Communist Youth League (Komso-
mol)--is playing an active role in the sociopolitical life of the country] [in

boldface]. There are more than 40.5 million boys and girls in its ranks, they are
workers and peasants, employees and students, young army members. In all 23.6 mil-
lion Komsomol members are working in the different sectors of the national economy.

Komsomol is organized according to the territorial production principle. This
means that the primary organizations, which have been set up at the place of work
or studies of the Komsomol members, are united into rayon, city and okrug organiza-
tions. which in turn form the Komsomol organizations of oblasts, krays and repub-
lics. The congress is the highest organ of Komsomol, while during the intervals
between congresses the Komsomol Central Committee is the highest organ.

The origin, formation and entire history of Komsomol are inseparable from the name

of V. I. Lenin and the activity of the Communist Party. The first revolution work-
ers' youth organizations arose after the February (1917) Bourgeois Democratic

118

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USB(MHLY
Revolution. At that time, in attaching enormous importance to this movement, the
sixth party congress adopted the special resolution ”0n Youth Leagues." it was
Stated in it: "Our party should... see to it that young workers create independent
organizations, which organizationally are not subordinate to, but are only spiritu-
ally connected with the party. But at the same time the party is trying to see to
it that these organizations from their very emergence would assume a socialist na-
ture.... /The interference of the party in the organizational construction of the
young workers/" [in italics], it was stressed in the resolution, "/should not have
the nature of guardianship over theml"ls [in italics].

The socialist leagues of young workers and peasants, which were formed in conform-
ity with the decisions of the congress, became the vital assistants of the party,
one of the shock detachments of the revolutionary proletariat during the days of
Great October.

The First All-Russian Congress of Leagues of Horker and Peasant Youth (October 1918),
which was convened on the initiative of V. I. Lenin, proclaimed the creation of a
communist youthleague-the Russian Communist Youth League. For the first time in
the history of the revolutionary movement a youth organization of a new type was
created: proletarian in its nature, communist in its goals and tasks, mass and in-
dependent in its character. Its formation enabled the Communist Party and the So-
viet state to take more completely into account the interests of young people and

to combine the struggle for national interests with the meeting of the specific de-
mands of boys and girls.

in the resolution "0n Hork Among Young People," which was adopted by the Seventh
Congress of the Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks), it was emphasized: "Com-
munist work among young people can proceed successfully only through independent
organizations which march under the banner of communism, in which young people
could display the maximum initiative which is certainly necessary for their commu-
nist education. The Russian Communist Youth League is such an organization....
The Eighth Congress of the Russian Commmnist Party deemed necessary the further
existence and development of the Russian Communist Youth League. The Russian Com-
munist Party should give the most active ideological and material support to the
Russian Communist Youth League."16

The role and place of the comunist youth league in the struggle for socialism and

communism and the program of the ideological. political, labor and moral education

of youth were specified in the historic speech of V. I. Lenin, "The Tasks of Youth

Leagues," at the Third Congress of the Russian Communist Youth League (I920). This
is the most important theoretical document of our party on the communist education

of young people. The main task of the Communist Youth League--to study communism--
was formulated and revealed in it.

The party indicated that the Russian Communist Youth League, while being the trans-
mitter of party influence on the broad masses of young people and having at the
same time specific tasks which differ from the partywide tasks, should be a self-
governing organization. At the same time it fought all kinds of trends of isola-
tion and withdrawal from the party, which were observed among a portion of the mem-
bers of the league (the theories of "neutrality," "equal rights" and so forth), and
emphasized that outside party supervision the communist youth league wOuld not be
able to perform its role in the sociopolitical life of the country. The party
taught the Russian Communist Youth Leage to coordinate the personal and group

119
FOR OFFHJAI.US£|DNIJ'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interests of boys and girls with the interests of the working class and to subor-
dinate everyday work to the common revolutionary tasks of the proletariat.

Taking in 1924 the name of the great Lenin, Komsomol swore to learn to live, work
and fight in the Leninist way. This oath became the oath of loyalty of all Komso-

moi generations to the behests of V. I. Lenin, to the cause of the Commuﬂst Party
and to the ideals of communism.

Komsomol sees its priority task in raising and training ideologically confirmed,
courageous champions of the cause of communism. It actively helps the party to edu-
cate the young generation in the spirit of Harxism-Leninism, the revolutionary,
military and labor traditions of the Communist Party and the Soviet people and the
readiness to stand with arms in hand in defense of the gains of Great October.

Komsomol has diverse forms of the ideological and political education of young
people. About 20 million young workers, kolkhoz farmers and specialists are study-
ing in the system of party and Komaomol political training and in mass forms of
economic education. The majority of undergraduates and students take part in the
annually heid all-union reviews of compositions on sociopolitical themes and the
competitions of student works on the social sciences, the history of Komsomol and
the international youth movement. Lenin Lessons and Lenin Tests, which promote
their better learning of Lenin's theoretical legacy and the formation among them

of an active position in life, hold an important place in the ideological and polit-
ical education of boys and girls.

The All-Union Tour of Sites of Revolutionary, Military and Labor Glory found fer-
vent support among young people. Uhen participating in it, millions of boys and
girls familiarize themselves with the heroic history of the Soviet people and with
the feats of their fathers and mothers and surround with concern and attention the
people who devoted much effort and health to the struggle for the happiness of the
homeland.

Komsomol is scrupulously fulfilling Lenin's behest: "Only in labor together with
the workers and the peasants is it possible to become real communists."l7 Shock
Komsomol construction projects have become a real school of life for hundreds of
thousands of boys and girls. In 1980 alone 125,000 volunteers were sent to them

in accordance with Komsomol travel authorizations. The movement "The Enthusiasm

and Creative Work of Young People for the Five-Year Plan of Efficiency and Quality!"
acquired a broad scope.after the 25th CPSU Congress. All-union reviews of the cre-
ative scientific and technical work of young people, in which nearly 20 million

boys and girls regularly engaged, have become traditional.

Komsomnl is performing much work on the training and education of a worth reinforce-
ment of the working class and the kolkhoz peasantry, on the sponsorship of voca-
tional and technical schools and on the assignment of young people to services,
animal husbandry and other sectors of the national economy, in which a shortage of
workmen is being felt.

Student youth are making a significant contribution to the national economy. In
the summer of 1980 the fighters of the All-Union Student Construction Detachment

performed an amount of work, which exceeded [.5 billion rubles, more than 10 mil-
lion school children worked at kolkhozes, sovkhozes and enterprises.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
An important section of the work of Komsomol is the utmost assistance of the Com-
munist Party in the formation of a harmoniously developed generation. Komsomol
nrgnnizations are drawing young workers. kolkhoz farmers and employees into evening
and correspondence schools, higher educational institutions and tekhnikums. Hil-
[ions of Komsomol members and young people not belonging to the league are engaged
in physical culture, sports and amateur artistic work.

The school is surrounded by the special concern and attention of Komsomol. Komso-
mol organizations are actively promoting the improvement of educational and train—
ing work, the drive for the thorough and solid knowledge of students, their pre-
paration for socially useful labor and the conscious choice of an occupation.

Considerable rights have been granted to Komsomol for the performance of its func-
tions. Komsomol is actively participating in the formation of the representative
organs of state power, in legislative activity and in the monitoring of the observ-

ance of the laws on the labor, training and material and cultural support of young
people.

Today, as was already noted, one deputy in four of the USSR Supreme Soviet, one
deputy in five of the Supreme Soviets of the union republics and one deputy in
three of the local soviets are young people up to the age of 30. In recent years
the Komsomol Central Committee has adopted a number of special decrees on the
strengthening of the contacts with the soviets of people's deputies. the improve-
ment of the work with young deputies and the enhancement of their role in organs of
power.

Many young deputies are members of the youth affairs standing commissions of the
soviets. Often Komsomol workers are elected as their chairmen. The youth consis-
sions jointly with Komsomol organs study questions of the labor, education and re-
laxation of young people and submit their own suggestions for the consideration of
the soviets and their executive comittees.

Komsomol makes extensive use of the right of legislative initiative, which is
granted to it by the Constitution. After the 18th Komsomol Congress (April 1978)
the Komsomol Central Committee jointly with state and public organizations adopted
more than 560 decrees on questions of the labor, education and relaxation of young
people. Komsomol organizations are taking an active part in the discussion of the
most important bills and the elaboration of other decisions, which directly affect
the interests of young people.

Komsomol representatives are members of the collegia of many ministries and depart-
ments, which are engaged in the education and training of young people, and active-
ly participate in the management of socialist production. About 2 million young
production workers have been elected to trade union management organs and to the
factory-plant and local connittees of the trade unions. A third of the trade union
group organizers are also young people. Komsomol workers and activists are members
of the permanent production conferences.

The right of Komsomol organizations to participate in the review of questions of
the payment of bonuses to young workers and employees. the allocation for them of

housing and rooms in dormitories. the labor safety procedures of adolescents, the
hiring and firing of young people and the use of assets for mass cultural and

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run on". ML Ubli ONLY

sports work is being actively exercised. Komsomol organizations take an active
part in the elaboration and implementation of collective agreements and the plans
of the social development of collectives.

In recent times the activity of such public formations as the councils of young
workers and specialists, public personnel divisions, bureaus of economic analysis
and technical information, design and technological bureaus and many others has
undergone extensive development.

/0n the instructions of the party Komsomol supervises the All-Union Pioneer Organ-
ization imeni V. I. Lenin] [in boldface], which unites about 19 million children.

The Pioneer organization, which was founded in 1922, along with the school, the
family and the public educates the Pioneers as conscious champions of the cause of
the Communist Party. It instills in them a love for knowledge and labor and the
elementary skills of community work. In the Pioneer organizations children are edu-
rated in the spirit of collectivism and comradeship, love for the Soviet homeland,
the fraternal friendship of the peoples of the USSR and proletarian international-
ism. The Komsomol organizations select leaders and supervisors of various groups
for work with the Pioneers. The supervisory organ of the All-Union Pioneer Organ-
ization is its Central Committee, which is set up by the Komsomol Central Commit-
tee.

The most important, primary thing in the work of Komsomol is to promote the forma-
tion of a generation of politically active people, who are well-informed, love
labor and know how to work and who are always ready to defend their homeland. This
was emphasized with new force in the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. The par-
ty sees a reliable guarantee that Soviet youth will also carry high the banner of
comunism in the conveyance to them of its experience and the certainty, which has
been tested by the decades, of the correctness of Marxism-Leninism.18

ICooperatives, especially the collective farms of the peasants--the kolkhozes--are
playing an important role in the life of Soviet society/ [in boldface]. At the be-
ginning of 1980 there were 26,000 of them. They have united [3.8 million Soviet
peasants.

Prior to the Great October Socialist Revolution poor peasants, who were dependent
on landowners and kulsks, made up two-thirds of the many millions of Russian peas-
ants. Private ownership of land was abolished with the establishment of Soviet
power in the country. The peasants received for free use more than 150 million
hectares of land which had previously belonged to landowners, the bourgeoisie, the
tsar's family, churches and monasteries. They were exempt from the payment of an-
nual rent payments for the land and the expenditures on its purchase. "In the
peasant country," V. I. Lenin wrote, "the peasants were the first to gain, gained
the most and gained immediately from the dictatorship of the proletariat...."19

V. I. Lenin saw the main path of the movement of the peasantry toward socialism and
communism in the development of production cooperatives and in radical socioeco-
nomic changes of the entire style of life of the workers of the countryside. ”For
the present we are living in a small peasant country," he indicated, "in Russia
there is a stronger economic base for capitalism than for communism.”20

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The cooperative plan elaborated by V. I. Lenin became the basis of the policy of
the Communist Party in the countryside. He developed the ideas of K. Marx and F.
Engels on the gradual transition of the small-scale peasant farms to a public basis
and took into account the peculiarities of our country and the experience of the
leading collective farms in the Soviet countryside.

V. I. Lenin and the Communist Party understood that immediately after the revolu-
tion it was impossible to accomplish a transition to a large-scale public sector.
And it was a matter not only of the fact that the material and technical prere-
quisites did not yet exist for this. The peasants who had receive land needed time
in order to overcome the age-old force of the habit of the small holder and to be
convinced of the advantages of collectivization by the practice of running an in-
dividual farm. And the party agreed to this. "We," V. I. Lenin said, "did not
want to impose on the peasanty the idea, which was alien to it, of the uselessness
of the equalizing division of the land. He believed that it is better if the work-
ing peasants themselves would see by the sweat on their own brows, for themselves
that equalizing division is nonsense.... The solution lies only in the public till-
ing of the land."21 Practice confirmed the correctness of this policy.

By the late 1920's the small-scale individual farms had almost completely exhausted
their potentials. They could no longer ensure the further increase of production.
Not only the poor peasants, but also the middle peasants were convinced that the
individual farm did not have economic promise and did not save them from poverty,

a half-starved existence and exploitation on the part of the rural bourgeoisie--the
kulaks. The aspiration of the peasants to join collective farms increased.

The ideological, political and organizing work of the party had an enormous influ—
ence on the change of the consciousness and views of the peasantry. By its econom-
ic policy, measures on the supply of kolkhozes with machinery and the establishment
of various privileges it promoted the increase and strengthening of collective
farms and the growth of their labor productivity.

By this time the necessary prerequisites for the mass kolkhoz movement had been
prepared. The construction of powerful tractor, combine and other plants of agri-
cultural machine building proceeded rapidly. Such forms of cooperatives as the
consumer cooperative, the agricultural cooperative and the handicraft cooperative
played a greater and greater role in the countryside. This accustomed the peasants
to the collective management of affairs. In the countryside the socialist sector
grew appreciably and became stronger, two poles came clearly into view: at one
there were poverty and the bulk of the middle peasantry, at the other there were
the kuiaks. The alliance of the working class and the working peasantry became
stronger.

Under these conditions the Communist Party shifted to the thorough collectivization
of agriculture. The policy of collectivization was proclaimed by the November
(1929) Plenum of the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (of Bolshe-
viks), which indicated that the pursuit of this policy required the strictest con-
sideration of the level of the economic and cultural development of the different
regions of the country.

The poor peasants willingly joined the kolkhoz, many middle peasants followed them,
but the most well-to-do section of the countryside opposed the very idea of the

123
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

collective farm. The property of kolkhozes was destroyed, terrorist acts, of which
party workers, state employees and kolkhoz activists were the victims, were commut-
ted.

On 30 January [930 the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (of Bol-
sheviks) adopted the decree "0n Measures to Eliminate Kulak Farms in Regions of
Thorough Collectivization." The provisions of this decree were sanctioned in legis-
lative acts of the Soviet state. An individualized approach to the kulaks was used
when implementing them. The organizers of armed demonstrations were subject to
isolation, the kulaks were resettled on lands located within-the kolkhozes.

For the implementation of the program of socialist changes of agriculture 2,500
party workers, more than 27,000 experienced workers and specialists were sent to
the countryside. The state allocated considerable monetary assets and machinery.
All this gave the kolkhoz movement a broad scope.

However, during the initial period, along with great gains, errors caused by the
lack of experience of transforming tens of millions of individual peasant farms
into kolkhozes, by the hostile actions of the class enemy and by the underestima-
tion of the strength of attachment of the middle peasant to the individual farm
were also made in the matter of collectivization. Here and there the pursuit of a
high percentage of collectivization began, the principle of voluntariness was vio-
lated, the diverse conditions of different regions of the country were not taken
into account. The Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (of Bolshe-
viks) reacted promptly to cases of the distortion of party policy in collectiviza-
tion and took steps to rectify them. The 16th party congress stressed: "Kolkhozes
can be built only [on the basis of voluntariness/ [in italics]. Any attempt at the
use of coercion or administrative compulsion with respect to the masses of poor and
middle peasants for the purpose of associating them with the kolkhozes is a gross

violation of party policy and an abuse of power."22

Owing to the proper guidance of the party, the strengthening of the kolkhozea and
the increasing might of the Soviet state, collectivization assumed a rapid pace.

By the end of 1931 62 percent of the peasant farms had joined kolkhozes, while by
I937 the socialist transformation of agriculture had been completed. The kolkhozes
united 93 percent of the peasant farms and had at their disposal more than 99 per-
cent of the sown areas. The socialist style of life in the countryside became the
undividedly predominant style of life, the division of the peasantry into poor peas-
ants, middle peasants and kulaks was eliminate forever. a new, socialist class--

the kolkhoz peasantry—-was formed.

The kolkhozes made it possible to carry out agriculture, by using the latest
achievements of science, on a modern industrial basis. During the years of the
building of socialism and communism an enormous amount of work was performed on its
technical equipment. Thus, the power-worker ratio of agriculture by early 1979 had
increased 23—fold. In 1980 there were 2.58 million tractors, 713,000 grain harvest-
ers. 1,607,000 trucks and millions of other machines in the village. The kolkhozes
provided all the peasantry with prosperity and a steady increase of material well-

being, education and culture.

"The ideas of the great Lenin on cooperation and party policy in the settlement of
the peasant question," L. I. Brezhnev nored, "have completely stood up to the test

124

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
of time. The experience of the USSR and the other socialist countries has shown in
all obviousness that the building of socialism in the countryside is the only path

to happiggss for the peasantry and the basis of the well-being of all the working
people."

[Other public organizations are also playing an active role in the life of our coun-
try/ [in boldface]: consumer and house building cooperatives, scientific and tech-
nical, scientific educational, sports and defense societies, creative unions, soci-
eties of book lovers, nature conservation, hunters and fishermen and so on. In all
about 7,000 all-union, republic and local voluntary societies are in operation in
the USSR. The Committee of Soviet women. the Soviet Committee for the Defense of
Peace, the Soviet Committee of War Veterans and others are mass popular movements.
The group of public organizations is constantly increasing, they encompass with
their influence practically the entire population of the country. Each of them
operates on a broad democratic basis, freely discusses and settles questions which
pertain to its activity.

In the course of the building of communism our party is acquainting newer and newer
millions of Soviet people with the management of the affairs of society and the
state, is steadily increasing the level of the sociopolitical activeness of the
masses and is developing the initiative and independent action of all public organ-
izations. The more actively these organizations operate, the greater the contribu-
tion they make to the cause of building communism. Therefore, the party is.direct-

ly interested in the increase of their role in the life of society and in their more
complete utilization of their forces and potentials.

FOOTNOTES

1. See "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress]. Moscow,
1981. p 66.

2. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK“

lThe CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenums
of the Central Committee]. 8th edition, Vol 1, Moscow, 1970, p 160.

3. lbid., p 493. I

4. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 42, p 297.
s. lbid., V01 44, p 346.

6. lbid., Vol 42, p 203.

7. lbld., Vol 44, p 346.

8. "KP88 v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK,"
8th edition. Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 226.

9. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 43, p 41.

10. Ibid., Vol 36, p 160.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll.

12.

13.

lb.

15.

l6.

l7.
l8.
19.
20.

2|.

EIHICMNGCJAL.USEGDNLY

"KPSS v tezolyutsiyakh 1 reshcniyakh s"yezdov, konferents1y 1 plenunov TsK,"
8th cdition, Vol 3, Moscow, 1910, p 272.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Len1nsk1n kurson" [By the Len1n1st Course], Vol 6, Moscow,
1978; p 322.

See "Hater1aly XXVI s"yezda KPSS," p 66.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh 1 reahen1yakh a"yezdov, konferents1y 1 plenunov Tax,"
Vol 2, p 326.

"KPSS v rezolyuts1yakh 1 reshcniyakh a"yezdov, konferenta1y 1 plenunov Tax,"
Vol I, p 499.

"KPSS v rezolyuts1yakh 1 reshen1yakh s"yezdov, konferentaiy 1 plenUIov Tax,"
V01 2, p 86.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. aobr. soch.," Vol 61, p 317.
See "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS," p 67.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," V01 39, p 276.
Ib1d., Vol «2, p 158.

Ibid., V01 37, p 179.

"KPSS v rezolyucs1yakh 1 reshen1yakh s"yezdov, konferenteiy 1 plenunov 13K,"
8th ed1t1on, Vol 6, Moscow, 1970, p 450.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Lenincki: kursou," V01 2, Moscow, 1970, p 491.

126
INDR‘OIIICJA1.UGIZCHWLY
PART V. PERSONAL RIGHTS AND PREEDOHS

The requirements in the area of personal rights and freedoms were set forth back

in the first Party Program, long before the socialist revolution. Included here
were: the inviolability of person and the home; unrestricted freedom of conscience;
freedom of movement and trades; the right of every person to prosecute before the
court any official.1 The CPSU is also steadfastly following these requirements to-
day, being the ruling party.

The USSR Constitution guarantees state protection of the family: the inviolability
of person and the home; the protection of personal property and private life: the
right to legal defense and damages; the freedom of conscience.

The respect of the individual and the protection of personal rights and freedoms
are in our country the duty of not only all state organs, public organizations and
officials, but also each Soviet individual. "The USSR citizen,“ it is stated in
the Constitution, "is obligated to respect the rights and legal interests of other
persons, to be intolerant of antisocial actions and to assist in every possible way
the maintenance of public order."

The practical realization of rights and freedoms in our country does not involve
great monetary expenditures, while in the Beat it entails material costs--legal
costs, the payment for legal advice and so forth, which frequently many cannot af-
ford. Our laws and everyday practice do not permit the exercise of rights and
freedoms to depend in only some way on the social and financial status of a
citizen.

What are the legal guarantees of personal rights and freedoms in the USSR?

[The constitutional right to state protection of the family/ [in boldface] is de-
fined more accurately in a number of legislative acts and first of all in the Funda-
mentals of Legislation of the USSR and the Union Republics on Marriage and the
Family. In this document it is stressed that concern for the family, which com-
bines public and private interests, is one of the most important tasks of the Sovi-
et state.

In our country only such a marriage, which has been concluded through the voluntary
consent of the husband and wife, is recognised by the law. The Fundamentals of
Legislation on Marriage and the Family stipulate the duties of spouses with respect
to each other, as well as to the children, and actively promote the elimination of
the vestiges of the unequal status of women in daily life.

127

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
e um vs a ALIAL. var. UI‘LI

The rearing of the rising generation in the spirit of communist morality has been
proclaimed as the most important duty of the family. "USSR citizens," it is stated
in the Constitution, “are obligated to show concern for the rearing of children, to
prepare them for socially useful labor and to raise them as worthy members of so-
cialist society." In turn the concern for parents and the providing of assistance
to them are the constitutional duty of children.

In the West they often reproach us for the fact that our citizens are ostensibly
not permitted to conclude marriages with foreigners, that we do not have the free-
dom of emigration. This does not correspond to reality. For example, in the past
10 years more than 15,000 Soviet citizens have concluded marriages with foreigners.
Many of them at the same time continued to live in the USSR, 10,500 left for the
place of residence of their spouses in more than 100 countries. As for emigration,
Soviet legislation and regulations are completely in line with the UN International
Pact on Civil and Political Rights. In it, in particular, it is stated that the
right to emigrate to another country can be restricted in instances connected with
the protection of "national security, public order, the health or morality of the
population or the rights and freedoms of others...."2 In individual cases the de-
cision on emigration can be postponed until close relatives settle their relations,
including material relations. The decision on the emigration of people, who have
secret state information or who have recently undergone military training in the
most important military specialties, can be postponed. After the expiration of the
established period of secrecy the question of emigration is reviewed. “e have no
other reasons for the denial of emigration.

/The right to the inviolability of person/ [in boldface] means that in our country
no one can be subject to administrative prosecution or arrest other than on legal
grounds. A court decision or sanction of the prosecutor can be such grounds.

The militia worker or investigator is obligated within 26 hours to report to the
prosecutor the detention of a person suspected of a crime. If after this the pro-
secutor does not issue a sanction for arrest within 48 hours, the suspect should be
freed. But even after the sanction of the prosecutor the detainee cannot be in
custody for more than 10 days, if in this time a charge of the commission of a
crime is not brought against him. Soviet criminal legislation establishes strict
liability for illegal arrest or detention, for the passage of an unfair sentence
and for false denunciations or unfounded charges of the commission of a crime. The
Ukaze of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet on the compensation of the harm
done by the illegal actions of officials of state and public organs was promulgated
on 18 May 1981.

/The USSR Constitution guarantees the protection of the private life of citizens/
[in boldface]. In our country no one has the right without legal grounds to enter
the home against the will and consent of the people living in it, to open others'
letters or telegrams and to listen in on telephone conversations. The state guar-
antees the secrecy of monetary deposits in savings banks and their safe keeping.
The making of a search and acquaintensnce with correspondence are permitted only
when the investigation of a crime, for which there is the sanction of the prosecu-
tor or a court decree, is carried out in conformity with the law. These constitu-
tional provisions are also supported by other laws, which establish the civil and
criminal liability for their violation.

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
No thoughts and convictions, no matter how reprehensible they may be from the point
ul vlvw of the authorities, involve legal liability in the USSR. Only criminal
acts are punishable. Our criminal legislation states that only a person, who is
guilty of committing a socially dangerous deed stipulated by the law, is subject to
criminal liability and punishment. Moreover, the Criminal Code contains an ex-
haustive list of specific acts which are recognized as criminal and punishable. No
broad interpretation of the articles of the code is permitted.

/USSR citizens have the right to own property and to inherit it, which is pro-
tected by the state/ [in boldface]. Earned savings, a residence, a private plot, a
motor vehicle and other items of daily use, personal consumption and convenience
may be in their private possession. Parcels of land, which are provided by the
state and kolkhozes for the keeping of a private plot (including the keeping of
livestock and poultry), horticulture, gardening and individual housing construction,
can also be used by the working people.

At present, for example, the majority of rural residents live in their own house
and have private plots. Tens of millions of head of domestic livestock and poul-
try, agricultural implements and tools of labor are in their private possession.
Rural inhabitants use the products obtained on the private plot for personal con-
sumptlon, and sell the surpluses through procurement organizations to the state or
sell them at kolkhoz markets. In accordance with the USSR Constitution, the state
and kolkhozes give assistance to citizens in the keeping of the private plot (the
sale of fodders at preferential prices, assistance in the purchase of mineral fer-
tilizers, various machines and so forth).

Individual labor activity in the sphere of agriculture, cottage industry and per-
sonal service, as well as other types of labor activity, which are based exclusive-
ly on the personal labor of citizens and the members of their families, are permit-
ted in the USSR.

[The USSR Constitution guarantees the right of every citizen to legal protection
against infringements upon his life and health, personal freedom, honor and digni-
ty, property] [in boldface]. Civil and criminal legislation establishes strict
liability for such infringements, no matter by whom they are committed.

The Soviet people have to right to lodge complaints against the actions of offi-
cials, state and public organs. Our legislation specifies a precise procedure and
period of the review of the complaints of citizens. If these actions were carried
out with a violation of the laws, with the exceeding of authority and with the en-
croachment upon the rights of a citizen, complaints can be lodged against them in
court in accordance with the procedure established by the law. In the case of harm,
which is caused by the illegal actions of state or public organizations or offi-
cials in their performance of official duties, citizens have the right to compensa-
tion for it in the full amount.

Thus, in the Soviet Union the right to protection against arbitrary or illegal in-
terference in the private life of a person is guaranteed to the full extent by
legislation.

[Freedom of conscience is also an important constitutional guarantee of the person-
al rights and freedoms of the Soviet people/ [in boldface].

129
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"HVrrynnu should he completely free to profess whatever religion he wishes or not
to recognize any religion, that is, to be an atheist.... No differences between
citizens in their rights subject to religious beliefs are permissible at a11"3--

the essence of the attitude of communists toward religion lies in these words of
Lenin.

The Harxist-Leninist principle of the freedom of conscience stems from the dialec-
tical materialist interpretation of the nature of religion and its essence as a
distorted form of social consciousness, which arises and forms on the basis of the
social and political conditions of the life of each people.

The exploiting classes are interested in religion as a tool for strenghtening their
domination over the masses. They impede in every possible way the spread among the
working people of correct, scientific views of nature and society, believing not
without reason that it is easier to keep in submission and easier to oppress back-
ward people who believe in God. The state of affairs with religion in our country
before the Great October Socialist Revolution can serve as an example of this.

Under tsarism the profession of any religion was the duty of every subject of the
Russian Empire. The spread of materialistic views and antireligious propaganda
were prohibited and persecuted. The "spiritual shepherds," as the priests called
themselves, in fact were tsarist officials in cassocks.

Being a part of the state machinery, the church had an exceptionally great influ-
ence on all the public and private life of the people. Birth, marriage and death
certificates were issued by church authorities. A marriage concluded without a
religious ceremony was considered illegal. while the children born from such a mar-
riage were considered "illegitimate." Dismisaa. from work threatened whoever did
not meet the religious requirements. For example. the great Russian scientist

K. A. Timiryazev was dismissed "for atheism" from the Agricultural Academy, which
now bears his name.

Nearly half of the schools in the country were in the hands of the church. At all
schools. state and private, the "scripture" (Orthodox dogma) was taught as a man-

datory subject, while at elementary and parochial schools it was the main subject.
The school authorities saw to it that the students attended services and performed
religious rites. Religion was also forcibly imposed at higher educational insti-

tutions.

The demands of the Communist Party in the area of religion were formulated in its
first Program. They included unrestricted freedom of conscience, the complete
equality of all citizens regardless of religion and the separation of church and
state and of school and church.“

with the victory of October the Marxist-Leninist principle of freedom of consci-
once found its complete embodiment and sanction in Soviet legislation. The decree
of 20 January 1918 "On the Separation of Church and State and of School and Church"
(it was signed by Lenin) established the right of every citizen to profess any re-
ligion or not to profess any, abolished all restrictions of rights, which were con-
nected with any faith whatsoever, and sanctioned the equality of all religions be-
fore the law. This decree not only proclaimed, but also guaranteed the freedom of

conscience.

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Comunist Party and the Soviet state, having proclaimed and implemented the
Harxist-Leninist principle of freedom of conscience, created the political and le-
gal bases for the complete liberation of the working people from the influence of
religious ideology, put an end to the extensive opportunities of clergymen to se-
cure their domination over the minds of people and made room for the spread of a
scientific world outlook. "With respect to religion," it was stated in the second
Party Program, "the Russian Communist Party is not satisfied with the already de-
creed separation of church and state and of school and church.... The party is
striving for the complete destruction of the tie between the exploiting classes and
the organization of religious propaganda, by promoting the actual liberation of the
working masses from religious prejudices and organizing the most extensive scien-
tific educational and antireligious propaganda."5

It is well known that K. Marx responded to the question of the fate of religion
under socialism as follows: "Religion will disappear as socialism is developed.
Its disappearance should occur as a result of social development. in which a major
role will belong to education."6 The practical experience of building socialism

and communism in our country has completely confirmed the correctness of this con-
clusion.

During the years of Soviet power, as a result of enormous revolutionary changes in
the life of society and much educational work of the Communist Party, millions of
Soviet people have broken with religion. In the middle of the 1930's two-thirds
of the adult population in the cities and one-third in the countryside were al—
ready nonbelievers. Since that time atheistic convictions have become even more
widespread.

The sociological studies conducted in a number of oblasts, cities and rayons show
that now among the adult population only 8-10 percent are active believers (ob-
serve fasts more or less regularly, confess, attend church and so on). Among young
people up to the age of 20 97-98 percent are atheists. The most socially active
categories of the population--skilled workers, rural machine operators, the intel-
ligentsia--have come out from under the influence of the church. And those who are
still devoted to religion are for their most part no long deeply religious people.
The consciousness of many of them is double-faced, religious and scientific ideas
are struggling in it. The further development of this process in the future leads
to a society which is completely free of a religious world outlook.

However. religion is a tenacious vestige of the past, which has deep social and
gnoseological roots. The vitality of religious delusions stems also from the
activeness of religious organizations. the promotion of idealistic religious ide-
ology from abroad and shortcomings in our atheistic work. Moreover. the still
existing differences between the city and the countryside. mental and physical la-
bor, in the level of education and material security of the population and others
have an effect on them.

Religious prejudices, as a rule, are interwoven with the vestiges of private owner-
ship and with the aspiration to withdraw into a narrow little philistine world and
to evade broad public interests and border on displays of nationalism and chauvin-

Inn. For example, by cultivating the individual psychology of "the repenting and
soul-saving sinner," religion hinders the development of collectivism and comrade-
ship. while. in expounding the superiority of one faith over another, hampers the

131
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a use us a syn-on out. UNI—I

development of international friendship among peoples. That is why atheistic edu-
cation remains even today one of the important area of the work of our party,
/while the right to conduct atheistic propaganda is a constitutional right of USSR
citizens/ [in boldface].

Here it should be emphasized that, while opposing religion, communists are fighting
not against the believer, but for him, for his truly humane, and not illusory life.
For our party the struggle against religious prejudices always was an ideological
struggle of the scientific, materialistic world outlook against an antiscientific,
religious world outlook. It is waging this struggle only by ideological, thorough-
ly humane and democratic means--by the means of training, persuasion and education.
"We demand the complete separation of church and state," V. I. Lenin indicated,
"in order to combat religious haze with purely ideological and only ideological
weapons, with our press, with our word."

In atheistic work the Communist Party always proceeded from the fact that all at-
tempts to force believers by forcible measures to repudiate their convictions are
not only unsound, but also harmful, that the spread of atheism is possible not as
a result of the prohibition of religion, but by the gradual change of the mind of
believers and their involvement in active social life.

In its decisions the party has repeatedly stressed how important it is to avoid any
hurting of the feelings of believers, which leads only to the reinforcement of re-
ligious fanaticism. It resolutely put a stop to instances of administrative inter-
ference in the activity of religious associations and groups, the coarse treatment
of the clergy and abusive attacks on believers who perform religious rites. "It

is necessary to bear in mind." it was stated in the decree of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee "0n the Errors in Conducting Scientific Atheistic Propaganda Among the Popu-
lation" (1954), "that abusive actions with respect to the church, the clergy and
believing citizens are incompatible with the policy of the party and the state of
conducting scientific atheistic propaganda and are at variance with the USSR Con-
stitution, which grants Soviet citizens freedom of conscience."8

The protection of the rights of believers and the loyal attitude of the Soviet
state toward the church are one of the requirements of socialist legality. [The
USSR Constitution guarantees Soviet citizens the right to profess any religion and
to practice religious cults, prohibits the incitement of hostility and hatred in

connection with religious beliefs/ [in boldface]. Soviet legislation contains spe-
cial legal norms, which protect believers, religious associations and ministers of

religion against encroachments upon their legal rights. Liability, up to criminal
liability. for hindering the performance of religious rites, if they are carried
out within the framework of Soviet laws, is envisaged.

While granting and protecting the rights of believers and the church, the USSR Con-
stitution at the same time emphasizes that the observance of the laws and legal
norms prevailing in our country is the most important duty of all Soviet citizens,
including believers. The organization of those religious groups, the activity of
which is accompanied by the causing of harm to the health of citizens or by their
inducement to refuse to perform civic duties, is prohibited in the Soviet Union.

It must be said that for its most part the clergy is honestly meeting the require-
ment of Soviet laws. If individual church or church-affiliated extremists, as a

132

FOR OFFICIAL USEiﬂVLY
rule. for selfish purposes attempt to evade them. it is quite understandable that
they bear responsibility for such actions.

There is in the Soviet Government the special Council for Religious Affairs, the
basic task of which consists in monitoring the proper enforcement of the laws which
pertain to the activity of religious associations, without any interference in
their internal life.

Imperialist propaganda often presents the attitude of the Communist Party and the
Soviet state toward religion and the church in a distorted light. It is spreading
lies about persecutions of clergymen and believers in the USSR, concerning the fact
that Soviet legislation on religious cults encroaches upon freedom of conscience,
that religion in our country is being eradicated by forcible methods. that in the
Soviet Union there is only "compulsory atheism." The flimsiness of such claims is
obvious to everyone who is if only a little familiar with the actual status of be-
lievers and the church in the Soviet Union. The leaders of the clergy in the USSR
also testify to this. numerous foreign guests visitng our country are also con-
vinced of this.

"For western propaganda," noted (Seid Barska Molla Shamsuddovla), editor in chief
of the journal (ISLAM IN THE PRESENT CENTURY), "the assertion that Hoslems in the
USSR are subject to oppression, has become customary. Unfortunately, some people
believe these cock and bull stories. Having visited this country, and in particu-
lar flourishing Tajikistan, we saw that the Hoslems here live well, enjoy all the
good things of civilization and education, do not suffer from unemployment. The
USSR is not a Moslem country, but the Government of the Soviet Union has granted
the Hoslems such rights and opportunities, which were never granted in the Moslem
countries."9

In recent years religious organizations in our country at their major intrachurch
forums confirmed their sincere support of the Soviet social and state system and
the new USSR Constitution and expressed approval of the domestic and foreign policy
of the Communist Party and the Soviet state. Along with all the Soviet people
they are speaking out in defense of peace and for the strengthening of friendship
between peoples. The World Conference "Religious Figures for a Lasting Peace,
Disarmament and Just Relations Among Peoples," which representatives of nearly all
religions from 107 countries of the world attended, was held in the USSR in 1977.
An international symposium on the theme “The Contribution of the Hoslems of Cen-
tral Asia, the Volga River Region and the Caucasus to the Development of Islamic
Thought and to the Cause of Peace and Social Progress," in which religious figures
from the different republics of the Soviet Union, as well as prominent represents-
tives of the Hoslem clergy from 25 countries participated, was held in 1979 in the
capital of Soviet Tajikistan, Dushanbe.

FOOTNOTES

1. See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s“yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Plenums
of the Central Committee], 8th edition, Vol 1, Moscow. 1970, p 63.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

9.

n vn vrrnwun. not. Ul‘Ll

"Human Rights. A Collection of International Agreements of the United Nations,"
New York, UNIPUB, 1973.

V. I. Lenin. "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 12, p 143.

See "KPSS v rezolyutsiyskh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tax."
Vol 1. p 63.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyskh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenunov Ts ,"
8th egition, Vbl 2, Moscow, 1970, p 69.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "0b ateizme, religii i tserkvi" [0n Atheisl, Religion
and the Church], Moscow, 1971, p 470.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch.," Vol 12, p 165.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyskh i resheniyskh s"yezdov, konferentsiy i plenumov TsK,"
8th edition, Vol 6, Moscow, 1971, p 517.

PRAVDA, 14 July 1980.

136
FOR OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
CONCLUSION

The 610th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution appears on our calen-
dars. Much, very much has changed in the world during these years. Honsrchies
have fallen, fascist dictatorships have been swapt away, the colonial system of im-
perialism has collapsed. The world system of socialism arose, has been growing and
has become stronger, newer and newer countries and people have entered the path of
a socialist orientation. Imperialism is losing one position after another. And
one of the main reasons for the triumphant progress of socialism consists in the
fact that precisely it serves as an example of the most just organization of soci-
ety, ensures genuine human rights, creates the most favorable conditions for the
development of the individual and is not in words, but in deed a society of equal
opportunities for all working people.

The more than 60 years of experience of the USSR convincingly attest: socialism and
human rights are inseparable. Socialism is inconceivable without human rights and
freedoms just as genuine human rights and freedoms are inconceivable outside social-
ism. ‘

As for the campaign about imaginary "violations" of human rights in the Soviet
Union and other socialist countries, their organizers miscslculated and stepped on
too thin ice. The book "The Hanan Rights Situation in the United States," which
was prepared by the Commie: Party of the United States, convincingly attests to
their pharisaism and hypocrisy. In it the American co-mnists draw the correct
conclusion: "Capitalism is a system which arose on the basis of slave labor and
many centuries of slavery, child labor, the oppression of women, contempt with re-
spect to those who work and produce, the extolling of the superiority of men,
elitism and racism and its derivatives: colonialism and predatory wars, and this
capitalism with the aid of its politicians and writers still dares to teach morals
and human rights to the socialist world!"l

"Freedom and justice for all." which are declared in bourgeois society, are only a
dream for the overwhelming majority of the population of the capitalist countries.
"And what," 1.. I. Brezhnev said, "can the apologists of the capitalist orders op-
pose... to the real achievements of mature socialism? What are the real rights and
freedoms, which contemporary imperialist society grants to the broad masses of
working people?

"The 'right' of tens of millions to unemployment? Or the 'right' of the ill to go
without medical assistance, which costs an enormous amount of money? Or the 'right'

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a VI VI'I'ILIRL not. URL!

of national minorities to humiliating discrimination in labor and education, in
daily life and in political life? Or, perhaps, the 'right' to live in constant
fear of the omnipotence of the organized crime world and to see how the press and

movies, television and radio do everything in order to raise the young generation
in the spirit of egotism, cruelty and violence?"2

Such is the real state of things.

On what do the "defenders" of human rights and freedoms base themselves in their
attacks on socialism? One provision does not suit them. In the USSR Constitution
it is stated: "The exercise by citizens of rights and freedoms should not do harm
to the interests of society and the state, to the rights of other citizens." In
these words, in the fundamental unity of the rights and freedoms of citizens with

their duties they see an "intolerable restriction" of the rights of the individual,
a contradiction of democracy.

Such assertions do not stand up to any criticism. The connection of rights and
duties is a univerally recognized principle of the democratic organization of so-
cial life. In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by the
United Nations in 1948, it was stated: "...Bvery person has duties to the society
in which the free and complete development of his personality is also only possible.
When exercising his rights and freedoms every person should be subject only to such
restrictions which are established by the law exclusively for the purpose of the
assurance of the proper recognition and respect of the rights and freedoms of
others and the satisfaction of the justifiable requirements of morals, public order
and general well-being in democratic society." This provision was recorded in the
International Pacts on Human Rights, which were ratified and are being strictly ob-

served by our country. The Soviet Constitution sanctions this principle in the in-
terests of our entire society and each citizen.

In this connection it is impossible not to note that the international pacts on
human rights, which have been signed and ratified by all the countries of the so-
cialist couummity, so far are not recognized by those who are causing the greatest
stir about human rights. Not by chance did American sociologist C. Green write
back in 1956 that for the United States "it will be hard to accept an agreement
which contains economic, social and cultural rights, since they go beyond the
framework of the rights which found expression in the U.S. Constitution."3

The Soviet people, whose will is expressed in our Fundamental Law, are unanimous on
the fact that socialist democracy is the unity of rights and duties, genuine free-
dom and civic responsibility. the harmonious combination of the interests of soci-
ety, the collective and the individual. And the very nature of discipline in so-
cialist society is thoroughly democratic. In the words of V. I. Lenin, this is
"comradely discipline, discipline of all kinds of respect, discipline of independ-
ence and initiative in the struggle."

Socialist democracy is constantly being improved. As the programs of socioeconomic
and cultural development are fulfilled, the socialist system ensures the extension
of the guarantees of rights and freedoms and the continuous improvement of the life

of the working people. And Lenin's party is the main guarantor of this progressive
development.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"We have not yet achieved comunisn," L. I. Brezhnev said. ”But the entire world
sees that the activity of our party and its aspirations are aimed at doing every—
thing necessary for the good of III], in the name of Ian. Precisely this highest,
humane goal of the party creates a bond between it and the people, unites it with
all the Soviet people by strong, indissoluble bonds."5

1.

2.

rooms
"The “man Rights Situation in the United States," macaw, 1978, p 86.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kursol" [By the Leninist Course], Vol 6, Moscow,
1978, p 531.

C. Green, "The United Nations and Human Rights," Washington, 1956, p 40.

V. I. Lenin, "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Works], Vol 36, p 500.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kurson," Vol 5, lbscow, 1976, p 51.9.

mPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Agentstva pechati Novosti, 1981

7807
050:

-END-
1800/527

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY