FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10400

19 March 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 9/82)

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infomtion primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 11.8. Goveruaent.

COPYRIGT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINAIION

0? THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(r000 9/82)
CONTENTS

INTERNATIONAL

Shakhnazarov Book Views Future world Order .
(G. Rh. Shekhnazarov; GMANSHCHIY HIROPORIMDK, 1981) ..... 1

'Problems of Foreign Beet, Modern Times' - Vol I
(G. F. Kim, et a1.; ZARUBEZHNH VOSTOK I MOST", 1980) 3

'Problems of Foreign Beet, Modern Tinee' - Vol II ‘
(0. F. Kim, et 31.; mm VOSTOK I WHOM",

19m) ooeoooeooooooooeoooeoesucceed-oooeaeenoeeooeoeeeeoueeoe 20

'Problems of Foreign Beet, Modern Time' - Vol III
(G. 1". Kim, et 31.; mm VOSTOK I MOST,

1980) .0.C....00...C.IOIIIOOIOIOOOOOOIIIOIOOOOIOOIOOOCCOODOCC 22

Anti-Soviet Propaganda by western Religious Centers Criticized
(H. V. ”Nev, at 81.3mm, 1980) .00....OOCOOICCOIOO. 37

NATIONAL

Problems, Tasks of Soviet Philosophy Outlined
(VOW mnl’ Jm 82) ....I..O.'...O..C.I..05.0.0000... hh

Rise of Conservatism in West Analyzed
(A. Yu. Hel'vil; VOROSY FIIDSOFII, Jan 82) ................. 19

Recent Studies on Soviet Working Class Listed, Described
(mitorial Report) I...0......DOOOOOOOOOOOOICCIIIOOOOOOOOOOOC 51

- e - [III - USSR - 35 F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY

INTERNATIONAL

SHAKHNAZAROV BOOK VIEWS FUTURE WORLD ORDER

Moscow cavmusacmv mmmnunor in Russian 1981(signed to press '27 Aug 81) pp 1-2,
447-448

[Table of contents and brief description of book by G.Kh.Shakhnazarov]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: GRYADUSHCHIY HIROPORYADOK (The Future World Order)
Publisher: Politizdat
Place and year of publication: Hoscov, 1981

Signed to Press Date: 27 August l981
Number of Copies Published: 50,000
Number of Pages: 668

Brief Description:

This book by G.Kh. Shakhnararov. doctor of legal sciences, president of the
Soviet Association of Political Sciences, winner of the USSR State Prise. con-
cludes his study, the first two parts of which were published under the titles
"The Socialist Fate of Mankind" and "The Fiasco of Futurology." The author
examines the main trends of contemporary social development and the prospects of
international relations; he subjects to critical analysis the views of western
political scientists and futurologists. The book is intended for specialists,
as well as for the general public interested in these problems. .

Table of Contents
From the AuthorUOOOODI.0...00.00.000.000...U.OCUQCIOOOOIIOI00.00.000.00....0... 3

Part 1. 0n the Laws Governing the Develop-ent of'International Relations.... 15
chapter 1. “y factor“...OOOOOOOUOOIOODOIO0.00....000......DIOOOI300... 15
Chapter 2. The interaction of world forces............................._b6

Part 2. The Problem of Peace................................................ 97
Chapter 3. comeptsolOlO00.00.000.00...COO...OOCOOOOOIOOOOOCUOOOOOOOOO. 97
Chapter 4. Interests and Realities.....................................142

' FOR¢OFFKJA1.U3E(NVLY
Part 3. Peace and the Vital Needs of Mankind. 181
Chapter 5. Global problems;........................................... 181
Chapter 6. Problem situation. and confucts........................... 253

Part 4. The Future World Order............................................. 303
Chapter 7. Models and situations...................................... 305
Chapter 8. Tvo hundred years later of as you like 1t.................. 3S9

concl‘dmg chwt‘rO0.000IOO.DOQ0.0.0...O‘COOOODODOOOI;.....OO0.00IOOOOIOIO.I 396

subjGCt “dud...OIOOOOOOOODOOQOOOO...DO.36.0.00000000000000000DOOOOOOODOOOO ‘35

hue induOOO0.000UOOIOOODQCIOOOOIO..00....OOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOIOOC 6‘1

COPYRIGHT: Pouuzmr. 1931
cso: 1807/51

2 .
MOMLIJSIONLY
'PROBLDJS OF FOREIGN EAST, MODERN TDIBS’-VOI. I

Moscow ZARUBEZHNYY VOSTOK I SOVREHBNNOST‘ in Russian 1980 Vol 1 (signed to press
22 Sep 80) PP 1-4, 5-18, 530-531, 532-534

[Annotation, introduction, author-collective, and table of contents of Vol 1 of "The
Foreign Last and Modern Times: Basic Problems and Tendencies in the Development of
the Countries of the Foreign East." in three volumes, by G. P. Kim at (11., Main
Editorial Office of Eastern Literature, Izdatel'stvo "Ranks", 18,200 copies, 533 pp]

[Excerpts] The book studies the processes that occur in the socioeconomic base
chiefly of the developing countries of Asia and North Africa. as well as questions
of the class and political struggle in those countries. Various economic problems
are considered in inseparable connection with an analysis of the specific nature
of the production relations that predominate in the modern East.

Introduction

Among the paramount social changes which, six decades after the historic victory
of the Great October, are shaking the world of social and national oppression. an
important place belongs to the revolutionary constructive creativity of the peoples
of the East. As was emphasized in the Report of General Secretary of the CPS!)
Central Couittse, L. I. Brezhnev to the 25th cpsu Congress, one of the typical
features of modern world development is "the serious intensification of the influ-
ence of the states which quite recently were colonies or semicolonies'd. The
second half of the 1970's confirmed the tightness of that evaluation. Overcoming
the opposition of neocolonislism, the national-democratic movement of nations is
receiving further deepening and expansion in Southeast Asia, in the Near and Middle
East, and in Tropical Africa. Young sovereign states are emerging as one of the

most dynanic components of the modern, rapidly changing world. we have in mind
not only the indicators of economic development, although major shifts have been
achieved in this respect. He also have in mind a broader series of questions that
encompass actually the entire totality of the basic aspects of the social life of
the developing countries - the economic base, the social structure. the political
superstructure, and ideology. As a consequence of the transitional nature of the
development of the liberated countries, all these spheres have been subjected to
rapid, although far from identical, changes.

The completion of the first large historical stage in the national-liberation
movement. which was linked with the collapse of the colonial system, means the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
advent of a qualitatively new stage in the history of the countries of Asia.
Africa, and Latin America and which is characterized by a change in those tra-

ditional forms of the popular masses against imperialism that had been aimed
primarily at expelling the colonizers.

The very logic of life led the peoples of the liberated countries to an under-
standing of the truth that the national-liberation struggle cannot be completed
by the achievement of political independence, that colonialism has set down deep
roots into various spheres of the socioeconomic and ideological-political life of
the enslaved countries, and that, therefore, the final liquidation of all the
survivals of colonialism is unthinkable without the extirpation of its roots.
hence the liberated countries are confronted by the imperative need to continue
the liberation struggle, but now with the emphasis upon the domestic and foreign-
political aspects, that is. a struggle that is directed primarily against the
heritage of colonialism, against the domestic exploiting upper class.

In documents of the Hoscow Conference of Communist and workers Patties (June 1969)
mention is made of the ever-increasing role of the anti-imperialistic movement of
the peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America in the world revolutionary processz.
This phenomenon is not only of a quantitative nature. Re are dealing with a new
qualitative stage, when, in addition to the struggle against imperialism (external

contradictions), one observes more and more clearly the internal social contra-
dictions.

Although the downfall of the colonial system does not mean the liquidation of
colonialism in general, it undoubtedly creates a new situation in the anti-imperi-
alistic struggle of the peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Today that
struggle is aimed chiefly against those socioeconomic foundations and social-
class forces upon which imperialism relies in its attempt to preserve and even,
if possible, expand the exploitation of the peoples of the developing countries.
Hhereas previously there existed a clearly defined line of demarcation along
which, on one side of the barricade, there stood the nationalepatriotic forces
and, along the other side, imperialism and its immediate agent network, at the
present time everything appears to be much more complicated. The struggle against
imperialism is inevitably fractionated through the prism of the internal social
contradictions, and the struggle for the choice of the path for development
frequently leads to a new demarcation for the petty bourgeoisie, the middle urban

segments, especially the national intellectuals, and the other social groups of
the transitional society.

The middle of the 1970's became a new. important turning point in the struggle for
the economic independence of the liberated states, in the course of which they
began to change over to collective and coordinated methods of struggle and ad-
vanced the slogan of the cardinal reorganization of the system of international
economic relations on the basis of equal rights. The first serious victories have
already been won in that struggle, including those on the "petroleum front."

Now even the bourgeois experts in the well-developed capitalist countries have
come to the conclusion about the urgent necessity for the community of nations to
resolve the "task of developing a new policy and new forms of cooperation," in
order to overcome the gap between the developed and the developing countries, the
instability of the world monetary system, the sharp fluctuations on the commodity

FOI‘OFEKJAL.USE(MVLY
markets, the depletion of the world's raw-materials supplies, the consequences of
the many years of natural calamities, the worsening of the position of the
poorest countries and regions, the slump in world capitalist production,
unemployment, constantly growing inflation, etc.’.

However, the resolution of the problems linked with the overcoming of economic
backwardness, with the creation of an independent economy, with raising the
population's standard of living, presupposes profound socioeconomic changes;
the carrying out of agrarian reforms in the interests of the working peasantry;
with its participation, the annihilation of obsolete feudal and tribalistic
relations; the liquidation of monopolies; the radical democratization of social
and political life and the state apparatus; the rebirth of national culture and
the development of its progressive traditions; the reinforcement of the revolu-
tionary parties and the creation of such parties where they do not yet exist“.

Thus, the present-day stage in the national-liberation movement is characterised
primarily by its turn in the direction of the resolution of acute social problems,
with the question of the liquidation not only of national oppression, but also of
every kind of social oppression, already being posed several times. During the
1960's and especially during the 1970's the struggle for national liberation in
many countries began to develop into the struggle against exploiter relations,
both feudal and capitalistics.

The anticapitalistic, or socialistic, orientation is becoming one of the leading
tendencies in present-day national-liberation revolutions.

The three-volume collective monograph "The Foreign East and Modern Times," which
is being offered to the reader, represents the second, revised edition of the
two-volume work of the same name that was published in 1974. It is devoted to.
a description of the most important phenomena in the socioeconomic and political
life of the developing countries of Asia and North Africa, basically in the 1960's
and the first half of the 1970's. It must be said that the term "foreign East"
as used in this work is of an extremely arbitrary nature. To a considerable
degree the term has lost its former meaning. since, with the downfall of the
colonial system, its chief basis has disappeared, for, in the past, the East

was a colonial periphery for imperialism and. from that point of view, it, as it
were, symbolized the colonial world.

At the same time, in literature that term has become traditional, containing
within itself not only a geographical, but also a sociopolitical principle.

with a consideration of all these circumstances, when we employ the term "East,"
we have in mind chiefly the developing countries of Asia and North Africa.

And there is one more important preliminary comment. The book deals with the
processes of today and, consequently, many of the phenomena and events that are
described in it are not yet settled and are complicated for the understanding of
contemporaries, since they are dynamic and are rapidly transformed. The state of
statistics also leaves such to be desired: research is also complicated by the
lack of sufficiently representative information concerning the situation in most
of the developing states. It is not by accident that many of the important
problems of the development of the countries of the East have become the object
of lively discussions, and this has found its expression in the fact that, within

FOR10FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
the author collective, there exist dissimilar approaches to certain theoretical
questions (for example, the nature of multiple ways of life and the tendencies
of their evolution, the peculiarities of the social-class structure, the pros-
pects for the development of revolutionary democracy). Under these conditions
we deemed it possible to retain in the book, to the maximum extent, the existing
points of view without subjecting then to an editorial "leveling“ process.

In the socioeconomic sections of the monograph, the attempt was made to analyze

in detail but, at the same time, in a comprehensive manner the basic processes
that have occurred and that are currently occurring in the economic base of the
countries of Asia and North Africa. The production shifts in agriculture, in
small-scale and factory industry, changes in the course of accumulation and in the
training of national cadres, the situation with regard to the employment rate, and
other economic problems are viewed in inseparable relationship with the specific
production relations that predominate in the present-day Bast. Their plural
nature, the existence of multiple ways of life, create a large peculiarity, the
study of which has become one of the most important tasks of the authors of these
sections. Therefore not only the technical-economic aspects of development, or,
in other words, the changes in the status of the productive forces in the definite
branch of the national economy, are coordinated with the evolution of the multiple
nature of the socioeconomic structure, but it is an object of complete research
itself. Individual chapters are devoted to an analysis of the ways of life and

to the changes in them during the past two to two and a half decades, using the
example of specific states and branches of the national economy.

This approach to the revealing of the topic makes it possible to provide a better,
deeper analysis of the real difficulties and contradictions in the struggle

being waged by the developing countries for the attainment of their economic inde-
pendence. As a result, one can discern more easily the relationships that the
production and social aspects of the struggle have with neocolonialism, with the
survivals of the Middle Ages and the local Big Business.

At the present time, among specialists on the East, there exist different opinions
relative to the essence of the very phenomenon of multiple ways of life and the
concrete forms of its manifestation. It is completely clear, however, that the
socioeconomic outlook of the developing countries cannot be recreated today

without a consideration of one of the most important and most typical_features of
it -- the existence of several ways of life. The interaction and conflict among

the various ways of life form the basis of many of the social contradictions and,
to a considerable extent, determine the processes of the further evolution of the
countries of the East. At the same time, despite all the stability of the multiple
ways of life, in the second half of the 1960's and especially in the 1970's there
has come forward as a very important task in the science of Eastern studies the
analysis of the basic tendencies in the process of the evolution and transformation
of the multiple ways of life, the ascertaining in this process of the role played
by the leading, structure-forming way of life, the analysis of the methods and
forms of overcoming it. In the process of resolving this task, the author collec-
tive of this work strove to avoid both the underestimation and the exaggeration of
the importance of the multiple ways of life. This is important in connection with
the fact that individual ways of life (for example, the state-capital and private-
capital ways of life) operate as a single reproduction complex, but the basic

6
INDR<OFIICIal.lﬂSE1(NVLY
INDR OFFICIAJ.IJSIZ(M‘LY

classes in the transitional society of the East are organically linked not with
one, but with several ways of life. Nor can one ignore the fact that certain
important components of the social structure of the developing countries are
reproduced in the process of the interaction and "butting" of various types of
production relations.

As is well known, the first person to carry out a scientific analysis of the
phenomenon of multiple ways of life and the methods of channeling that phenomenon
into a single, organically integral socialist method of production, was V. I.
Lenin. The object of his study was Soviet Russia during the NB? [New Economic
Policy} period [1921-1936]. The conclusions that were obtained were brilliantly
used in practice. However, it is only now that we are beginning to realize more
completely the entire significance of Lenin's analysis, when the similar phenomenon

of the multiple ways of life is being revealed on the tremendous areas of the
developing countries.

What does the existence of multiple ways of life express? It is the best
indicator of the deepest processes of the transitional state of the production
relatisns. The growing interest of the social sciences in the transitional
states of society, one must think, will lead to the revealing of the specific
nature of the phenomenon of multiple ways of life during the development of

a definite formation. For the developing countries, the results of this kind of
analysis will be not simply of cognitive interest, but also of the-absolutely
most vital interest, since they will help to reveal important elements of their
present-day validity. And yet, in this instance, we are engaged in the problem
not of transitory phenomena- in general, but, rather, of transitory phenomena
under specific conditions, at a definite time, and in a definite direction.

v. I. Lenin laid the basis for the study of transitory phenomena and multiple ways
of life, analyzing those problems under the specific conditions first of pre-
revolutionary and then of postrevolutionary Russia. As a result we obtained a
classic model of the dialectical approach to the study of the general and the
particular in the problem of multiple ways of life, the methodology of which must
be employed when analyzing multiple ways of life in the modern world. Obviously,
it is necessary at such time to take into consideration all the specific features
of the multiple ways of life in the Afro-Asian countries.

In the basic areas of Asia and partially in North Africa, the feudalism that had
been established long ago coexisted with other, more ancient forms of socioeconomic

ways of life, the significance and extent of which were immeasurably larger and
broader than under the "European" types of feudalism.

The economic, and then the political invasion of the colonizers effected a cardinal
change in the course of the social evolution of the enslaved countries. The
foreign usurpers strove for a long time not to spread the new, capitalist relations,
but rather for the maximum pumping out of wealth. Insofar as this was possible

for them. they placed at their service all varieties of the "native" types of pro-
duction. This achieved a contradictory effect: on the one hand, the traditional
types of social order were preserved (or, rather, conserved), and, on the other
hand, their inner essence was distorted. The contradictory influence of coloniali-
zation led to the differentiation of the local precapitalist ways of life. Some
adapted better to the colonial exploitation, and others adapted worse.

7
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
With the advent of the era of monopoly capitalism, the extremely agonizing
development of the capitalist ways of life occurred in the colonial and semi—
colonial countries under the influence of the foreign and domestic factors. The
capitalist production relations were not, however, homogeneous: some of the
capitalist enterprises were created by foreign monopoly capital in its interests,
and some grew up as a result of the protracted development of local capitalism.

Thus, the basis of that specific kind of plurarity of the ways of life formed under
the pressure of colonial exploitation.

The analysis of the ways of life and the ascertaining of all the mechanisms of
socioeconomic development create an important basis for studying the individual
classes and the class structure of society as a whole. A special section of the
book has been devoted to the present-day social-class structure, which is
characterized by the “coexistence" of the old, traditional, and the new, modern
classes and social groups. The authors have striven not only to point out the
specific nature of the basic classes of Eastern society, but also to isolate those
very important class segments and groups (the middle segments, the nonproletarian
segments of the workers, etc.) which have their own specific interests and

occupy a special place in the social and political life.‘ It is only as a result of
this kind of approach, in our opinion, that one can reveal the important peculi-
arities of the class conflicts in the developing countries at the present-day
stage, and to ascertain the relatively independent nature of the political factors.

Today the question that stands in the center of the class struggle in the libera-
ted countries is the question of choosing the path of social progress. hence

an ever-growing importance is attached to the study of the ideological situation
in the area of the national-liberation movement, the process of the origin and
development of the chief ideological concepts, and the struggle among various
currents. Factors which are extremely complicated for the researcher are the
determination and interpretation of the most important ideological currents in
the East, which, in the overwhelming majority, represent a variegated mixture of
tradtional and new views, the class content of which sometimes filters through a
complicated system of mediating layers of a religious-communal or tribal nature.

One of the typical features of this ideological situation is, in addition to the
existence of traditional, bourgeois, and petty-bourgeois ideological concepts,
the origin of a large number of "transitional," basically petty-bourgeois, currents.

As is generally known, the common feature for most of the countries in the East
lies in the fact that they put an end to the direct political dominance of the
imperialistic powers, and are confronted by complicated tasks in overcoming the
pernicious social and economic backwardness. Today they are in the state of
confrontation with colonial and especially with neocolonialism.

0n the path of consolidating their national independence, they will have to over-
come a number of cardinal difficulties and to resolve many fundamental contradic-
tions. The following are the most important of them.

First. the contradiction between the dependent (in its structure, colonial)

nature of the national economy and the objective need for its intensive develop-
ment for the purpose of achieving economic independence and consolidating the

F03 omcm. use ONLY.
IIIRCMHHCJA1.USEGDNLY

political independence. We have in mind the need for decisive shifts in
material production, and the reorganization of the deformed, one-sided=specializa-
tion of the economy as the agrarian type for producing raw materials, which will

inevitably result in substantial changes in the entire social structure of society
and its production relations.

Secondly, the contradiction between the democratic forces which are striving for
fundamental changes in the interests of social progress, and the reactionary
forces, which are inclined to make concessions with imperialism. That contra-
diction is leading to the sharp intensification of the class struggle.

Thirdly, contradictions among various ideologicaltendencies. Among these contra-
dictions one must isolate the struggle of the neocolonialistic and revolutionary-
democratic concepts. The "splitting" of bourgeois nationalism and the arising

of petty-bourgeois currents of a transitional nature, as well as presocialistic
concepts that bear the charge of revolutionary radicalism. have become one of the
peculiarities in the ideological and political life of many developing countries.

The creation of independent national states predetermined the curtailment of

those traditional forms of the struggle of the popular masses against imperialism
which were aimed at breaking the apparatus of the colonial administration and
driving out the colonizers. The center of gravity of the struggle against imperi-
alism was shifted to the sphere of intergovernmental relations. At the present
time it has taken on the nature of economic, political, and diplomatic contradic-
tions and even military conflicts. The countries with national-democratic regimes
use, in the struggle against imperialism, the power of their state apparatus.

An important place is occupied at such time by the capabilitity of establishing
treaty relations with other states (primarily with countries of the socialist
community), which leads to the internationalization of the struggle and a quali-
tative change in the correlation of the forces that are in a confrontation
situation.

The Afro-Asian countries do not represent an organically integral and homogeneous
group. They are not of the same type. and large differences exist between indi-
vidual groups of countries. Realizing the entire conventionality of any classi-
fication of such dynamic phenomena as modern developing countries. we neverthe-
less attempted to isolate four groups of countries, keeping in mind primarily
their types of evolution in the course of social progress.

The first group includes the countries with comparatively developed national
capitalist ways of life in the economy and a relatively independent national
bourgeoisie, which, acting in alliance with or making a compromise with other
classes. is capable of definite anticolonial and anti-imperialistic actions in
the defense of the national economy and political sovereignty. In the countries
of this group, there has occurred, for the most part, class differentiation;
the capitalist ways of life predominate in the city and are waging an offensive
on the rural areas. The national bourgeoisie which is in power is sufficiently
strong and experiencedto lead these countries along the path of capitalist
development. These countries resolve their contradictions with imperialism not
only by a struggle, but also by an agreement with it. This group includes a
number of countries in the Middle East and South and Southeast Asia.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The second group includes the countries with the predominance of semifeudal

and even prefeudal ways of life. with a class structure that is still poorly
developed. The comparatively narrow elite which is in power does not have a

more or less stable social base. Therefore-one frequently observes there an

acute struggle among the social groups and even the narrow political groupings with
regard to the question of choosing the path for further development. One must
include many of the states in Tropical Africa in this group.

The third group includes the countries or territories in which the capitalist
ways of life are developing under the decisive effect, or with the direct partici-
pation. of foreign monopoly capital, with the latter exerting pressure upon the
other ways of life and misforming them. The national bourgeoisie in these
countries is subordinate to foreign monopolies, and the political institutions
and state apparatus are subordinate to imperialism. As a rule. the governments
of these countries. which are independent of imperialism participate in the
knocking together of various military blocs.

The fourth group is made up of the countries that have accepted socialist orienta-
tion. In these countries the basic positions of the foreign capitalist way of
life have been undermined, the agrarian reform is dealing a tangible blow at the
feudal way of life, and a serious offensive is being waged against major national
capital. The structural changes in the base are leading to shifts -- albeit not
always adequate - in the superstructure as well. A number of progressive social
reforms are being carried out (in the area of workers legislation, public health,
education, etc.). The foreign-policy course of these states is aimed at expanding
the cooperation with the socialist countries.

The level of economic and social development, the correlation of the class forces.
'the degree of interference by imperialism, and the capabilities of cooperation with
the countries of socialism are creating that concrete-historical situation which
determines the basic content of the national-liberation revolutions in each
country. At the same time, the 1970'sweretypified not only by the further deepen-
ing of the differentiation between the two extreme poles - the socialist and the
capitalist -- but also by the processes of inner crystallization and differentia-
tion in the very groups of the developing countries which have already begun

to orient themselves to socialism or capitalism. This leads sometimes to a

new placement of forces on a regional scale, and partially also on a world scale.

The independent states of Asia and Africa, in their socioeconomic development,
lagged behind the advanced countries by many decades. That means that the
replacement of capitalism by socialism is a process that is prolonged in time and
complicated in its essence. It can occupy a relatively large period of time and
can be broken down into a number of stages. Experience shows us that, for

the majority of the liberated countries, capitalist orientation does not promise
any cardinal resolution of the fundamental socioeconooic tasks. Despite the
possible partial economic successes, they have waiting for them, in the final
analysis, the fate of conversion into neocolonies, that is, formally independent
states with a subordinate, malformed economy. 0n the capitalist path they will
remain in the status of a "rural periphery" of the capitalist world, since the
chasm that separates them from the developed countries will broaden more and more
during the age of the scientific-technical revolution.

10
FOR‘0F1lC1Al.lEﬂi(HVLY
FOR4OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

The states with socialist orientation, using such levers for the mobilization
of economic potentials as the nationalization of the extraction and processing
of mineral resources; the expansion of the state sector in industry, power
engineering, and transportation; the development of cooperatives in agriculture;
the consolidation of state finances; as well as economic aid provided by

the socialist countries, developing the planned principle in management, and
mobilizing the creative energy of the masses, are able, when the historical
conditions are favorable, to leap across the gap of centuries of backwardness

in only a few decades, that is, during the lifetime of a single generation.

Of course, the choice of the path of noncapitslistic development itself does not
automatically guarantee the successful resolution of these tasks. To an equal
extent one should not expect on this path an immediate effect. The historical
experience of the previously backward nations of the USSR indicates that what is
required here is painstaking work, which is fraught with many difficulties, as

well as the mobilization of all the material and spiritual resources of the nations.

For the future prospects of the national-liberation movement (by which we under-
stand also the present-day stage in the development of the countries of Asia and
Africa), a factor that will be of tremendous importance is the further dissemina-
tion of scientific socialism. In this regard, the monograph points out the role
and place of the Afro-Asian proletariat, its closest political allies (the
peasantry, the nonproletarian segments of the workers, the national intellectual
class, and other groups) and the very important problems that are linked with the

activities of the Communist and revolutionary-democratic parties in the countries
of the East.

The correct description of the situation in the East would be unthinkable without
the ascertaining of the place and role of the national question at the present-day
level. The countries of Asia and Africa, as is well known, are, in the overwhelm-
ing majority, multinational ones. At the present time, as a result of the fact
that the chief center of the liberation struggle has shifted to the sphere of
socioeconomic reforms, there has been a considerable aggravation of the national
question. Various nationalities which are at a dissimilar level of socioeconomic
development and social-class differentiation, and which, by virtue of the histori-
cal conditions, occupy a dissimilar position within the system of the internal
social interrelationships of the particular state. understand variously the

tasks of economic development and the social reforms.

The nationalistic frictions with regard to the economic problems do not necessari-
ly take the nature of a struggle with regard to the choice of the path of develop-
ment. They can also arise as a result of the choice of the type of capitalist
evolution. The interests of the more developed bourgeoisie of one nation or
nationality lead to a conflict with the striving of the aristocratic, tribal, or
bureaucratic leaders of another nation or nationality to preserve their privi-
leges, and then both forces appeal to "their own" ethnic masses, advancing
nationalistic slogans. Very frequently in African countries one observes the
attempts of the bourgeoisie of one nationality to become rich at the expense of
the bourgeoisie of another nationality, to guarantee themselves the monopoly

right of exploitation on the regional, "intra-ethnic" market. Putting it more
briefly, behind many "national" demands one can discern a completely definite
social-class interest, albeit one which is disguised by nationalistic slogans.

11
'ron omcw. use ONLY
An important cause of the aggravation of the national question lies in the nature
of the ethnical processes in the East themselves. They are distinguished by a
dynamic and incomplete nature. In many countries, all three major stages of the
ethnic process coexist: the formation of the tribes into nationalities; the
formation of nations from the nationalities; and the internal consolidation of
the nations that have already formed. Thus, there existsahistorically developed
unevenness in ethnic development, an unevenness which, naturally, gives rise to

unequal rights for the various nationalities. and which, consequently. can serve
as a source of national conflicts.

The qualification and classification of the national move-cuts in the East as a
natural consequence of the aggravation of the national question is a matter of
primary importance and, at the same time, of exceptional complexity. In the
sphere of national relations, the class content emerges in an extremely mediated
form: it frequently is difficult for contemporaries to isolate in a particular
national movement the fundamental interests of the working masses and to avoid

the reefs of either the nationalistic or the chauvinistic approach. A factor that
takes on very great importance in this regard is theneedfor a decisive struggle
against the ideology and policy of Haoism. which plays an extremely pernicious
role in the national-liberation struggle of the peoples of the East. Extreme Inni-
festations of chauvinism and anti-Sovietism, the vulgarization of the principles
of scientific socialism, and the formation of blocs with the most reactionary
imperialistic circles leave no doubt that the Maoist strategy is being converted
into a special. extremely dangerous variety of modern anticommuniam. The correct

combination of the national and the international in the spirit of revolutionary

dialectics and in the application to the specific national situation in our time
is impossible without the successive unmasking of Haoism.

When evaluating the national movements from the point of view of their progressive
or reactionary nature, it is necessary to proceed. first, from their deep class
content and , second, from their objective, primarily international, consequences.
It will be incorrect at such time to give preference to the former or the latter
aspect of the question: in the present-day world the domestic and international
aspects of the national movements form an organic fusion as never before. In addi-
ition, it is necessary to remalber that, under the conditions of the countries
with multiple ways of life, which are deeply split by the most varied social
contradictions, "pure types" of national movements are encountered not frequently.
Frequently the progressive and reactionary tendencies coexist and oppose one
another in one and the same movement, and it is not always possible to predict
which tendency will prove to be the leading one.

In the ethnic processes in the countries of the East there are two basic tendencies:
the objective (consolidationsl) and the differential (disintegrational). Sometimes
both these tendencies coexist. '

Not only the very rich experience of history. but also the current political life
of the peoples of Asia and Africa, demonstrates the doomed nature of the narrowly

nationalistic, isolated movements. The lessons of history and modern times dictate
the need that the nations which are fighting for their own national rights have to
unite with the democratic forces and the working masses of the dominant nation

and the other national ainorities. This is the most effective method of struggling
for the elimination of national oppression and simultaneously the chief means of

12
FOR OFIICJAI.USE¢MNLY
combatting both narrow-minded nationalism and great-power chauvinism. The

other, international aspect of the united front of national movements' tactic,

a tactic which has demonstrated its effectiveness, is the orientation toward the
countries of the socialist community and the advanced democratic forces in the
countries of capitalism. Otherwise, self-isolation is inevitable, and this
sharply weakens any national movement, of the use of it by imperialism and the
local reactionary forces for their own selfish interests. This was demonstrated

to the world with particular clarity by the events in the area of the African
Horn in 1977-1978.

In this monograph a considerable place has been given to an analysis of the basic

ethnic processes, their socioeconomic and political aspects, and national move-
ments.

In the concluding section of the monograph the attempt was made to pose and to
throw light upon a number of new social and political problems of the modern

national-liberation movement, which evolve from the existence of the two opposing
social systems on the world scene.

Special attention at such time was devoted to the new aspects of the social and
political strategy of neocolonialism. which are linked with its persistent striving
to lessen somewhat the contradictions with the growing national bourgeoisie of
the developing countries -- the decisive internal force in the struggle for the
confirmation of capitalist production relations. The imperialistic circles of
the West, manifesting a definite self-interest in "pulling up" the productive
forces of the liberated countries, in guaranteeing more or less stable propor-
tions in their structure, are striving first of all to reinforce and expand

the positions of the modern capitalist ways of life, and, consequently, the class
position of the national bourgeoisie, the bureaucratic upper class, the local
elite. and other rightist-nationalistic, antisocialistic forces.

A place of no small importance in the neocolonialistic programs for modernizing
the international capitalistic division of labor is given to the scientific-
technical revolution, which, according to the plans of the imperialistic circles,
has been called upon to block the carrying out of the successively progressive
reforms in the liberated countries. However, the real-life practical situation
has revealed with complete obviousness the insolvency of the strategic line of
neocolonialism , which is aimed at using the scientific-technical reforms to
oppose the social revolution of the nations of Asia and Africa. The use of the
advanced achievements of scientific and engineer-technical minds opens up for the
young states the objective opportunities to achieve a sharp increase in the social
productivity of labor, and to attain a major economizing in time and material
resources in the struggle for economic independence and social progress.

The implementation of these inexhaustible capabilities acts in irreconcilable con-

tradiction with the overall socioeconomic backwardness of the liberated countries
and the striving of neocolonialism to reinforce and perpetuate their economic
dependence upon the system of developed capitalism. Moreover, the unequal status
of the developing countries in the international capitalist division of labor

is leading to paradoxical socioeconomic consequences, when the greatest benefits
from the introduction of advanced technology in the liberated countries are gained

13
Ftﬂl(lﬂﬁ(1AL USEZCNVLY
by the imperialistic monopolies; this is one of the prerequisites for increasing
the gap in the level of social productivity of labor between the two parts of the
world capitalistic economy.

Real cooperation in providing the young states with the latest scientific-technical
knowledge, advanced technology of production, in training skilled national cadres,
and in developing the most promising branches of scientific research has been
rendered by the socialist states. This aid is not only of economic iaportance,

but also of great social importance, contributing in every way to the victory of
the progressive forces in the anti-inparialistic struggle. "In the person of the
socialist countries, these states," L. I. Brezhnev emphasized in his report "The
Great October and the Progress of Mankind," "have true and reliable friends who

are ready to provide them with all kinds of aid and support in their development
along the progressive path. And that support is not only moral and political,

but also economic, organizational -- up to and including cooperation in reinforcing
their defensive capability"5.

Active, effective support provided by world socialism and the international working
class represents the decisive foreign factor in the further deepening and expansion
of the national-liberation struggle of nations. It is precisely this support that
has been paralyzing Iany of the expansionistic actions of modern imperialism

which are aimed against the peoples of the East.

V. I. Lenin said that the victory of the proletarian revolution creates "completely
different international relations which provide the opportunity for all the
oppressed nationalities to get rid of the imparialistic oppression"7. Reinforcing
the alliance with the national-liberation movement, the socialist countries are
executing in a holy manner the Leninist behests concerning the unity of the world-
wide anti-imperialistic forces in the cannon struggle for the national and social
emancipation of the peoples on our planet.

The deep-down processes of the further social demarcation and aggravation of the
class struggle, processes which frequently are concealed from foreign observance,
and in_particular the noticeable rapprochement of the imperialistic circles of the
West with the reactionary rightist-nationalistic (as well as pro-Maoist) circles
in the developing countries, group in a new manner the motivating forces of the
present-day national-democratic struggle. There has been a steady intensification
of the isolation of the rightist-nationalistic, reactionary, pro-imperialistic
forces, which have been opposing the vitally essential tasks of national rebirth
and social progress. And, at the same time, there has been an immeasurable increase
in the role played by the progressive democratic forces, which have a heart-felt
self-interest in the consolidation of the national independenceand in the forward
movement, in the future prospect, toward real socialism.

FOOTNOTES

1. Materialy XXV s"yeada'KP55 [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1976 p 13.

2. Seez’Meshdunarodnoye Soveahchmtiye kanmmisticheskikh 11 raboahikh partiy. Dolm-
menty i matsrialy [International Conference of Connunist and Workers Parties:
Documents and Materials], Moscow, 1969, p 310.

lb
FOI'OFFKJAI.USB(MVLY
3. See: Development Co-operatton BfTbrts and Policies of the Members of the
DAC. 1978. Review. P., 1976, p 9 [as published].

4. See: Meshdmarodnoys Soveshohmiye kommnisticheskikh i raboehikh partiy, p 312.

5. See: Mhterialy XXIV s"yesda KPSS [Materials of the 26th CPSU Congress],
Moscow, 1971, p 18.

6. L. I. Brezhnev, Velikiy Oktyabr' i progress ohelovsoheatva [The Great October
and the Progress of Mankind], Moscow. 1977. p 21

7. V. I. Lenin, "The 8th All-Russian Congress of Soviets, 22—29 December'l920. 1.
Report on concessions for Factions of the RKP(h) [Russian Communist Party (of
Bolsheviks)], 8th Congress of Soviets. 21 December," Vol b2, p 107. The works
of V. I. Lenin are cited from Polnoys sobraniye soohineniy {Complete Collected

Works]; the works of K. Marx and P. Engels are cited from soakineniya [works],
2nd edition.

AUTHOR COLLECTIVE

Volume 1
Introduction —- G. F. Kim.

Section I -- Problems of the Socioeconomic Development of the
Countries of the East (supervisor, A. I. Levkovskiy):

A. I. Levkovskiy (Chapter I; Chapter Iv, jointly with A. I. Novichkov;
Chapter VIII, jointly with B. V. Sinitsyn; Chapter x, jointly with I. I.
Yegorov and V. N. Ulyakin).

N. A. Dlin (Chapter II).

N. c. Lozovaya (Chapter III).

V. I. Iskol'dskiy (Chapter V).

G. A. Kochukova, Ye. A. Panikova, N. N., ’I‘svetkova (Chapter VI).

N. A. Arsharuni (Chiytér VII).

L. K. Orleanskaya (Chapter IX).

Sh. H. Bsdi, T. K. Savel'yeva (Chapter XI).

8 A. Bessonov (Chapter XII).

I. I. Yegorov (Chapter XIII).

Section II -- The Class and Political Struggle in the Countries of the
East (supervisor, R. G. Lands):

R. G. Lands (Chapters 1-11; Chapter V, jointly with R. E. Sevortyan).
A. s. Plotnikov (Chapter 11, paragraph 3).

B. V. Pavlutskaya (Chapter II, paragraph A).

G. P. Kim and l. G. Sanovich (Chapter III).

A. V. Kiva (Chapter IV).

3. G. Sapozhnikov, R. B. Sevortyan (Chapter VI).

N. A. Sinoniya (Chapter VII).

Volume 2

Section III—- The Agrarian-Peasant Question (supervisor, V. G. Raetyannikov).

V. G. Rastyannikov (Chapter I, paragraphs 1, 2; Chapter II, paragraphs 1, 2;
Chapter III: Chapter IV, introductory part, paragraph 1, conclusion;

15
FOItOFFKJAl.USE(NNLY
Chapter V, paragraph 1: The Peasant Hove-cut in the Countries With
Rural Workers Organizations That Are Independent of the State -- India).

‘lu. G. Aleksandrov (Chapter I, paragraph 3; Chapter II, paragraph 3;

Chapter V, paragraph 1: introductory part, The Peasant Hoveaent in Countries
with Rural Workers Organizations That Are Controlled by the Ruling Political
Group), paragraph 2).

Zh. D. Snirenskaya (Chapter IV, paragraph 2; Chapter V, paragraph 1: The Peasant

Movement in Countries With Rural Workers Organization That Are Independent
of the State -- the Philippines).

Section IV -- The National Question (supervisor, H. S. Lazarev):

The section was written basically by H. S. Lazarev with the participation of

V. F. Vasil'ev (Burns), G. K. Grigor'yeva (India), V. I. Kochnev (Pakistan),
L. S. Kyuzadzhyan (China), W. S. butskaya (the Hagrib countries (Libya,
Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco], I. B. Harunova (Kanpuchea), I. K. Heliksetova
(Oceania), I. H. Oshurkova (Nepal), P. I. Puchkov (Oceania), W. I. Senenova
(India), N. A. Sincniya (Indonesia), 3. D. Talmd (Sri Lanka), V. V. Trubets-
koy (Iran). In addition, the section contains texts and materials by L. H.
Denin (Indonesia), 1!. G. Lands (Algeria), G. I. Levinson (Philippines),

Liu Younan,(Chinese in Southeast Asia), 6. I. Hirakiy (Arab world), Yu. V.
Khrenov (Malaysia), 3. I. Sherkovina (Pakistan).

Volume 3

Section V - Social and Political Thought in the Countries of the East

L.

(supervisor, L. R. Polonskaya)

R. Polonskaya (Chapter I, paragraph 1; Chapter V, paragraph 1; paragraphs
Z-lo, jointly with S. I. Kornev (Buddhism) and G. I. Levinson (Christianity).
C. Khoros (Chapter I, paragraph 2).

I. Chicherov (Chapter II).

' s. Kant-an (Chapter III).

s. Kyuaadzhyan (Chapter IV).

I. Ionova (Chapter V, paragraph 5).

Kb. Vafa (Chapter VI, paragraph 1; general editing of Chapter VI).

D. Litnan (Chapter VI, Philosophical Thought).

8. Aganina, Ye. P. Chelyshev (Chapter VI, literature; in the written of the
paragraph "Literature," use was made of materials by V. I. Braginskiy,

N. D. Gavryushina, A. A. Gerasinova, V. N. Kirpichenko, V. B. Klyaahtornaya,
2. N. Petrunicheva, A. S. Sukhochev, S. N. Uturgauri, B. V. Chukov).

I. Potabenko (Chap“cr VI, Art).

K. Dreyyer (Chapter VI, Science).

I. Kukhtina (Chapter VI, Education).

3. Nikol'skiy (Chapter VI, Linguistic Situation).

Section VI -- International Aspects of National-Liberation Hovsnents (supervisor,

V.
N.

V. P. Li):

F. Li (Chapter I).
A. Sinoniya (Chapter II).

Yu. P. She-ray (Chapter III).

16
F0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
. TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
[as publisl

Introduction 5
Section I
Problene of the Socioeconomic Deve‘lopnent of the Countries of the Best
Chapter I. General Description of the Socioecononic Base, With

Multiple Rays of Life, of the Developing Countries

of the Best 21

Chapter II. Basic Socioeconomic Mes of Developing Afro-Asian Countries 36

Chapter III. The Problem of the Employment Rate of the Population 107
Chapter IV. Industrial Developnent 61
Chapter V. Internal Accumulation 82
Chapter VI. Foreign Capital and Foreign Financing I 109
Chapter VII. Petroleum and New Aspects of the Socioeconomic Development

of Countries With Multiple Hays of Life . 127
Chapter VIII. Local Developed Private-Capital Entrepreneurship - ' 142
Chapter IX. Cooperatives 166
Chapter X. State-Capital Entrepreneurship 187
Chapter XI. Snell-Scale Couodity and Petty Capital Production in

the Urban Bconony 221
Chapter XII. Planning of Socioeconomic Develop-eat . 23h

Chapter XIII. Combination of Planning and the Market As an Instth
of Integration of the Transitional Econony 259

Section II -- The Class and Political Struggle in the Countries of the East
Chapter I. Peculiaritiee of the Social Development of the East at

the Present Stage 287
Present-Day Conditione of the Class and Political
Struggle - ' 287
17

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 11.

Chapter III.

Chapter IV.

Chapter V.

Chapter VI.

Chapter VII.

' Specific Nature of the Classes and Social Structure
Special Role of the Ruling Elite

Basic Tendencies and Ferns of the Class Struggle

International Factors in the Social Battles of
the l960-l970’s
Causes of the Aggravation of the Class Struggle
in the l960-l970's
Development and Peculierities of the workers Movement
Social and Political Dynanisn of the Intellectual
and Student Groups. The "New Left" Hovenent.
The Role of the Petty Bourgeoisie

Class Alliances and the Problen of Revolutionary
Democracy

The Struggle for the Choice of the Path for
Further Development

The Communist Parties of the Countries of the East in the
Struggle for National Independence and Social Progress.

Socialist Orientation

Diversity of Socialist Orientation
Deep Changes; Certain Problems of Development
Revolutionary-Democratic Parties

Chief Trends in the Evolution of the Political Life of
Society

Changes in the Apparatus of Administration
Peculiarities of the Parties

Certain Features of the Development of Political
Regimes

The Role of the Arny in the States of Asia and Africa

The Army and Class Orientation

The Army as an Instrunent of Influence Upon Society
in the Afro-Asian Countries

Military-Bureaucratic Engines

The Army and the Defense of National Gains

The Unevenneea and Contradictory Nature of the Socioeconomic

Development of the East

Author collective

18
FOI<0FIWCLAL.U§E<N9LY

301
320

332

332

3‘1
350

362
376

385
393

399
425
527
435
646
452

453
064

47‘
480
680

691
493
502

506
S30
Editorial Board

G. P. Kin (chairman of the Editorial Board) _
K. N. Bmtcnts '
0. K. Dreyyer

A. S. Kauflan

H. s. Lazarev

A. I. Levkovakiy

V. F. Li

L. R. Polonakaya

Ye. M. Prilakov

V. G. Raatyannikov

V. G. Sapozhnikov

N. A. Simoniya

COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redaktaiya voatochnoy litaratury izdatel'atva ”Nauka", 1980.

5075
C80: 1807/69

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OV. veeevenu W“ “0'...

1mm: town.
I

I
'Pnonmas by man EAST, now now - VOL II

Moscow ZARUBEZUNYY VOSTOK I SOVREHENNOST' in Russian 1980 Vbl 2 (signed to 9:933
27 Aug 80) PP 3-‘, 319-320

[Annotation and table of contents of Vol 2 of "The Roreign Rest and Modern Times:
Basic Problees and Tendencies in the Development of the Countries of the Foreign
East," in three volumes, by G. P. Kin at 01., Main Editorial Office of Eastern
Literature. Izdetel'stvo "Neuka", 182,00 copies, 319 pp]

(Excerptsl the book studies the problems of reproduction in the agriculture of

the developing countries of the East and the shifts in the socioeconomic structure
of the rural areas in the l960-l970's, and throws light upon the contradictions

in the "green revolution." end the basic peculiarities of the social .36 political
situation in rural areas. It also considers the typical features of the national
development of the present-day countries of the East and the factors that exert
an influence upon the national aovenents. It provides a typology of the national
movements.

TABLE OF CONTENTS 958°

[as published]
Section III

The Agrarian-Peasant Question

Chapter 1. Problems of Reproduction in Agriculture at the

Preindustriel Stage 9
Labor Productivity and lnterbranch Links 12
Small-Scale Economy in Social Reproduction 23
The Use of Manpower Resources 27
Chapter 11. Shifts in the Socioeconoaic Structure of the Rural Areas 36
I The Develop-ant of Capitalism and the Nature of the
Changes in the Agrarian Systea 34
The Arising in the Agrarian Sphere of the Special

Pot- of State Property 53

Agrarian Reform and Its Effect upon the Socioeconomic
Structure of the Rural Areas 61

20

lﬂll¢ﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.l§Hi(HVlY
Chapter III. The "Green Revolution" 73

The Arising of the Industrial Sum. of Productive
Forces in Agriculture 73
The Origin of the Industrial Porn of Agrarian Capital 80

Chapter IV. Certain General Prohleas in the Peasant Hove-en: 106
Changes in the Agrarian Structure and. the
Peasant Movement 108
Traditional Ties in the Rural Areas and the Social
Awareness of the Peasantry ' 122
Chapter V. The Social and Political Activity Rate of the Peasantry

With Various Orientations of Socioeconomic Develop-eat 163
Section IV

The National Question

Chapter I. The Present-Day National Situation and the General
Natural Laws Governing Its Development 187
The Posing of the Problen 187
Socialism and the National Question 191
Basic Features of the National Developmnt of
the Liberated Countries of the East 201
Chapter II. Regional Peculiarities of the National Processes
(Eastern and Southern Asia) . 208
Oceania 208
Southeast Asia 212'
' South Asian Subcontinent 232
Chapter III. Regional Peculiarities of the National Processes
(western Asia and North Africa) . 266
Near and Middle East 2106
Arab Horld 259
Chapter IV. National Hovuants: Description and Typology 273
Description of National Contradictions 273
Feudal-Separatist and Tribalistic Movements 276
Bourgeois and Bourgeois-Democratic Hoveuents 291
_ Revolutionary-Dementia Tendencies in National
Hovaents 308
Social and Political Role of National Mements in
the Present-Day Best 313
Author collective 317

COPYRIGHT: Glavnaya redaktsiya vostochnoy literatury izdatel'stva "Nauka", 1980.
5075

C80: 1807/69

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'PROBLDIS OF FOREIGN EAST, MODERN TDBS' - VOL III

Hoscow mum VOSTOK 1 MOST in Russian 1981 Vol 3 (signed to press
23 Jul 81) pp 3-6, 512-526. 527-528

[Annotatiom conclusion, and table of contents of Vol 3 of "The Foreign East and
Modern Tines: Basic Problems and Tendencies in the Develop-en: of the Countries of
the Foreign East." in three volumes, by G. 1'. Kim et a1", Main Editorial Office of
Eastern Literature, Irdatel'stvo "Nauka", 18,250 copies, 528 pp]

[Extracts] The book discusses the underlying natural laws and peculiarities of

the present-day stage of social thought in the developing countries and analyzes
bourgeois nationalism, the non-Marxist socialist concepts, and the role of religion
in the ideological-political struggle. A considerable amount of attention is
devoted to the problems of culture. The book also throws light upon the inter-
national aspects of the national-liberation movement: questions of foreign aid.

the problea of nonalliance, etc.

Conclusion
The Liberated Countries of the East on the Threshold of the 1980's

The national-liberation struggle of the nations during the past one-and-a-half to
two decades was marked by new outstanding victories. "Confirmation of this.”

as stated in the report by General' Secretary of the CPS!) Central Coaaittee, L. I.
Brezhnev to the 26th CPSU Congress.""is provided by the revolutions in Ethiopia.
Afghanistan, and Nicaragua, and the overthrow of the antipopular nonarchist

regime in Iran. During the 1970's. factually speaking, the liquidation of the
colonial empires was completed. There was a narrowing of the sphere of ilperialis-
tic dominance in the world“. In addition to the crushing defeats inflicted on
imperialism and neocolonialism, the great-power chauvinistic policy of the leader-
ship of the People's Republic of China suffered serious failures in the countries
of Asia and Africa. The nature and direction of the national-liberation struggle
completely confirned one of the basic conclusions of Marxism-Leninisn, as relative
to the content of the present-day era as the era of the revolutionary transition
from capitalise tosocialisn on a worldwide :scale. '

The struggle being waged by the nations of the East for the consolidation of their
national independence and social progress, fusing together with the struggle being
waged by all the progressive forces of our planet against inperialistic reaction.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
accelerates the present-day revolutionary process. In the course of this struggle
one begins to see more and more clearly the limitation of the social framework of
capitalism for the purpose of resolving the vitally important tasks of the national-
democratic revolutions. In this regard one must view the very important feature of

the social development of the East -- the unusual intensity of the attraction of
the masses of the people toward socialism.

The struggle against imperialism and the forces of domestic reaction, which struggle
constitutes the content of the present-day stage of the development of the liberated
countries, has revealed a number of contradictory phenomena and tendencies. Sub-
stantial successes in this struggle were achieved primarily by the countries of
socialist orientation, which acted most decisively to squeeze the imperialistic
monopolies and to establish strict governmental control over their own economic
ties. At the same time, new trends also touched those countries which. cooperative-
ly recently, were viewed by imperialism as relatively ”stable regions" of the world
capitalist economy. It can be assumed that the 1980's will run their course under
the sign of the further development of these tendencies, both in width (as a result

economic policy). In the new decade, obviously. one should expect the completion
of ‘ process of reorganization of the activities of foreign capital and the
s ..cantial limitation of the frankly predatory forms of its activities.

Another important tendency which was noted in the 1970's but which, obviously,

will receive wide development in the 1980's, is the carrying out of considerable
democratic reforms, primarily in the agrarian area. The countries that were the
pioneers in these reforms were the countries of socialist orientation. However,

In many countries one observes the greater and greater deepening_of the dispropor-
tions between the modern and traditional sectors of the society, primarily

between the urban industrial branches and the agrarian sphere, which continues

to rely upon backward productive forces. On this basis there has been an exacerba-
tion of the food-supplies problem, which has been hindering the formation of a
commodity fund of food supplies that is necessary for the creation of a diversified

modern structure of the economy, and which intensifies the dependence of the
system of social reproduction.

The social consequences of these increasingly exacerbated contradictions find

their manifestation in mass pauperism, the extremely low level of consumption by

the bulk of the workers who are vegetating in the sphere of precapitalistic ways

of life, and the vast unemployment. which has clearly expressed features of a
depression. All this is the direct result of the destructive interaction of the
socioeconomic and demographic processes in the disintegrated economy of the develop-
ing countries, which occupy a special, subordinate position in the system of world
capitalism. Moreover, one of the important peculiarities of its effect upon the
process of socioeconomic evolution lies in the fact that, in essence, it blocks

the growth of the organic structure of joint capital and intensifies the

23
FOR OIIWCIAL USElDNLY
a use va'e'ebume. we Vl‘hl

disintegration and disproportions in the entire national-economic structure.

And the one-sidedness of the reorganization of the economy, in the final analysis,
restrains the process of its progressive reform and leads to the continuous
increase in the relative gap in the levels of the econoaic development of the
liberated countries and the world capitalist centers.

The unevenness of the socioeconomic development, as a general underlying

natural law that is inherent to the entire system of world capitalism, manifests
itself on the periphery of world capitalism and in the further deepening of the
differentiation of the liberated countries themselves. That circumstance was
emphasized in the report of the CPSU Central Cousittee to the 26th CPSU Congress:
"These countries are very varied. Some of them, after liberation, took the revolu-
tionary-democratic path. In others, the capitalist relations were confirmed. Some
of then are carrying out a truly independent policy, and others are today follow-
ing the wake of the policy, of imperialism. In a word, the picture is rather
motley“. Hith the passage of time a factor that exerts a stronger and stronger
effect upon the socioeconomic development of the countries of the East is such a
factor as the differences in the degree and the nature of the inclusion in the
worldwide capitalist economy. However, even the countries which have gone ahead
with regard to definite indicators are encountering the ease very acute prob-
lems: the deepening of the disproportions and the intensification of the dependence
upon the imperialistic powers, the pressure exerted by the tremendous repopulstion
upon all the social processes, and the intensification of the counteraction being
put up by the imperialistic centers. Therefore the problem of a single anti-
imperialistic front made up of all the liberated countries in the struggle for the
creation of s new international economic order is taking on an increasingly
important nature.

The contradictory features of the socioeconomic evolution of the countries of the
East which are in the system of the world capitalist formation determine the
further aggravation of the old social contradictions and the arising of new ones. '
Hit1in the next 10-20 years in the liberated countries of capitalist development
there will inevitably occur the further intensification of the social polarisa-
tion, the increase in the relative and absolute gap between the propertied,
exploiting upper class and the exploited lower classes of society. The course aimed
at the forced development of capitalism will inevitably cause the further forcible
pushing out of broader and broader masses of the workers from the existing system
of production and the headlong swelling of the sphere of pauperism and backward-
ness. (No less than one-fourth of the population in the liberated countries
consumes an amount of food supplies that is below the minimum means of subsistence.)
The pauperism of the masses and the declassing of a considerable part of the popu-
lation will, to a large extent, determine the nature of the social'and political
struggle in the liberated countries during the 1980's.

The organic incapsbility of capitalism as a social means of production to resolve
the vitally important economic and social problems of the developing countries
brings with it new contradictions in socioeconomic life. One of the most important
is the intensification of the effect that the state and its property have upon
social reproduction and the evolution of the socioeconomic structure. Within the

next decade one should expect a further increase in the role of the national state
in the socioeconomic development of the liberated countries, and this, undoubtedly.

will reflect the inability of the private-capital way of life to resolve

2h
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
independently the tasks of overcoming the economic backwardness and of social
progress. In the countries of the East with a capitalistically oriented develop-
ment. the expansion of state property in the sphere of the economy gives rise to
socioeconomic types of the economy which are phasically higher than private-
economy capitalism (various versions of state-monopoly capitalism, primarily),

the development of which types, for the most part, is subordinated to the logic

of development of the capitalist formation. Hence the persistent striving of
private capital to be integrated to the maximum extent with the state capital,

up to and including the creation of a single reproduction process. At the same
time, the evolution of state capitalism in the 1980's, to a greater and greater
extent, will be influenced by the intensification of the state functions to
integrate the entire process of economic development and to maintain the political
stability of society under conditions of the continuous aggravation of the funda-
mental social contradictions, and this objectively intensifies the noncapitalistic
potential of state property and the entire effect of the national state upon the
socioeconomic development of the transitional society.

The specific nature of the class structure in the countries of the East lies in the
existence and the frequently numerical predominance of the classes and segments

of the precapitalistic type (tribal nobility and patriarchal-commune peasantry,
feudal lords and feudally enslaved peasantry, a large number of semifeudal groups,
including those among urban dwellers, a large military segment, nonproletarian
segments of workers, etc.). The breakdown of these classes and groups is histori-
cally inevitable. Nevertheless, within the next decade (the 1980's) they will
continue to play an important role in the social structure.

The variety and the-multileveled nature of the class gradations, interests, and
strivings in countries with multiple ways of life determine the special role of

the ruling elite. In the East. they are not simply the agent network of the ruling
class, but, rather, a specific and socially complex (not always constant) segment
that carries out the political power usually in the name not of a single class,

but a broad class coalition. Acting as a consolidating and mobilising factor,

the elite attempts to play the role of an above-class arbiter (and if it succeeds
in doing so, it is only for a short period). This tendency objectively feeds on
the special economic role played by the state and state coercion, and upon the
historically firmly established might of the bureaucracy in the East, a bureaucracy
which always revealed the striving for the formation of a closed, distinctive
social caste. In this situation the elite strives to represent itself as the
expresser of the interests of society or the nation as a whole, but, obviously,

its understanding of these interests is influenced both by its social origin and
social ties, and by the overall situation and correlation of class forces in the
country. To the same extent that, inthel980's, there will be an aggravation of
the multilevel and multistage class struggle in the liberated countries, the elite
will remain the object of various class pretensions and will reflect the upward
flight of a particular class. Also linked with its contradictory nature is the
special role of the army, the bureaucracy, and the state sector in the economy.

Under conditions of the aggravation of the class struggle in the East, factors
that are taking on greater and greater importance are both the improvement of the

organizational and political forms of the class movements (still insuffiently de-
veloped and self-determined) of the proletariat, the nonproletarian segments of
the workers, and the working peasantry, and the social and political dynamism

25
ms omcm. use ONLY
of the modern middle segments, that is, the most educated and politically active
social groups —- the intellectuals, the officer class, the studentry, etc. -- which
are linked to a particular degree with various detachments of the petty bourgeoisie.

The advancement of this segment was objectively caused by the weakness and unpre-
paredness of the proletariat and especially the bourgeoisie, by the considerable
growth of this segment by drawing on the broad urban and rural masses of the
precapitalistic small-scale producers, by the gravitation to it of the pauperized
poor and the preproletariat, which constitute a large part (sometimes the majority)
of the population in many countries of the East. The close ties between the petty
bourgeoisie and the nonproletarian majority of the population determined the bour-
geoisie's leadership role in many important processes in the development of the
modern East. As a whole the petty bourgeoisie, after its advent to power, is
typified by the gradual rejection of extremes, pragmatism, and the orientation toward
the prolonged coexistence of petty and medium private ownership under the aegis of
the powerful state sector. Also operating in this same direction is the petty-
bourgeois influence in the ranks of the ruling elite, the bureaucracy, the army,

and the apparatus of economic administration, which apparatus is gradualy encompassed
by the petty bourgeoisie.

The complicated process of the national rebirth and the search for the ways for
the further development of the peoples of the East cannot fail to lead to a new
regrouping of the social and political forces during the 1980‘s. As the social
and class consciousness of the workers inevitably becomes intensified, there will
be an acceleration of the transition from the previous class-caste conservative
social structure to a modern social and political organization that included within
itself new social classes and segments, new progressive parties and organisations.
The upsurge of national feelings, the increasing protest against imperialistic
exploitation, provide the objective impetus for the ethno-netional processes:

the transition from tribal organization to the nationality; the formation of the
nationalities into new nations of the transitional type.

The struggle for the consolidation of the political integrity and sovereignty
remains one of the most inportant directions in the social development of the
liberated countries during the 1980's. Meanwhile the social reforms, even during
the modern era, when they evolve under the active guiding effect of the political
superstructure, will require a rather prolonged transitional period. That course
also requires the active participation of the masses in affairs of administering the
state. In the countries of capitalist development, very serious obstacles stand on
this path: a considerable part of the population, from the point of view of their
social psychology. the degree of development of their class-political awareness,
have not yet matured enough for active and conscious political movements. The
existing forms of state authority in the countries of capitalist development do

not always correspond to the objective need for involving in active political

work the broad masses of the population or the creation of mass-scale social and
political organizations. Frequently the ruling bourgeois groupings limit the
participation of the masses in political life, and strive to channel their partici-
pation into the move-eats that are occurring under the slogans of bourgeois
nationalism, conservative traditionalism, etc.

These factors will undoubtedly exert the most serious influence upon the domestic
political life of the liberated countries in the 1980's. Wherever the political

26
FOR‘OFINCIAI.USE(NVLY
ROIINHHCJAI.USE(NULY

life comes out from under the control of the parliamentary regimes, the bourgeois-
nationalistic forces will strive to promote "strong personalities" to the power,
and to promote the confirmation of authoritarian forms of power. Under a personal
or narrow-group dictatorship there can be a temporary weakening of the role and
importance of the constitutional-legal, democratic-representative institutions, and
there can be an excessive expansions of the punitive prerogatives of the army.
police, and the internal security agencies. However, these repressive tendencies
will not lessen, but rather will aggravate still more the antagonistic contradic-
tions of the transitional society. In other words, during the 1980's the social and
political tension in many countries of the East, in proportion to the growth of the
class differentiation and the aggravation of the domestic contradictions, will
grow steadily.

A very important feature of the present-day ideological situation in the developing
countries is the deepening of the social content of various theories and concepts,
their more clearly defined class-political demarcation. The question that was the
center of ideological battles in most of the states in the Asian-African world was
the question of culture and national traditions, and that had the most direct
effect upon the fates of various bourgeois and petty-bourgeois doctrines. There
was an acceleration of the previously noted reduction in the influence of those.
nationalists who had acted from frankly “modernizer” positions. That fate overtook
the rather numerous and extremely varied segment of theoreticians, primarily the
popularizers of "Western models" of capitalist development. The only ideologists
who could defend and expand the zone of effect upon the masses were, for the most
part. those bourgeois and petty-bourgeois ideologists who did not so much break

as adapt the “traditional factors" to the needs of modernizing society. A special
place was occupied by the corresponding transformation of the religious dogmas

and laws. There still remain linked with the idealization of the patriarchal
social orders many patriarchal-peasant and petty—bourgeois illusions, including
those which provide an impetus to the movements of social protest.

An extremely important factor in the early 1980's in the ideological and political
life of the liberated countries is the consolidation of the ideological alliance
between the national democratic forces of the liberated states and the worldwide
system of socialism and the international communist movement. Real socialism
guarantees gigantic social progress, organically combining the resolution of the
tasks of economic growth, the complete cultural flourishing of the nations, with the
realization of the centuries-old national yearnings for social justice.

The question of this realization takes on special acuity in a situation of the
growing differentiation of the countries in the Asian-African world, where the
question that has become the decisive one is the question of the class choice

of the particular place in the world conflict between socialism and capitalism.

But the ranks of the ideologists whose teachings objectively serve to substantiate
the bourgeois development are far from monolithic. The large number and the
theoretical motleyness of the teachings themselves reflect the varying level of

the social development of individual countries, the variety of the specific politi-
cal situation, and the varying degree to which the general national tasks have been
resolved, including the overcoming of economic backwardness, the elimination of the
inhibiting consequences of colonialism and precapitaiistic relations. and, finally,
the divergence of the strivings of the representatives of various bourgeois, as

27
son omcw. use ONLY
well as petty-bourgeois groupings. One observes differences of opinions between

the ideologists who act from anti—imperialistic positions and the ideologists

of the neocomprador, landowning upper-bourgeois segments. These differences of
opinion affect to a broader and broader extent not only the foreign-policy sphere.
but also the entire mechanism of international economic communication. The sowers of
the illusions concerning the exclusive effectiveness ofbourgeoisdevelopment and the
zealous apologists of "free enterprise," nn.che one hand. and those who, to one
degree of another, are aware of the limited nature of the historical opportunities
of that progress and who join up with the criticizing of the negative features of
capitalism which were revealed on the national soil. on the other, continued to
march in different columns. As a result there was an expansion of the chasm

between the ideological expression of the interests of the narrow sxploiter

circles and the interests of the remaining groups of the population.

At the same time, the doctrines that became most widespread were those nationalistic
doctrines which represented. as it were. the "equivalent" of various social forces.
The most typical components of those doctrines were, as a rule. the course aimed

at a "mixed economy," in which one observed the parity between the private initia-
tive and state-economic activity; the criticism of large capital, foreign and
national; and the declaration of the primacy of the general national interests over
others. Doctrines of this type were confirmed as the dominant ones at the general

Horever, practically the main emphasis in these ideologies is placed upon bringing
up to date the mass awareness. upon introducing into it those value landmarks and
mobilizing ideological principles which serve the goals of accelerating the rates of
economic development, the reinforcement of sovereignty. and the repelling of the
intrigues of neocolonialism under conditions of social and economic'disintegration.
the multiplicity of historical and cultural traditions. the incompleteness of the
processes of class formation and the formation of nations. The spectrum of

the official doctrines has become more varied: their creators have developed
various approaches to the correlation of the social and the general-national. and
have proposed different versions for coordinating these factors with the spiritual
heritage of their countries. with the cultural norms.

"hat, though. are the basic prospects for the ideological-political struggle in
the liberated countries during the 1980's? As the national-democratic movement
continues to deepen, the struggle waged by the progressive forces against the
noticeably intensified attempts to use religion for antipopular purposes will
take on particular importance. Pointing out the use of religious slogans, L. I.
Brezhnev emphasised that "the chief thing lies in what goals are being pursued by
the forces that proclaim the various slogans"3. The anti-imperialistic and anti-
capitalistic moods that have been widespread among the masses of the faithful and
some of the clergy, as well as the political figures who are close to them, make it
possible to oppose to the dogmas of religious exclusivity the ideas of religious
tolerance in the name of creating a single front of patriotic forces; to

oppose to theocrstic tendencies the requirements of the genuinely democratic and
progressive transformation of society and the state; and to oppose to the summons
for religious unity the policy of the international solidarity of the workers in
the name of the struggle for international security and social progress.

whereas during the period of the struggle for political independence the gauge of
progressivity was the attitude toward ilperialism, at the present time that

28
FIHRCHﬂﬂCIAl.USEGMNLY
FIII(Nﬂﬂ(JAl.lEﬂE(HQLY

criterion is insufficient. "hat has become decisive is the attitude toward
socialism and capitalism. The social-political ideologies that were developed
during the period of the struggle for independence and that enjoyed mass support
are undergoing a crisis and have lost their previous importance. The political
forces that are in power or that are fighting for the power are striving to develop

The dissemination of the ideas of scientific socialism in the liberated countries
travels along complicated and contradictory paths. Frequently the influence of the
patriarchal peasant and petty-bourgeois psychology ideology, and the adherence
to the traditional way of thinking and way of life, inder the perception by the
masses of the theory of scientific socialism. The non-Marxist socialist concept

are sometimes distinguished by their deep duality and eclecticism. Anticapitalism
and socialist orientation, which constitute their strong aspect, are isolated from

the question of power. from materialistic philosophy as a whole. Certain national
democrats are typified by the lack of understanding of the leading role played by
the working class, their overestimation of the revolutionary potentials of the
peasantry and intellectuals. the overestimation and absolutization of the national
peculiarities and the national specifics of the revolutionary process, and the
underestimation of its general underlying natural laws. All this creates the

opportunities for the temporary evolution of some of the national democrats to the
right.

This does not preclude the fact that during the 1980's the socialist orientation of
a number of the developing countries, and the anticapitalistic theory and practice
of the revolutionary democracta at the existing level of social-awareness, will

A factor that has become a fundamentally new phenomenon in the ideological and
political life of a number of countries in the East is the arising of vanguard
parties of workers who have accepted scientific socialism. For such parties the
1980's will become a period of an intensive struggle against the forces of foreign
and domestic reaction, for the consolidation of the unity and organizational spirit,
of all the forces of the people's revolution. The most important tasks that have

the development of the countries of socialist orientation along the progressive path.
As was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress. these trends include: ". . . the gradual
liquidation of the positions of the imperialistic monopolies, the local upper
bourgeoisie, and the feudal lords, and the limitation of the activities of foreign
capital. This is the guaranteeing to the national state of the commanding heights
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007(02109: CIA-RDP82-00860R00050W0048-2

FIIICHWHCJAI.USE4DNLY

be occupied by the state sector. By monitoring the financial and bank system and
foreign trade, and by protecting the domestic market from the expansion of foreign
monopoly capital, the state sector will contribute even more actively to the creation
of the optimal conditions for the development of national production, the diversifi-
cation of the national economy, and the liquidation of its single-commodity struc-
ture. It is precisely the state sector that has been called upon to play the leading
role in liquidating the backward socioeconomic relations which have been restraining
economic development; to promote the broader development of cooperatives for

raising the level of small-scale production in the rural and urban areas. thus cre-
ating the material-technical prerequisites for the noncapitalistic development for
the changeover in the future to the path of the extended construction of socialism.

The changeover of the previously oppressed countries to the path of noncapitalistic
development, a changeover that is uniform in its social content, requires the

unity of all the patriotic. democratic, and progressive forces, but the political
basis of that unity is formed primarily by the alliance of revolutionary democrats

and communists. the most consistent expresaers of the revolutionary atrivings of
the broad masses of the people.

The complication of the present-day international situation, the intensification of
the ideological struggle in the world. the changes in the social and class situa-
tion, and the polarization of the political forces in the liberated countries are
presenting the Communists with fundamentally new tasks, the resolution of which does
not always fit inside the ordinary theoretical schemes and which requires special
and timely elaboration. They include the definition of the role in the revolutionary
process of the vanguard parties that rest upon a Marxist-Leninist ideological

basis, but which are not communist parties; the correct choice of the struggle
strategy in conformity with the level of socioeconomic maturity and the stages of
the national-liberation revolution; the definition of the new tasks and methods of
mobilizing the masses of the people for the most active struggle against neocoloni-
alien and the forces of domestic reaction.

During the decade that has begun. the problems that will be exceptionally important
for Communists are the set of problems that are linked with class and political
coalitions and with the creation of a broad anti-imperialistic, antifeudal democratic
front of patriotic forces. Problems that are taking on even greater importance

are such problems as the determination of the principles and tasks of the unifi-
cation. the forms of uniform actions, the development of a strategy for alliances

and the role of the communist parties participating in them at various stages of

the struggle, the conditions for entering, participating in, and leaving coalition
governments, etc.

The many years of practice confirm the fact that what is very important here, as in
general in the activities of the communist parties. is the correct correlation
between flexibility and adherence to principles, the skillful combination of the
struggle for the res.lution of the general national tasks and the defending of the
class interests of the proletariat. "For the Marxist," V. I. Lenin taught, "the
task consists only in avoiding the two extremes: on the one hand. in not falling
, into the error of those people who say that, from the point of view of the prole-
tariat. we do not have anything to do with any of the immediate and temporary non-
proletarian tasks, and, on the other hand, in preventing the participation of the
proletariat in the resolution of the immediate democratic tasks from obscuring its
class awareness and its class peculiarity"5.

30
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOROFFICIALUSEONLV

The vitally important problems of the comlunist movement and the entire revolution-
ary process in the zone of the national-liberation struggle are complicated and
varied. They require scientific study on the basis of a thorough concrete-
historicsl analysis and the generalization of the varied experience of the national-
liberation movement. The path to their resolution inevitably lies through the
revolutionary practice. through the creative search for the optimal strategy and
tactics with a consideration of the changing political situation in the world and
within their own countries, the political maneuverings of the class enemy, the
national-ethnic and cultural traditions, and the peculiarities of the social
psychology. and many other factors which do not exist in countries where strong
detachments of the national proletariat have already formed.

The national situation in the East has become considerably more complicated. In
most of the developing countries of Asia and North Africa there have been sharp
conflicts on the national soil. which at times have taken on a dramatic nature.

The reasons for this aggravation of the national questions are to be found in factors
both of a domestic and a foreign nature.

The former include the sharp speeding up of the natural ethnic processes as a

direct consequence of the unprecedentedly rapid rates of social and cultural develop-
ment. The consolidation of new ethnic comaonalities as a consequence of the inte-
grational processes, the rapid formation of young and dynamic nations, the disappear-
ance and "dissolving" of many small nationalities and ethnic groups, as well as
those which have been baclnvard in their development -- those are the chief signs of
the ethnic processes in the East which have occurred before the eyes of contaspora-
ries. This inevitably leads to the intensification of the struggle for political
self-determination of the nations that have arisen on the Afro-Asian scene. In
addition, a morbid effect is exerted on the national relations by all the contradic-
tions and difficultues of socioeconomic and intrs-politicsl development.

Two social systems exert an effect simltaneously upon the national situation in the
countries of the East. a: the one hand, a favorable effect is exerted upon them

by the generally acknowledged successes achieved by the socialist community in
economic and cultural construction and especially in the effective resolution of
the national question. 0n the other hand, neocolonialism, placing its emphasis on
the undermining of the internal integrity and stability of the recently liberated
states, eagerly uses the age-old method of inciting national enmities. Yet another
negative factor has begun to exert an effect upon the national relations in the
countries of the East - the great-power chauvinistic' policy of Beijing. Practical- '
ly speaking, in the national situation in the East the hegemonistic pretensions of
Beijing play the same role as the inperialistic intrigues: it is a disintegrating

factor. which undermines the domestic security and integrity of the young indepen-
dent states.

The general evaluation of various national movasents is possible. of course, only
from concrete-class positions. with the mandatory consideration of the highest in-
terests and final goals of world socialism and the national-liberation movement.

When approaching the national movements of the present-day Bast it is extremely im-

portant, first of all. in each of them to isolate the overall democratic content
and, secondly, to ascertain the degree to which the particular movement contributes

to (or hinders) the most rapid dying out of the traditional ways of life in the

. 31 ,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
socioeconomic and social and political structure, and especially the overcoming

of the capitalist system and the preparation of the conditions for the transition
to socialism.

should include the sharp aggravation of the contradictions between the national-
liberation forces and imperialism. At the sense time that international imperialism
has been unde taking complicated and flexible neneuverings for the purpose of
keeping the liberated countries in the worldwide economic structure of capitalisn,
the nations of the East, on the contrary, have been intensifying the struggle to
overcome their age-old backwardness, for the radical reorganization of the semi-
colonial structure of the economy, the guaranteeing of modern standards of consan-
tion. the upsurge in national culture, and the attainnent of a new economic inter-
national order and a truly equal position in the international division of labor.

deaocratic forces and imperialism, there has been a deepening and expansion of the
social base and the scope of the mass anti-imperialistic movements in the countries
of the Best. Therefore. within the next few decades the rising wave of anti-
axploiter social revolutions. without any doubt. will combine within themselves
even more closely the anti-imperialistic, antifeudal. anticapitaliatic, democratic,
and, in the broader prospect, the socialist streaas of the class struggle.

the effective involvement in the nodern scientific-technical revolution-the inten-
sive development of modern productive forces, to which, in the final analysis, the
definite (nonexploiter) production relations must correspond; a new political and
legal superstructure that corresponds to the interests of the access of the

people, and primarily the working class, the peasantry, the intellectuals, the
employees, cull-scale property owners, and other representatives of the middle
and nonproletarian segments.

The next few decades will be a period of the further consolidation of the political,
economic, scientific-technical, cultural, and other forms of cooperation between the
liberated countries and world socialise. In essence, we are dealing with the pos-
sibility of important qualitative changes in this cooperation, when the agenda will
include problem of multilevel specialization and cooperatives, the development

0n the basis of many years of experience, the nations of the gas: are becoming note
and more aware of the fact that the durability of the alliance with world socialise,
the modern placement of the world social and class forces, will detcraine the out-

32 _
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

3.
‘0.

50

moms
mum, 24 Pebriary 1981.
Ibid.
Ibid.

V. I. Ignin. ”Answer to the Criticism of Our Program Draft," [Palm aobr. each.
[Co-plated Collected Horhll, Vol 7, p 225.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page

[as published]
Section 5

Social and Political Thought in the Countries of the East

Chapter I. Basic Trends in the Ideological Struggle 7
New Tendencies in the Development of Social Thought
in the Countries of the East 7
Ideological Tendencies of the Populist Type 18
Chapter II. The molution of Hodern Trends in Bourgeois
. Social and Political Thought . 26
Historical Changes in the Sphere of Bourgeois Social
ThOught. Description of Its Basic Trends 26
Bourgeois-Progressive Trend 36
The Struggle waged by the Conservative and Liberal Tendencies lob
Leftist-Nationalist“ Trend ’09
Chapter III. The Revolutionary-Denocratic Theories of Socialisl in
the Liberated Countries 55
Basic Prerequisites and Peculiarities of the Pornation
of Non-ﬂanist Socialist Theories 55
Social Roots and Ideological Sources of Modern Revolutionary-
Denocratic Concepts of Socialists 59
Keynote Docunants of Revolutionary-Duocratic Forces and
Various Types of Rewlutionary-Dnaocratic Concepts 62
Cot-mists and the Revolutionary-Democratic Porces 82
Chapter Iv. Negative Influence of Maois- Dpon the Ideology of the ~
Developing Countries 91
Haoisn Concerning Socialist Society and the State . 9b
The Maoist Approach to the Resolution of Ideological
Problens After the Attainnent of Independence 106
The'Antiscientific Nature of Maoist Theories Concerning the
Role of the National-Liberation Hovenent 113
The Great-Power Principle and Nationalisn of the Foreign-
Policy Platforn of hsoisn 118
Causes and Nature of the Political Crisis in China 126
Chapter V. Religion in the Present-Day Social and Political Struggle 137
The Causes and Nature of the Influence of Religions 137
Discrepancies in the Positions of the Religious
Ideologists. Parties. and Organizations 142
Religious Ideological Currents and the Tendencies of
Their Development 167

The Attitude Taken Toward Religion by the Ruling Regines
of the Developing Countries and the Po1icy of

Seculariaation 165
The "Dialogue" Hith Believers of Other Psiths in the
- Present-Day East 179
3h

FOIOFIIGALUSEONLY
Chapter VI. Problems of the Culture of the Nations of the Present-Day

Bast

General Underlying Natural Laws and Specific Peculiarities
of the Development of Culture

Philosophical Thought

Literature

Art

Science

Education ,

Linguistic Situation

Section 6
International Aspects of the National-Liberation Revolutions

Chapter I. Aggravation of the Contradictions Between the Liberated
Countries and the Imperialistic States
The Liberated Countries and world Capitalism
Imperialism and the National Bourgeoisie of the
Developing Countries

The International Capitalistic Division of Labor and
the Liberated Countries

Chapter II. Problems of the Economic Independence of the Liberated

Countries Under Conditions of the Struggle Between
the Two world Systems

The Essence of the Problem of the Economic Independence
of the Developing Countries

Economic Independence and the Importance of the International
Division of Labor

The Intensificstion of Dependence, or the Movement Toward
Independence?

Prospects for Economic Independence

Chapter III. world Socialism and the Struggle for the Economic Independence

of the Liberated Countries

New Type of International Economic Relations

Expansion of Trade Cooperation

Problems of the Division of Labor Between the Socialist
and Developing Countries ‘

Improvement of the Trade and Economic Ties Between the
Socialist and the Developing Countries

New Forms of Production and Scientific-Technical
Cooperation

Chapter IV. The Developing Countries and the Economic Aid Provided by
Imperialism
Basic Economic Functions of Aid
The Social Functions of Aid
Aid As an Instrument of Political Pressure
Certain Military-Strategic Aspects of Aid

35
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY

185
185
196
217
260
255

270
283

295
300

316
330

343
343
353
357

- 360

371
371
377

381
389
397

£09
615
622
427
633
Chapter V:

Chapter VI.

Conclusion.

Author collective

COPYRIGHT: Clavnaya redaktsiya vostochnoy literatury izdatel'stva "Hanks", 1981.

5075
080: 1807/69

Nonallisnce -- The Basic Trend in the Foreign-Policy Course
of the Countries of Asia and Africa

An important Factor in the Anti-Inperialistic Struggle

The Course Aimed at Heakening and Splitting the Movement of
Nonalliance - A Component Part of the Strategy of
Imperialism

world Socialism -- The Historic Ally of the Liberated
Nations

Criticisn of the Neocolonialistic Concepts of the Social
and Political Development of the Liberated Countries
of the East
Certain Historical Prerequisites and Political Aspects of
the Ideological Expansion of Neocolonialisn
The Antipopulist Essence of the Social and Political Concepts
of Neocolonialism. The Offensive "aged by the Ideologiats
of Iaperialisn Upon the Principle of National Sovereignty
The Evolution of the Social Strategy of Neocolonialisa and
the Search for a General Theory of the Social
Development of the Liberated Countries

The Liberated Countries of the East on the Threshold
of the 1980's

36

FIHICHWWCIAI.USE(NVLY

636
636

666

655

666
668

682

695

512
525
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL

ANTI-SOVIET PROPAGANDA BY W RELIGIGJS CENTERS CRITICIZED

Moscow museum in Russian 1980 (signed to press 30 June 80) pp 1. 4.7-4.8. 57.
74—75, 76-80, 81-83. 192

(Title. table of contents. and accents from book 'Argments" by H. V. Andreyev,
H. A. Col'denberg. N. S. Gomiyenko, et a]... Politimt, 200,900 copies. 192 pages]

[Excerpted CONTENTS . Page
To “I. Imus O I I O O O O O O I O O ,. C I 0 O I O O O O O O C O O C C I 3
Lieavtsev. E. I. . “The Present-Day Ideological Straggle and Religion" . . 6

Andreyev, ‘.. V. . "Present-Day Clerical Anti-Communion (Based on the Example
of the Activities of the Catholic Church and Its Secular Organisation)” . 19

Col'denberg. H. A.. "The Clerical Myth of a Religious Revival in the USSR" . 1&1
Theirﬂevelatlons eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee'eeee63

Isnailov. Hanan, 'f‘antasiee and Facts (Criticim of the Feleificatione
maudingtheStatusoerlanintheUSSR)“ . ._ . . . . . . . . . . 6!»

Our Country's Cueete regarding the Status of hueline in the Soviet Union . 85

Gordiyenko. No Se. Kmv. Po yle. m P. Kc Kmhkin' "’1“. 30881“
cnmhAm‘d'l Ideo1°g_mpoliucsu eeeeeeeeoeeeeoeoee 89

What the Intriguing Kulovac Politiciane'Are Writing About .". . . . . . . 119
Karpov, 0.. ”Under the Banner of'the £61011)" [Expansion Unknown] . . . . . 120
Lerov. L. PL. “Hmmfitsfm'lhie?” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1&2

Materials from a Press Conference Held by the mieeary of the Union of
the Catholic Priest. Bennie Vincenao (Lvov. 1979) . . . . . . . . . . . 181

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The malignant accusations which are directed at the Soviet Union are often most ab-
surd in nature. It would. perhaps. be difficult to name a more virulent anti-Soviet
person of the clerical persuasion than the Baptist pastor R. Bumbrand. who lives in
the United States. and a more implacably hostile publication than the arch-reaction-
ary CATACOMBSS. which is published in Paris. Let us attupt to provide at least a
partial idea of the "survey" of the Soviet press's atheistic materials which the
pastor made in 1976 in the pages of this monthly. For exanple. the issue of KAZ’Jﬂi-
5T. ExSMYA PRAVIM. dated 16 June 1971. cane within Bur-brand's field of vision.
"Having conprehended" it. the "surveyor" talked absut the ”brothers and sisters" who
managed to print "hundreds of books of Christian songs in a state printing plant
with the concurrence of the director. all aployees, and the persons who furnished

this literature on order. Nobody gave anybody away. This shows how appmvingly the
average citizen of the Soviet Union looks at Christianity...."1

Here is what really happened: the directors of the printing plant. along with the
party, trade-union. and Konsomol organisations unanimously assisted the sectarians
in publishing the religious literature. for the entire group at this printing plant
consists of zealous Christians. But it is not Bunbrmd's scope to be satisfied
with the narrow framework of a single organization: the conclusions which he drew
were extrapolated in the course of things to the entire Land of the Soviets!

But such a version is Just as far fro- the truth as the pastor himself is free the
elementary horns of honesty. In fact. KAZNOXS’I‘ANSMYA PRAVDA reported an irritat-
ing machination. The chief of the printing production shop of one of the planning
institutes along with four other workers entered into a conspiracy for a large sun
of noney with several Seventh-Day Adventists and agreed to print for than a collec-
tion entitled ”Psalms of Zion.” The sectarian ”activists” were counting on ensur
ing theaselves a tidy profit from selling their "spiritual" product. All of this
took place (let's quote verbatim) "under the noses of the gawking managers." "This
chance instance has denonstrated." the newspaper goes on to say. "that poor organi-
zation. a disorderly system. and managerial carelessness are not sinply a loop-hole
but a broad road for unscrupulous persons. "

Islam's "opposition" potential could be depicted ”on a larger scale." if there were
some kinds of extra-1st trends within it. however. to the great annoyance of our
opponents. Islan has nothing analogous. let's say. to the Baptist ”initiators." And
since there are no such elaents. therefore. it was necessary to invent sonething.
And they did think something up. There are in the Soviet Union. wrote one of the
most true-blue bourgeois Isle-1c scholars. A. Bennigsen. two types of Islam--the
official and the unofficial. If the forner is loyal. the latter is "energetically
opposed to the regime." Bennigsen does not inform us about the relationship be-
tween the two models of Islan which he has constructed. psrnitting the readers to
draw whatever conclusions they please. Bennigsen does not bother to explain what

"official" Islan is or wherein consists the "energetic opposition" of the "unoffi-
cial" Islan.

Following the lead of the West's imperialist propaganda and utilizing. often with
a delay. its very sane dirty methods. the press organs of the Muslin reaction are
striving to create among the population of the developing countries a persistent
stereotype of suspicion towards genuine socialism. If the Vest speaks about the
"awakening" of the Soviet Union's Muslims under the influence of the events in
Iran and thereby betrays its own secret hopes for the emergence of something like

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
create such a movement. They write that they want to "extend. strong bridges" to
the Soviet Union's Huslins. who. in their opinion, are experiencing "the most acute
need for support and aid." so that the Soviet Muslims "together with their brothen
can activate the Islamic noveaent. which has been called upon to encompass new na-
tions and to extend its inﬂuence over the entire earth" (from the Saudi Arabian
newspaper Ali-NANA. dated 19 March 1979). And in order to sonshow Justify his own
inventibns. the author of this article slanders the Soviet state. accusing it of
"forbidding freedom of religious belief and interfering in people's links with the

"The couunist countries have set thaselvss the goal of ridding themselves of the
Islamic minorities in their countries." The falsifiers have not been able to find

condition for building socialism is supposedly the liquidation of religion. Rely-
ing on such thought-up versions as this. the Muslin reaction wants in all manner of

comaunist and to struggle against genuine socialisa. Hypnotized by this conception
of theirs. the opponents of social progress have concluded that Muslims in social:
ist countries are in political opposition to the socialist system and that they

Inasmuch as our country's Muslims do not go along with the wishes of the Soviet
people's adversaries. the latter have resorted to various types of inventions.
lies. and slander. These also include slander against the Muslims and Muslin lea-
ders in our country. k certain Abdu Huhashir. writing in the Cairo AL-Almm (1
April 19??) even accuses our country's religious leaders of ”not raising their voi-
ces in defense of the Soviet Union's Muslims." '

what was said on this subject after completing a two-week trip around the Soviet
“union by Jordan's minister of ﬁeligious Affairs and holy Places. Abdul Aziz al-Ha-
yet in an interview with the correspondent of Asa-3m. "We have becoae con»
vinced that the I-zuslils have the freedoa to carry out their religious rituals. wor-
ship, and religious life. including prayers and marriages. After registering a
marriage in the state institution. Muslims confim their marital union before suf-
tis or inane. he saw hundreds and thousands of persons saying their prayers in the
mosques on Fridays. despite the fact that this is not a day off... . During the
course of our meetings with Muslims we constantly felt the spirit of Isles. the ad-
herence to laiamic doctrine and morality. as well as a striving to perform the re-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

251th regard to the secular life of the believers the minister stated the following:
"i-iuslims in the Soviet Union, like all other citizens. take part in all the spheres
of life: in the economy, culture, and the field of education. They are engaged in
various fields within the sphere of managuent and production. in kolkhozes and

sovkhozes. Al like other citizens they receive tuition-free education at various
universities. '

To this testimony from Jordan's religious leader we may add that the Muslims of the
Joviet Union have not known unemployment for almost 50 years. They live in a coun-
try which has the lowest and most stable prices for bread. transportation. and hous-
ing. prices which have not changed for decades, where there exists high-quality.
free medical service for the entire population, where education from the first grade
of primary school to graduation from an institution of higher learning is free. and
where there is the highest level of education among the baoad masses.

Every Soviet Muslin. like any citizen of the USSR. knows that he is living better
today than yesterday and that he will be living better tomorrow than today.

But can one say- the same thing about Egypt's Muslims? As Arabic sources inform us.
the workers' standard of living in Egypt is rapidly sinking; the masses are growing
poorer. whereas the incomes of the bourgeois-hmaucratic strata are growing at a
fabulous rate. There is a growing number of citizens who do not have a roof over
their heads; the BAGHDAD OBSERVER writes that in Cairo alone there are more than
1600.000 persons who are homeless.3 Apartment rents. like the prices for other :
items of prime necessity, have grown catastrophically. In Cairo apartment rents
have increased five-fold during the last few years. food products and other item
of prime necessity in the country during this same period became 2-46 times more
expensive. During the period from January 1977 through March 1978 alone the cost
of items of prime necessity increased by 56 percent. Unaployment has grown rapid-
1y. Out of 12 million persons of the able-bodied population more than 2 million do
not have permanent Jobs. About 1; million Egyptians have gone abroad in search of
work.

As we have seen. the Egyptian 'defender” of Soviet Muslims is clearly dissipating
his reproaches on the wrong target. 'Ihe facts testify that he should raise his
voice in defense of Egypt's Muslims, who have been deprived of many of the most es-
sential socio-economic and political rights and liberties. which the Soviet Union's
Huslims have been enjoying without hindrance during the course of many decades.

It seems not enough for Islamic anti-comunists to blacken the socialist system and
to hurl ungrounded accusations against the Muslim leaders in the Soviet Union. In
order to turn the popular masses of the developing countries away from the ideas of
communism, they are prepared to slander entiro peoples. Here. for example, is what
Akhmad Salakh writes in the Horld Islamic League's weekly. NEWS OF‘ m: ISIAHIC
NORM) (No 1:31, 9 June 1975): "A society which does not acknowledge the existence
of God. neither recognises the existence of the human personality, liberty, nor hu-
man rights. Therefore. we consider that in a communist society human beings do not
exist." He designates the citizens of a socialist society as a ”forest of red
animals."

ho
FOR omcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such attacks, however. have not had any effect. The popular masses in the coun-
tries 01‘ the non-socialist world are getting rid of the enti~couunist myths with
more and more determination. History is the best teacher. It bears witness to

the fact that under Conunist leadership the east Just and solid society which man-
kind lmows has been built and that this society is a bulwark for universal peace
and social progress. The expanding contacts between the Soviet Union and the ”hue-
lim countries" have deeonstrated more end more vividly to the peoples that it is ,
precisely in the socialist countries where one finds the impluentation of the
workers' ideals regarding the establishment between a society's labors of the
highly eoral relations of coaradeehip. autuel aid. and brotherhood.

Such a reality drives the salicious people distraught, arousing them to make in-
creasingly inept statements. Thus. the newspaper REVS OF THE ISLAMIC HORLD (b
April 197?) asserts that in the Soviet Union "an iron wall. has been set up around
the Muslims in order to isolate thee from other peoples of the Islamic world."’t
But, of course. it is sufficient to open up any issue of the Journal mews OF
THE SOVIET EAST, which is published in Tashkent in Uzbek. Arabdc. English. and
French and which is sent to the religious organizations of Saudi Arabia and. obvi-
ously to the editors of the above-mentioned newspaper, to be convinced of the fact
that the huslins of the world's first socialist country have extraely broad con-
tacts with their brothers in the faith in dozens of countries throughout the
world. In practically every issue of the Journal there are materials about the
stay in the USSR of this or that Islamic delegation from "Muslim" or other coun-
tries or about a visit by our country's religious leaders to various 'l'iuslin
countries." This Journal also inforas us that taking pert in the work of the
ilorld Conference entitled "Religious Leaders for Lasting Peace. Disarmament. and
Just Relations among Peoples” (held in Moscow during 19??) were prohinent Huslim
leaders from more than no of the world's countries. After the conference ended.
they were the guests of the Soviet Union's Muslims for two weeks. Likewise promi-
nent religious leaders from 26 'eluslim countries.” including sons froa Saudi Ara-
bia, took part in the work of the Samaritand Conference of huslims, entitled "rho
Imam al-Bukhari and the Present Day" (1971»). and then for 10 days they traveled
about the Soviet Union, speaking before believers in dozens of mosques. Apropos
of this, the newspaper NW3 0? THE ISLAMIC UORLD and the JOURIML OF THE WORLD IS-
LkhIC LEAGUE published at that time a series of articles by the deputy general so-
cretary of the h'orld Islamic League. Muhammad Sawfat Sakka al-Anini, which includ-.
ed the following words: "It was as if the Muslin center of the entire world had
shifted from Mecca to Smarkand." Evidently. the publishers of the newspaper and
journal of the world Islamic League have already “forgotten" about this.

The most violent, unprincipled and dirtiest anti-Soviets in the camp 3f the Isle-
mic anti-comeunists are traitors and renegades such as Beynirsa Khait and a cer-
tain “grandson of the Imam Sheen." Said Shanil. Issuing forth from their pens
are the most savage, most delirious, slanderous inventions and assertions. And

there are people who call themselves "fighters for the truth" who will hear that
out and even publish their writings.

In 1969 the above-mentioned Said Shenil in a report read at the h'orld Islamic
League described how in the USSR a f'policy of national discrimination" is being
conducted and how the "Huslims are concealing their religious adherence. fearing
repression: and persecutions." He swore to the truthfulness of his statements in

1:1
roe omcm. use omv
FOR OFFICIAL USU“. ONLY

the face of his listeners who expressed doubts: "I call upon those who are being
deluded by the propaganda of extremists who have lost all human feelings (thus this
slandorer calls the followers of sgientific coamunism) to go there. behind the iron

curtain. and see the truth there."

Over the last few years hundreds of Muslim leaders from foreign countries have vi-
sited the USSR and becoae convinced with their own eyes how false and sluidemus

were the assertions of Said Shsmil and malicious persons like his.

After religious leaders who are so authoritative in the huslim world as the follow-
inguthe foraer sheikh of "Al-Azkhar." huhammsd ammo. al-Fakhkham. the supreme
nufti the Syrian Arab Republic. Alarmed Keftaro. the chief aufti of Lebanon. ﬂasan '
Khaled, the mufti of the Yemen Arab Republic. Aim-ad hum-mad Zabara. the former
minister of religion of horocco. mm Bargash. and any other proainent religious
leaders who have visited the USSR-An their public utterances have attested to the
presence in Soviet citizens of the full opportunity to be believers or non-belie»
vero. the presence of genuine conditions among Muslims to profess their religion
and. on an equal basis with all the country‘s citizens. to enjoy all the decora-
tic rights and privileges which are accorded by the socialist society. after all
this. it would seem to be no longer possible to speak about ”persecutions for one‘s
faith.” about "persecution of Huslins in the USSR.” or about their being deprived

of any kind of rights.

It is a characteristic. however. of the viewpoint of anti-Soviets and anti-commu-
nists to. despite the facts. not to stop at inventions and slender in order to

blacken genuine socialism .

In a report rhich was read at the Institute of Huslim Minorities at the King Abdul
Aziz university in Jidda on 20 March 1978 (and published in an expository fon in
the feurth issue of this institute's BULLETIN) Baymirsa Khait stated. for example.
that in the USSR ”Islamic meetings were prohibited. " that in Central Asia (he
writes 'Turkestan") “there are only eight aoeques." that "it is forbidden for more
than 20 Muslims to asseable in the mosques.“ that “all contributions for Islaaic
purposes are forbidden." etc.. etc.

Such declarations as these can in no way be relegated to the category of honest
mistakes. If they had the slightest desire to be objective. the organisers of
this renegade's lectures could have at least glanced at the pages of the London
newspaper BOONWIS‘I‘ (see. for example. the issue of 22 January 197?). which can in
no way be suspected of having sympathies with communism. and they could have read
a report by its Moscow correspondent that "only 1.000 mosques” are functioning in
.5oviet central Asia. Or they could have turned to the materials of the weekly of
the world Islamic Congress. susur. “031.0. in which religious leadersueyewitnesses
from Pakistan-smarked on several occasions that in Tashkent alone more than 10
major mosques are functioning. where on Fridays thousands of believers pray with-
out hindrance. And in the weekly of the Horld Islaaic League was 0!“ ma ISIAhIC
'u'OHLD (3'0 1619 for 17 March 1975) they could have found the following testimony of
the.deputy general secretary of the Horld Islamic League. huhalmed Sawfat Sakka
al-Amini: “The budget of .the Soviet Union's Muslim organisations is fully based
on the "zakat" [aims] and other contributions. I myself have personally observed
that the believers bring their own contributions voluntarily. proceeding from
their own religious convictions.”

ha
roe omen. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

1. (MW, ho 61. Paris, 1976, p 5.

2. Ami-am. Allan, 19 HQ 1976.

3- See u mmw. 8--1u Jun. 1WD p 7.

u. AKH'MR AL-AIN': AL-IswlI. MSCCA. SAUDI ARABIA. 1; April 197?.

5. As a. refugee from bzbekistsn, asylum khsit during the Great Patriotic Her
surrendered to the fascists and became their servant; he organized the punitive
detachents of the 'Esstern Muslin Division" and the Thur Batallion. On his
unclean conscience are the desths of thousands and thousands of our fellow-
countrynen. as well as Czechs. Itslinns. Frenctnen. and create.

Bulletin (No ls) of the Institute of Huslin Hinorities of the King Abdul

Aziz University in Jidds (Saudi nrsbis) presents B. Khsit as a. ‘11th from
’mrkestsn, living at present in west Gmny, where he is engaged in research
on the conditions and status of Huslins in the van."

a. AL-RAID, Lskhnsu. 1389 khidshry, 15 dzhmsdil-swal 1?].

COPYRIGHT: Politizdst. 1980

2384
use. 1830/205

1:3
ms omcw. use ONLY
PROBLEMS, TASKS 0F SOVIET PHILOSOPHY OUTLINKD
Hoscow VOPROSY PILOSOPII in Russian lo l,Jam 82 pp 3-21
[Articlez "For a Close Bond Between Theory and Practice"] ‘

[Excerpts] Research on the dialectical confornities to law of mature socialism
and on the conformities to law of communist construction has especially important
significance for the enrichment.of the theoretical and instructional methods base
of Marxist-Leninist theory and for the practical solution of important problems

in social development. Such research is one of the Iain directions in the work of
Marxist philosophers. - -

Trying to make its oan contribution to the development of these very important
philosophical problems. the journal began a new section,."Today's Urgent Social
and Philosophical Problems in Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress"'
in its fourth (April) issue of 1981. Many important articles, in which urgent
problems in the development of Soviet society and internationa- life were analyzed
and in which vital questionsconcerning social science research in the future were
raised, have been published in this section. In our opinion, the material which
is being planned for this section must reflect the real state of affairs in the
research on this field of philosophy and on the entire totality of today's social
and philosophical problems, including such a very important one as the theory of
a mature socialist society; provide an opportunity to evaluate sensibly the main
trends in the developnent of theoretical thought during recent years; and reveal
"bottle necks" which require the special attention of our social scientists,
especially when analyzing problems connected with the development of production
forces and production reletions,the conformities to law of the formation of
communiem's material technical base, the change in the social structure of Soviet
society, the development of national relations, the improvement of the socialist
way of life, the formation of a socialist type of personality, etc.

deepening and correlation of the scientific and theoretical image of developed
socialism with the existing social reality of mature socialism. Of course, the
theory of scientific communisa is not a hardened and immutable construction which
has been dogmaticslly set once and for all. It is being enriched and developed
by the scientific conclusions regarding the real practices of socialism. This
enrichment does not repudiate the basic statements of Marxist-Leninist teachings

hh
FOR‘OFFK]A[.USE(NVLY
about socialism. However at the same time, the improvement of the theory's
individual components and the incorporation into it of the new constructive ideas
which have been evoked by the deep changes for the better, which are taking place
in socialist society, are a necessary condition for its progressive development.

Of course, this does not assume the creation of some idealized "model " of social-
ism which is separated from life and to which the practical movement of society
supposedly must mechanically conform. lie are talking about the creation of a
theoretical model which would primarily reflect the general and binding features
of a socialist structure and which would at the same time take into consideration
the specific features in the development of individual countries, that is, which
would coincide to the maximum degree with the real development of society and
which would reflect all the complexities and contradictions in its development.
Soviet philosophers in cooperation with representatives of other social disciplines
must insure the maximm possible strictnesa in scientifically forecasting the
course of social processes based on theoretical elaborations, and give appropriate
recommendations to practical workers since the making of the best decisions in the
area of social, economic and cultural construction is possible only on this basis.

The cornerstone of the unity of the Soviet people is their internationalism. Under
the conditions of a multinational state, the Comaist Party has always regarded
the nationality question as one of the vital questions in the construction of a
socialist society. The full equality of nations, the right of nations to self-
determination, the merging of the workers in all nations - this is the way V. I.
Lenin, the founder of our state, understood the essence of our party's nationality
policy. The ,birth and successful development of the voluntary and equal state
union of the Soviet republics is-an example of a fundamentally new and truly just
solution to one of the most complicated questions in the development of human
society. The laeninist nationality policy of the CPSU'has permitted the nations

and nationalities of the USSR, which were liberated from national and- social.
oppression. to construct a path from backwardness to the heights of social and
cultural progress within a relatively short period according to the scale of
history, and to achieve factual equality in all areas of social and spiritual life.
Therefore, in a society of developed socialim internationalism was transformed
from the ideal of a small number of comunists into the deep conviction of millions
of Soviet people and all nations and nationalities. This is truly a revolutionary
transformation in social awareness whose significance it is difficult to over-
estimate.

In 1982, the 60th anniversary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will be
celebrated. This important political event must arouse our philosophers to pay
intense attention to the thorough development of the theory on national relations.
The unity of USSR people is firm today as never before; however. this does not
mean by any means that all the questions in the area of national relations have
already been solved. The dynamism in the development of our multinational state
-- which the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics which unites more than 100
nations and nationalities is, gives birth to quite a few problems of a theoretical
and practical nature, which require the intense attention of our scientists and
practical workers in the construction of socialism. During the 26th congress,

it was pointed out that the trends in the development of national relations and

15
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
in the demographic and migratory processes are leading under the conditions of the
country's single national economic complex, which has taken shape. to a growth in
the proportion of the non-indigenous population in the national republics. This
is playing an ever greater role in the economic, social, political and cultural
life of the national republics. "The fact that the unity of Soviet nations is
today strong as never before. does not at all mean the solution of all questions
in the area of national relations”.* For example. the complicated question of the
social and ethnic signs of a nation remains open to discussion.

In addition. when solving this series of questions which has practical significance,
a retreat from the fundamental principles of the Harxist-Leninist theory on
national relations, attempts to move biological factors to the fore-front when
explaining the peculiar features of national structures and the mutual relations
between people of different "ethos" attempts to replace the objective features

of nations with individual and psychological characteristics, and the unjustified
introduction of biological and medical terms into the content of social theory
cannot be tolerated.

The editors intend to perform a lot of work in publishing materials in a section
entitled"Philosophy - Man - Culture: For the 17th Horld Philosophy Congress".
which is being especially introduced in accordance with the next. the 17th world
Philosophy Congress which will be held in August 1983 in the city of Montreal
(Canada) on the general subject "Philosophy and Culture". In accordance with the
traditions which have taken shape, we will publish here articles by pro-inent
Soviet philosophers and scientists, and we will sum up the results of the work

of the Montreal Congress. I

The Journal attaches a great deal of importance to questions concerning the history
of native culture. Studying the cultural history of the Russian people

and the other peoples of the Soviet Union permits the multi-planning. variety,
exceptional richness. and -- at the same time -- the integrity of the demonstra-
tion of the confornities to the laws of historical develOpment in the diversity

of society's material and spiritual life to be shown more completely; and the
creative and theoretical activity and -- in this regard -- the cultural activity

of society and of individuals, groups and classes to be revealed.

when investigating the problems of man,philosophy cannot ignore the contribution
which such important spheres of social awareness as literature and art make to
the development of this problem since they, on the one hand, exert considerable
influence on the formation of an individual and, on the other hand, are one of
the most important means by which an individual will get to know an image which
is specifically different from science. At the same time, literature and art
contain a large humanistic charge and are a unique method for penetrating into
human individuality. The numerous statements of Marxist-Leninist classical

_______1____.____
'PRAVDA, 18 December 1981

h6
FOR OFFKJAI,USE(NVLY
writers regarding the influence, which literature and art -- especially the works
of outstanding representatives of world literature -- had on their thinking, are
well known. At times, literature and art are capable of revealing deep social
contradictions more sharply than science does this and of directing the attention
of social awareness to the fundamental problems of human existence. Therefore,

the urgent task of philosophical aesthetics is the need for a theoretical under-
standing of present literary and artistic practices. A further strengthening of
philosophy's union with literature and art, especially in the analysis and working
out of the human problem, is required.

New conditions have taken shape during the stage of develqmd socialism which make
the solution of the problem of an individual's thorough development as a person
practically necessary and r- from the point of view of the material prerequisites
--possible. The 26th 0850 Congress.pointed out that the formation of a new
individual must rely on a solid social and economic policy base. In this regard,
the humanism of our society, the goals and policy of our party, and all its
activity are inseparable from the uncompromising struggle against everything that
interferes with the Soviet people living and working quietly and properly. Rely-
ing on the enormous accomplishments and at the same time soberly evaluating
existing difficulties and deficiencies, we must not boil the negative phenomena
in our life down to only "vestiges of the past" in the consciousness of people,
since the deficiencies, whose causes and roots must be searched for in recent
practices or in today's practices, are lost sight of in this case. Thus, the
manifestations of parasitism, graft, embezzlement, stealing. profiteering, infringe-
ments on socialist property, protectionism, covering-up, and violations of the
norms of socialist society, which still exist in our society, cannot be explained
only by the heritage of the past which is preserved in people's consciousness.
They are often the result of arising and existing economic and social imperfections.
Therefore, it is impossible to eradicate negative phenomena only with the help of
moral regulators of a person's conduct and by publicizing communist ideals. In
the struggle against such phenomena it is necessary to use all available economic
and social levers and organizational, financial and legal means.

An important sector in the party's ideological work is the struggle against the
remnants of religion in the consciousness of Soviet people. Scientific atheism,
being an integral feature of socialist social awareness, of a dialectical
materialistic world outlook and of a socialist way of life, is at the same time

a very important condition for the all-round development of an individual. Without
it, the creation of a new culture, which corresponds to the needs and goals of a
socialist organization of society and to the workers' indoctrination in communism,
is impossible. The main task of scientific atheism in the aspect of a specifically
philosophical journal is the critical understanding of religion as a phenomenon

of social consciousness and social life. This has determinedand is determining the
problems which are being raised by the journal VOPROSY PILOSOPII on this question:
studying the reasons and conditions for the origin of religion, the stages in its
development, its present status, and the attempts of religion to improve its role
in the life of society; analyzing the social and cultural mechanism for its

effect on people; critically examining the main propositions of religious dogma;
revealing the essence of the general crisis of religion in the contemporary world;

it?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
using religious forns in liberation and revolutionary novenent; explaining the
reasons for the existence and ways to overcome religious views and vestiges in a
socialist society; critiquing bourgeois religious concepts; etc.

By revealing the bankruptcy of sodern bourgeois ideological concepts, including
religious ones, the journal is trying to show logically the growing role and
influence of Herxist-Leninist philosophy in the spiritual life of mankind, and is
directing the attention of researchers to the need for a thorough scientific
elaboration and Marxist interpretation of the new problens, counterposing a
Harxist point of view to all the attenpts of bourgeois theologists to profit by
the daily needs, difficulties and concerns of people and by the unresolved probless
with which theoretical thought and social practices have been faced by the present
historical developeent. At the sane tine. the journal's work on the probleas of
scientific atheism has certain difficulties connected with the specific nature of
a philosophical journal (the need for a philosophical and not a popular scientific
analysis of the nentioned subjects) and with the insufficient elaboration of
scientific atheisn's sethodological problems which is explained by the shortage
of highly qualified philosopher specialism engaged in the philosophical analysis
of these problems.

Now, as never before. the task of further developing the philosophical. sociologic-
al and psychological aspects of ideological work theory and nethods, of the
scientific bases of its current and long range planning, and of thorough research
connected with the study of public opinion, the effectiveness of various sethods

for ideologically and indoctrinationally influencing the nasses, and the specifics
and capabilities of the mass information media in this process, has becone urgent.
This requires with new force the unification of the efforts of all workers on the
ideological front and the strengthening of the bonds of acedenic scientific
research institutes with ideological and indoctrinational work practices, especially
with the activity of V02 social science departments.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda", "Voprosy filosofii", 1982

8802
C80: 1800/ 303

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
use or oousrnvuxsu m wast ANALYZED
Moscow vopnosr mason: in Russian No 1. Jan 82 pp 1!.7-150

[Article by A. Yu. Hel'vil': "A Critique of Conservatism and the Tasks of the
Present Ideological Struggle"l

[Excerpts] The international scientific colloquium studying the policy and
ideology of conservation, which was held during Hay 1981 in the CD]! in the
Friedrich Schiller University (Jena), made a contribution to" solving the important
and urgent task of critiquing modern conservation. The colloquiun was organised
by the university's Marxist-Leninist departnent and by the scientific council on
the main questions in the ideological struggle between socialism and inperialise
attached to the GDR Academy of Sciences. Scientists fron the-(ml, USSR, Bulgarian
People's Republic, ﬂungarian People's Republic, Polish People's Republic,
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the [’86 took part in the work of the colloq-
uiun. ‘rwo plenary sessions and sessions in four sections were held during which
the problems of the interrelationship of the economic. political and ideological
aspects of conservation; the world outlook and ideological sources and foundations
of modern conservatism; conservative political md ideological concepts and
social theories and the historical traditions of conservatiul were exasined.

During the colloquiun, ten reports were given to the plenary sessions and about

80 presentations to the sections. The theoretical and instructional methods for
studying and critiquing the policy and ideology of present day conservation in

the west and its ideological, theoretical and philosophical sources and traditions
were exaained in the reports and presentations. A comparative analysis of the
features of conservative ideology in the leading countries of nodern day imperial-
isn, especially in the PRC and the United States. was also undertaken.

The report of A. Yu. Mel'vil' (USSR) was devoted to the distinctive features of
the conservative currents in the policy and ideology of the United States. Their
origin and evolution was connected with the inheritance of classical European
conservative traditions, with the dynamics of Anericen liberalism, with its

shift from the liberalism of a free narket and free enterprise to a state-nonopol-
istic, Keynesian liberalisn, and with its subsequent development. In the opinion
of the speaker. the phenomenon of modern Anerican conservation testifies to the
origin of a qualitatively new ideological and political situation which was
caused by the growing ineffectiveness of the traditional liberal nechanises of

state regulation and social policy. A nunber of parallels were also drawn between
the ideologies of nodern conservatiea in the United States and the m.

119
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
a an vn'd'lblﬂb wt. UI‘LI

The adequate understanding of the essence of conservatisn as an ideology and
political orientation also requires the drawing of a clear distinction between
it and the right-wing radical and right-wing extrenist forms of ideology and
policy. According to its own definition, conservatism is the adherence to the
status quo, although the adherents of a conservative orientation can find then-
selves —- when necessary in specific historical situations -- defending their
already objectively lost social positions, turning to the past and demanding
changes in the existing order. On the other hand, those with a right-wing
radical orientation denand a complete break with the present and radical social
changes of a reactionary trend.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo TsK KPSS "Pravda", "Voprosy filoaofii", 1982

8802
C80: 1800/306

So
roe omcm. use on“
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

NATIONAL

RECENT STUDIES ON SOVIET manna CLASS LISTED. DBSCRIBED

[Editorial Report] Rascal: vomsr ISTORII in Russian No 2, February 1982, carries
on pp 3-16 a ”DO-word article by G. A. Sivokhine entitled "Soviet Historiography
on the Uorking Class of the 0881! in the Period of Developed Socialism." The
article's analytic footnotes provide an extensive bibliography of recent Soviet
research and writing on the USSR's working class.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'stvo "Pravda", "Voproey ietorii", 1982

cso: 1800/ 352 m

51
roe omen. us: ONLY