POI OH'K'MI. USE ONLY

JPRS L/10517

14 May 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 14/82]

THE BASMACHI: ORIGIN. ESSENCE. COLLAPSE
by

A.I. Zevolev at al

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
101'!

ms publications contain information priasrily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also fro- news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials iron foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

leadlines, editorial reports, and asterisl enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforution was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
aation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetiully or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. lines within items are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no nay represent the poli-
cies, viewa or attitudes of the 0.8. Govermnent.

COPYRIGl'I' LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNIﬂG WHERSHIP OF
”TERMS REPRODUCED IIEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUEICATION BB RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THE BASHACHI: 0mm; Essence; comma
(2000 14/82)

Moscow BASHACHESWO: vozurmvmm, SUSBCBNOST' , m in Russian
1981 (signed to press 21 Rug 81) pp 1-231, 244-246

[Book by Aleksandr Izrailevich 2evelev, Yuriy Aleksandrovich Polyakav,
and Aleksandr Ivanovich Chugunov entitled "The Basnachi: Origin,
Essence, Collapse', rzdetel'stvo "Ranks“, 10, 000 copies. 2“ pages:
passages enclosed in slantlines printed in italics]

Coureurs
AmuatimOO0.00.00.00.00...0....O'CCOOOIOIOICCOI...COCOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO 1
Introduction .0.00IOOODOOOOODCO......IOUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOCQOCO 1
"For-er slaves Bees-s Free" .......................................... lb

AW"MI.W1“.““. med OOOCOODIOOOOOOOIOOOOOO0.00.00.00.00. 1‘

om of ‘ “a ufe d...OO00..0.00.00.00.00.IOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOO¢OOOO 17
Inperinlist Intervention and Civil War ............................... 2!.
Comterrevolutionsries and Interventionists Unleash Her ........... 26
Fighting Turke.‘an O...O.D0.0...ICOOODOOOOOOOOCOODOCO0.00.00.00.00. 35
Th: B‘mchi Fatwa Front .0Cossoooosseoooescoeonoos0000.00.00.00. ‘1
Areas of Banach! Concentration: Ablyk, "Hatchinskoye Bohetvo" 72
Basnachi of Bukhars and [bores- ................................... 76
Enenies of Peaceful Labor ............................................ 83
Successes and Achievements of the Toilets of Central Asia ......... 83
and of the Perm; name“ Q...O...O‘DOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00...O 87

Bukhsra: The Struggle Continues ................................... 99
FOI‘OFTHC]AI.I£H§(MILY

The aner Pasha Venture ..........................................

The Chieftains Refuse to by Don Their Ann .....................
In the Sands of the Kate Run

A Dying ﬁnely In Dangerous ..................... ....................

Incurnions by Ibrngin-Bek ........................................
Rout of the "Predators of the Desert” ............................

Appendix 00.00000.Ono.0......0.00.00.00.000.00.0000...0000.00.000....

Footnote. cocoon...eeooeoooooeeooooooeeeoo-ooeoooeoooeouooooeeoeoonee

AbbreViations and ACI'WYISQooeovooeoonetaco...ooooooeoooooeeooooeooe
ANNUI'ATION

LText] This book deals with the heroic struggle of the toilers of Central Asia
against the basnachi -- enemies of the revolution and progress and hirelings of
international reaction. The authors trace the stages of this struggle, reveal
the sociopolitical roots of the basnachi. their antipopular essence, and show
that defeat of the basnachi bands constituted a convincing demonstration of the
the triumph of lenin's nationalities policy and promoted further strengthening
of friendship among the peoples of the Soviet Union.

INTRODUCTION

The words "baa-sch" and "has-achestvo" have become historical terns for the peoples
of our country. But people of the older generation, particularly those living in
Central Asia, recall years when these words were repeated with pain and anger, with
hatred and indignation. Contained in these words are years of difficult struggle
against a vicious, dangerous and cruel foe. Contained in these words are the asb;s
of villages burned to the ground, tranpled fields, the crackle of nachinegun

bursts, and rifle shots, thousands of people killed and tortured, hunger, death, and
ruined lives.

The word "basnach" derives from the Turkic verb "basnalt," which neans to pressure,
to oppres , to coerce. For the peoples of Central Asia the tern "has-sch". signifies
brigand, bandit, robber, oppressor. For centuries people who have chosen the

raiding of trade caravans. brigandage and surJer as their "profession" were called
basaschi.

After the October Revolution, when the Uzbek, Tajik, Intknen, Kirghiz, Kazakh, and
Kara-Kalpak working people took power into their on hands, with the assistance

of their Russian brothers, and proceeded to build a new life, the ter- "baa-achestvo"
acquired a quite specific social and political content. Banachestvo becane one of
the most acute forts of class struggle by the overthrown exploiters against the

victorious revolution and dictatorship of the proletariat, against the power of the
working people.

The feudal and clan-tribal elite, the reactionary segment of the Muslin clergy,

and the emerging national bourgeoisie in Central Asia organized and guided the ac-
tions of the bassechi. Besnachi leaders espoused openly counterrevolutionary, anti-
Soviet slogans, setting as their goal the overthrow o f Soviet rule, restoration
in Central Asia of the suprenacy of the exploiters, and detach-eat of Central Asia
froa Soviet Russia. The cause espoused by the bamchi was of a clearly-marked
nationalist character, inciting hatred toward Russians and everything Russian.

At the sane tine they pronoted discord among the various peoples of Central Asia.

Nationalistic propaganda was interwoven with extensive utilization of religious
prejudices.

The basnachi inevitably joined forces with the Russian counterrevolutionaries;

basnachi detachaents established contacts with and conducted joint actions with
Russian White Guardists.

MWLUSEONLY
‘Uls vaapuaoeu ~..... .. .m-

As enemies of the revolution, socialism, and progress, the hasmachi enjoyed the full
support of international imperialism and reactionary elements in neighboring
countries. Camel caravans crossed the border and made their way across mountain
passes and sun-scorched deserts, laden with heavy bales containing rifles, machine
guns, and cases of anunition.

British and American agents, operating on the territory of Afghanistan, Iran, China,
and Turkey, supplied the basmachi with weapons, ammunition, and mney. They took
direct part in organizing and forming basmachi detachments. Basmachi hands, when
defeated in combat, would withdraw across the border and, after resting and
recouperating, would once again invade Soviet soil.

The actions of the hasmachi were accompanied by savage acts of terrorism, which
assued extremely cruel forms. The basmachi bands left behind them a trail of mass
reprisals against the civilian population and savage acts of execution. Thousands
of Comunists and Komsomol members, rural and urban activists, girls who had dared
to cast aside the paranja, and youths who had resolved to learn to read and write
died a martyr's death at the hands of the basmachi.

Burning industrial enterprises and warehouses to the ground, barbaric destruction
of railroad stations, peaceful villages and irrigation works, looting and driving
off livestock -- all this led to a catastrophic decline of productive resources in
Central Asia.

The struggle against the basmachi, which was a part of the civil war - dramatic,
savage and intense -- demanded considerable efforts and sacrifices on the part of
the Soviet people. This struggle is fully entitled to be included among the

heroic pages of our history. It contains a great many examples of courage,
staunchness and military valor on the part of Soviet officers and men, self-sac-
rifice and dedication to the ideas of the revolution on the part of ordinary people
of all nationalities, who were selflessly defending a righteous cause.

Success in the struggle against the basmachi depended not only on victory in combat
but also on the daily activities of the working people of Central Asia, led and
guided by Communists, in building and consolidating Soviet national statehood, con-
sistent implementation of revolutionary socioeconomic measures and a Leninist
nationalities policy, rebuilding and development of the economy, and a rise in the
cultural level of the people.

The activeness of the worker masses of Central Asia, which were overcoming age-old
hackvardness, were becoming liberated from the opiate of religion, were rejecting
the nationalistic slogans of the bai [propa’ty owners in Central Asia] and their
minions, constituted the decisive factor in the ultimate defeat of the basmachi.
The historical experience of the peoples of Central Asia confirms the correctness
of Lenin's thesis that "that people will never be defeated in which the majority of
workers and peasants have recognized, felt and seen that they are defending their
own, Soviet rule -- the rule of the working people, that they are defending that
cause the victory of which will secure for them and their children the opportunity
to make use of all the benefits of culture, all that which has been created by
man's labor."1

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
Standing in opposition to the obscurantism and wild fanaticism of the basmachi was
dedication to the high ideals of socialism and progress; political consciousness
stood in contrast to intellectual darkness and ignorance; countering violence and
cruelty was socialist humanism, which included a desire to assist the wavering and
the erring, as well as proletarian firmness toward implacable enemies.

The friendship of peoples and their fraternal mutual assistance prevailed over the
endeavor to fan the flames of nationalistic passions and to evoke hatred among

working people. The defeat of the basmachi signified total victory of the ideas
of proletarian internationalism.

The struggle against the basmachi constitutes a lengthy historical epic. It lasted
about 15 years, sometimes dying down, and then again flaring up with renewed force.
Beginning in 1917, immediately following the victorious October Revolution, and
reaching a high point during the civil war and the first postwar years, basmachiac-
tivities subsided in the first half of the 1920's. Remnants of basmachi bands.
taking refuge abroad, temporarily ceased their activities.

At the end of the 1920's and beginning of the 1930's, however, basmachi detach-eats,
penetrating our country from abroad and directed by international imperialism, once
again disturbed peaceful labor in a number of areas of Central Asia.

The history of the struggle against the basmachi thus encompasses a considerable
chronological period and includes a large group of problems which are inseparably
linked with the history of consolidation of the socialist revolution, socioeconomic
and cultural reforms in the republics of Central Asia.

To this we must add the following: the enormous diversity of geographic, economic,
historical and other conditions in Turkestan. Bukhara and Khiva led to a situation
where the cause of the basmachi, while containing common counterrevolutionary and

anti-Soviet aims, at the same tine was manifested in a number of localized events,
each of which contained a great many specific features.

The purpose of this study is to investigate the social-class nature of the basmschi
movement, to reveal its true inspirers and organizers, to present the heroic history
of the struggle with the basmachi by the Red Army and the working people of Central
Asia, inspired and unified by the Communist Party, and to present the principal
events in the history of the defeat of the basmachi. The authors, basing their
presentation on the achievements of Soviet historiography in this problem area,

have sought to reflect the generalpatterns.and features of the class struggle,

the distinctive features of its nanifestation i.n the specific conditions of Central
Asia, and to show the fact that the basmachi were historically doomed and the in-
evitability of their final defeat.

For a long period of time the basmachi seemed to represent a specific phenomenon,
characteristic of the special conditions of development of the socialist revolution
in Central Asia. The experience of the 1960's and 1970's, however, hasshownthat
phenomena similar to those of the basmachi have occurred in a number of developing
countries of Asia and Africa in which progressive reforms were being carried out.
Just as the basmachi of the 1920's, inspired and supported by international in-
perialism, they represented desperate opposition on the part of reactionary feudal

3

FOI.0I1ﬂ(1Al.lEﬂE(MNLY
0 ‘1“ V. I Oblhh VII.- Vl‘b.

and clan-tribal elements to any and all progressive measures -- from agrarian reform
to a literacy movement. in spite of all the differences of circumstances of time

and place, one can easily detect that same support ontie pmtof international reaction,
those same social roots, that same exploitation of backwardness and ignorance, that
same religious fanaticism, that same hatred of everything new, those same savage,
barbaric forms of struggle against an activist defending the new system of govern-en;
with the peasant who has proceeded to till the landowner's soil, with the teacher

and the actor, and with the woman who has dared expose her face contrary to age-old
prohibitions....

The struggle of the united forces of international imperialism, Chinese hegemonism
and domestic counterrevolution against progressive reforms in Afghanistan has become
the most vivid manifestation of reactionary activities analogous to those of the
basmschi. It is not surprising that the Afghan oounterrevolutionary bandits, armed
with Chinese assault rifles and U.s.-mads chemical grenades, are often called
basmachi in the press.

ﬁtt

Examining the history of the struggle against the basmachi, the authors drew on
numerOus assessments, conclusions, instructions and theses on Central Asia, con-
tained in the works of V. I. Lenin, his companions-in-arms, and in documents of the
CPSU and the Soviet State.

The Leninist scientific concept of history of the USSR, one component part of which
is the history of the peoples of Central Asia, theses on the logical nature of the
victory of the socialist revolution in the eastern part of our country and on the
paths of transition by the working people of Central Asia from feudalism to social-
ism, bypassing the stage of capitalism, the strategy and tactics of the struggle
for consolidation of Soviet rule in the former colonial outlying regions of Russia,
as well as a Leninist description of the civil war in the USSR, its essence, stages,
character and social significance, as well as the distribution of class forces in
that war, constitute the methodological foundation for investigating the history of
the basmachi.

Lenin's appraisals of prerevolutionary Turkestan are also extremely important for
understanding the essence and class nature of the basmachi. V. l. Lenin sci-
entifically defined the place and position of Turkestan in the structure of czarist
Russia. 0n the basis of synthesis of a vast ammmt of factual material, he came to
the conclusion that Turkestan, just as the southern part and the southeastern part
of European Russia. as well as the Caucasus, had been transformed by imperialism
into a colony of Russian capitalism, that the vassal states of Bukhars and Khiva
were "also akin to colonies."2

V. I. Lenin did not, however, limit himself to this conclusion alone. A study of
numerous materials (literary, statistical, demographic, and others) led him to con-
clude that Turkestam stood at the precapitalist stage in its level of development,
that feudal-patriarchal relations prevailed in the life and affairs of the peoples
of Central Asia.3 At the Second Comintern Congress he stated that the most im-
portant characteristic feature of Turkestan was the fact that "precapitalist
relations still predominate there."‘

IN)! OFIWCJAI.IEHE(NVLV
theoretical audiethoddogical significance in this regard is V. I. Lenin's con-

Following the victory of the socialist revolution, V. I. Lenin consented in a letter
entitled "To the Conunist Comrades of Turkestan," which contained fundanental

All-Russian Congress of Con-unis: Organizations of the Peoples of the East, on the

perience of the first years of Soviet contraction in the national republics, V. I.
Lenin pointed out that "with the assistance of the proletariat of leading countries.
backward countries can Bass to a Soviet systea and, via certain stages of develop-
sent -- to comunisn.” We should particularly stress that Lenin invested broad

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. I. Lenin did not limit himself to theoretical elaboration of the possibility of
building socialism by the peoples of the East. He pointed to political and
economic ways and means of accoaplishing this task.

In order to bypass capitalism in making the transition from feudalism a) socialism,
it is necessary to overthrow the rule of the exploiters, to establish worker-peasant
rule. and to secure the assistance of the prolgtggiat to those countries which are
building socialism, in the economic and cultural advance of their peoples, and
particularly in the building of centers of industry, forming of indigenous
proletarian cadres, cooperative agriculture among the peasantry, and implementation
of a socialist cultural revolution. V. I. Lenin pointed out that in backward
countries there is no need to develop capitalism in order subsequently to liquidate
it.

V. I. Lenin advanced the idea of peasant Soviets, adapted to the precapitalist
structure of society. hhisrqmrt at the Second Comintern Congress (July-August 1920)
V. l. Lenin came to the ingenious conclusion that the peoples of Central Asia, just
as other backward peoples, consisting in their majority of peasants, "can excellent-
ly assimilate the idea of Soviet organization and implement it in a practical
manner." "The idea of a Soviet organization," he continued, "is simple and can be
applicable not only to proletarian but also to peasant feudal and semifeudal rela-
tions."11 V. I. Lenin concretized these ideas at the Eighth All-Russian Congress of
Soviets (December 1920). Discussing the establishment of new Soviet republics -
Bukhsra, Azerbaijan, and Armenian, he noted: "These republics are proof and confirms-
tion of the fact that the ideas and principles of Soviet rule are easily understood

or particular importance for understanding the history of the successes of the
Soviet Government in the struggle against the basmachi were V. I. Lenin's ideas on
the necesstiy of finding "transition stages,” special paths and forms of approach to
previously oppressed masses, of including them in the mainstream of building so-

ue emphasized that one should carefully take into account all the specific features
of development of a given people, the unique traits of a people's way of life,
religion, and customs, that it is necessary to proceed in such a manner that each
and every toiler, even the most backward, perceives socialist tasks as his own
vital concern. In 1921 Lenin reminded the Turkestan Communists of an important

FOR OFFIChkLC£SEiﬂVLY
obligation -- to show regular and maximum concern "for the Muslim poor, their or-
ganization and enlightenment."1‘

Also meriting particular attention is another instruction given by V. I. Lenin to
the Communists of Turkestan in 1919 at the Second All-Russian Congress of Com-
munist Organizations of the Peoples of the East. He recounended that they be
guided "by general Communist theory and practice" and "apply this theory and
practice" to the unique conditions of Central Asia.15 Further developing these
ideas, in 1921 V. i. Lenin called upon the Communists of the republics of the
Soviet East not blindly to copy the tactics employed in the conditions of the
RSFSR but independently to study the reasons for and uniqueness of these tactics
and "to modify them in a thoughtful manner applicable to different concrete condi-
tions."16 "to apply not the letter but the spirit. the sense, the lessons of the
experience of 1917-1921."17

Lenin's legacy contains exceptionally valuable theses on activities of the party and
soviet authorities in Central Asia, which are of fundamental significance for under-
standing the forms and methods of class struggle which developed in the new histori-
cal conditions. Having substantiated the thesis that replacement of precapitalist
with socialist production relations is a difficult process, that it is connected
with the maturing of requisite objective and subjective preconditions, V. l. Lenin
advanced a most important thesis, the essence of which is the fact that there will
occur in the republics of the Soviet East at the initial stage "a slower, more
cautious, more systematic transition to socialism."18 Warning the Communists of
Turkestan about the complexity, difficulty and responsibility of the tasks facing
them,19 in a letter to representatives of the party Central Committee in Turkestan
V. I. Lenin developed his ideas on the specific features of implementation of the
new economic policy in conditions of Turkestan, a policy aimed at strengthening the
alliance between the worker class and the toiling peasantry, and at revival of the
region's economy.20

V. l. Lenin, having laid down the foundation for Marxist investigation of history
of the civil war in Central Asia, showed how one shOuld approach study of the his-
tory of the struggle against the basmachi.

Leninism contains a classic definition of the essence and aims of civil war, the
distribution of opposing class forces in civil war, the forms and methods of
struggle. V. I. Lenin repeatedly addressed the question. In "The Russian Revolu-
tion and Civil War“ (September 1917) he pointed out that civil war “is the most
acute form of class struggle."21 In the course of the class struggle economic and
political battles, repeating, accumulating, expanding, becoming more acute,

reach the point of "transformation of these clashes into a struggle with weapon in
hand by one class against another class.“22

v. i. Lenin appraised the civil war in Central Asia as a component part of the
civil war throughout the cauntry. He stated in a speech at a combined meeting of
the VTsiK [All-Russian Central Executive Committee], Moscow Soviet, Moscow facto-
rv-Plant committees and trade unions on 29 June 1918: "Murmansk in the North, the
Czechoslovak Front in the East, Turkestan, Baku and Astrakhan' in the Southeast --

we see that almost all the links in the ring forged by Anglo-French imperialism are
interconnected."23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘M Ul'l‘lklhl. Dbl. VAL!

Praceeding from his general conception of imperialist intervention,2‘ V. I. Lenin
emphasized that the undisguised British intervention in Turkestan was also a com-
ponent part of the overall imperialist plans to dismember Russia and that im—
perialist conflicts were clashing in Central Asia just as elsewhere. He wrote:

"The hypocritical phrases of Hilson and the Hilsonists about 'democracy' and 'al-
liance of peoples' are laid bare with amazing rapidity when we witness seizure of
the left bank of the Rhine by the French bourgeoisie, the seizure of Turkey (Syria,
Mesopotamia) and part of Russia (Siberia, Arkhangel'sk, Baku, Krasnovodsk, Ashkhabad,
etc) by the French, British and American capitalists - when we see the steadily
growing animosity over division of plundered booty between Italy and France, between
France 32d Great Britain, between Great Britain and America, and between America and
Japan."

V. I. Lenin linked the struggle in Turkestan with the overall aims of the inter-
ventionists and domestic counterrevolution to strangle Soviet rule throughout our
country. He exposed the attempts by international imperialism to transform
Turkcstan into a colony, to detach its peoples from the peoples of the land of the
Soviets.

V. I. lenin substantiated in a scientific manner the causative factors behind the
victory of the working people of the land of the Soviets in the civil war. Lenin
stated at the Second All-Russian Congress of Communist Organizations of the Peoples
of the East: "Revolutionary war, when it genuinely involves and interests the
oppressed worker masses, when it makes them conscious of the fact that they are
struggling against the exploiters... such a revolutionary war generates energy and
the ability to work wonders.“26 V. I. Lenin pointed out that convincing the masses
through their own experience of the correctness and viability of party policy is of
enormous significance for victory in war. He believed that one of the decisive
causative factors in victory over external and domestic counterrevolution in the
former colonial outlying regions was implementation of the principles of proletarian
internationalism and practical implementation of the party's nationalities policy.
In connection with this V. I. Lenin stated: "It is particularly necessary to be
cautious in regard to various nations, for there is nothing worse than a nation's
distrust."27 Appealing directly to the Communists of Turkestan and to the of-
ficials of the RKP(b) Central Committee Turkburo in connection with discussion of
the Turkestan question in the party Central Committee in 1921, V. I. Lenin stated:
"...It is extremely important [to earnlthe trust of the indigenous population; to
earn it 3 and 4 times over: Ito prove/ that we are [not] imperialists, that we shall
/not/ tolerate a [deviation] in that direction."23 V. I. Lenin emphasized that a
correct nationalities policy in Turkestan "is a question of worldwide importance,
worldwide without any exaggeration," and that it would have enormous significance
for our "Heltpolitik."29

or great importance for understanding the content of the party's campaign to resolve
the nationalities question in Central Asia are the RSFSR SNK [Council offhanhb (humus
snsldecree dated 8 October 1919 on establishment of the Turkestan Commission,
signed by V. I. Lenin, and his letter "To the Communist Comrades of Turkestan." 0f
great theoretical and methodological interest is an RKP(b) Central Committee
Politburo draft decree. signed by V. I. Lenin on 22 June 1920, on the tasks of the
Communist Party in Turkestan. Nine days prior to this, on 13 June, V. I. Lenin had
made frank and firm comments on the draft decree, prepared by a Central Committee

FtNICHHNCJAl.lEﬂE(NVLY
conission. They are grounded on the idea of broadening the rights and obligations
of Turkestan soviet and party agencies and all-out enlistnent of the worker masses
of local nationalities in building a Soviet State.30 In particular, the draft
decree provided for equalizing land ownership by Russian settlers and the working
people of local nationalities by expropriating unlawfully seized land from the
kulak-colonialists and expelling colonialist-comterrsvolutionaries froa the
republic.” v. 1. Lenin specified that the activities of the Commist Party of
Turkestan should be directed toward liquidating the colonial and patriarchal-
feudal legacy.

On 29 June 1920 the ma) Central Con-ittee Politburo adopted on the basis of
Lenin's draft decree four decrees on the tasks of the arm) in Turkestan.

V. l. Lenin stressed the enormous international significance of victory in the civil
war in Central Asia. At the Second All-Russian Congress of Comunist Organizations
of the Peoples of the East, he stated: "I believe that the fact that the Red Artsy
has emerged victorious, its struggle and the history of its victory will be of
iuense. worldwide significance for all the peoples of the East."32

Lenin's ideas pertaining to Central Asia provide a methodological foundation for
studying the history of the defeat of the bamchi. Lenin's approach to analysis
of Central Asian realities is an example of rigorous historicity, an objective
and party approach in investigating the history of the class struggle in Central
Asia.

In 1921 V. I. Lenin specifically addressed the question of the basnachi and the
fronts in the Fergana. It is evident from the letter to A. A. Ioffe that he was
requesting detailed materials on the basnachi and the fronts in the Fergans, en-
phasizing that he needed "facts and the precise decisions of the TurkTsIK
[Turkestan Central Executive Connittesl" on these matters.33 Lenin linked

handling the matter of the basaachi with unswerving practical inpleaentation of the
party's nationalities policy; Ieasures pertaining to further struggle with the
basnachi were to be grounded on thoroughly studied facts and materials.

V. I. Lenin's attention toward the basnachi question in a period when the civil
war had already ended in the country's principal regions attests to the fact that
the party and government leader was uintaining an attention focus on this unique
phenomenon of the class struggle and was taking part in elaboration of measures
aimed at crushing the basnachi.

**t

Lenin's scientific conception of the class struggle and dictatorship of the
proletariat. as well as the nationalities question is enbodied and further
developed in the proceedings of Col-unist Party congresses and conferences, and in
the writings of CPSU leaders.

Documents of the 7th (April) All-Russian Conference of the RSDRP(b) [Russian
' Social Democratic Uorkers' Party (of Bolsheviks”, the 7th, 8th, 10th, and 11th

party congresses are particularly valuable in examining the problen of defeating the
basmachi.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rust Us'lsylnn. ya- v..a.s

The 7th (April) All-Russian Conference of the BSD” in 1917 adopted a resolution
written by Lenin, containing the following points of party nationalities policy:
on the right of nations to separation and the advisability of such separation at a
given nonent, on regional autonony and establishnent of unified proletarian or—
ganizations in Russia. The conference pointed out that the advisability of
separation of individual parts of Russia would be determined "completely in—
dependently in each individual case, free the standpoint of the interests of so-
cietal development as a whole and the interests of the class struggle of the
proletariat for socialisn."3‘ "The interests of the worker class," stated the
conference resolutions, "demand nerging of the workers of all the nationalities of
Russia in unified proletarian organizations, political, occupational, cooperative-
educational, etc. Only such a nerging in unified organizations by the workers of
the various nationalities enables the proletariat to wage a victorious struggle
against international capital and bourgeois nationalisn."35

The conference resolutions are fundamental in examining natters connected with the
Struggle against the "Xokand Autonomy" and in settling the question of the party's
struggle against nationalist-deviationists, for ideological-organizational consolida-
tion of its ranks, and for establishnent of a unified Turkestan Communist Party.

The 8th RKP(b) Congress, which adopted the second party program, densnded the fol-
lowing in the area of national relations: "In order to overcone the distrust on the
part of the worker masses in oppressed countries toward the proletariat of the
nations which had been oppressing these countries, it is essential to end any and
all privileges of any ethnic group, to achieve full equality of nations, and to
acknowledge the right of separate statehood to colonies and unequal nations....
The resolutions of the 8th mm Congress indicated that correct resolution of the
peasant and nationalities questions played a prinary role in the struggle against

"36

population.

Proclaining, on the basis of the congress resolutions, firs inplenentation of a
policy of a strong alliance between the proletariat and the niddle peasants, the
Turkestan Communist Party sought to draw the middle-peasant nssses of the mltina-
tional peasantry over to the side of the Soviet authorities and to detach fron

the hasnachi and the counterrevolutionary Cossacks that segment of the niddle
peasantry which had been provoked and incited to turn against the Soviet authorities.

of great inportance for the Turkestan Conunist Party, just as for the entire party,
was the resolution of the 8th Congress on the military question. In the specific
conditions of the initial phase of the civil war in Turkestan, where elements of a
guerrilla movement were particularly strong, and where in sons units the election
of counsnd and political personnel was still being practiced, this congress resolu-
tion signified intensification of the struggle to establish a disciplined regular
army, capable of crushing the interventionists and donestie counterrevolution.

The resolution of the 10th Co tens of the 8120) entitled "0n Current Party Tasks
in the Nationalities Question" 7 and the 12th Congress resolution entitled "0n the

Nationalities Question"38 have direct application to the history of Central Asia.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Of particular importance is that part of the resolution of the 10th RKP(b) Congress
which deals with the degree of capitalist development of the peoples of Central Asia,
the significance of the experience of the socialist revolution for these peoples,
and dealing with federation, and where the congress formulates the party's current
tasks regarding the nationalities question. The 10th Party Congress stressed that
the great achievements of the October Revolution had undermined the old ethnic
hostility, had given the Russian workers the trust of their brothers of different

nationalities, and had "brought this trust to an enthusiasm, to a willingness to
fight for the col-on cause." 9

The 12th mm Congress demonstrated the great importance of the military alliance
of peoples which had been established during the years of the civil war: "The vic-
tory of the Soviets and consolidation of the dictatorship of the proletariat con-
stitute that base, that foundation on which fraternal cooperation of peoples in a
common political union can be built.“0

The resolutions of the 10th and llth party congresses contain a Marxist definition

of the essence of deviations toward great-power chauvinism and local bourgeois na-
tionalism.

V. I. Lenin's letter entitled "0n the Question of Nationalities or on 'Autonomiza-
tion'," sent to the Politburo, was read to the delegations to the 12th Party Con-
gress. Pursuant to Lenin's instructions, a number of fundamentally important
changes and addenda were incorporated into the draft congress resolution on the
nationalities question. Advancing and substantiating the idea of establishment of
the USSR, Lenin appealed for a determined struggle against nationalism and pointed
out that genuine internationalism is tested by how resolutely actual inequality of

peoples is liquidated.

Thus the resolutions of the 10th and 12th party congresses, which took place after

the civil war ended, arm the historian with fundamental theses on root questions
pertaining to the course and results of the civil war.

Frank and firm assessments of the problems with which this book deals are contained
in documents of the Cormunist parties of Turkestan, Bukhara and Khorezm, and of
party executive agencies of the Central Asian republics and Kazakhstan. The tasks
of the struggle against the basmachi at various historical stages were specified
in accountability reports to party congresses and in special reports (for example,
at the Sixth Congress of the KPT [Communist Party of Turkestanl).

*ﬁ‘k

The history of the civil war in Central Asia is dealt with in the writings of V. V.

Kuybyshev, Ya. E. Rudzutak. I. V. Stalin, H. V. Frunze, D. A. Kunayev, and Sh. R.
Rashidov.

Articles by l. V. Stalin entitled ”A Current Task," "To the Soviets and Party 0r-
ganizationa of Turkestan," "Our Tasks in the East," plus certain others, written at
the behest of the RKP(b) Central Committee and RSPSR Narkomnats [People's Commis-
sariat for Nationalities Affairs], specifically formulated party tasks which during

the civil war years were carried out by local party and soviet organizations in
Turkestan.

11

FOI‘OFFK]A1.USE(NVLY
Ivan vs sage-sac vv- shame

Guided by the instructions of the RRP(b) Central Comnittee and V. I. Lenin on the
necessity of developing special methods for the canpaign to consolidate Soviet power
in the East, I. V. Stalin specifiesthreemein tasks: the struggle against vestiges
of colonialism and local bourgeois nationalisn, implementation of the principles of
Soviet autonon¥,and organizational-ideological strengthening of the Turkestan Com-
aunisc Party.“

when they were in Turkestan, H. V. Prunze, V. V. Xuybyshev, and Ya. B. RJudzutak"2
frequently presented reports and gave speeches at meetings of party activists, con-
ferences, and at gatherings of the republic's working people. In addition, they
jointly wrote a number of appeals to the peoples of Central Asia and the servicemen
of Turkestan, which are of considerable interest for understanding the essence of
the basmachi."3

Clearly expressed in the writings of H. V. Prunes, V. V. Kuybyshev and Ya. E.
Rudzutak dealing with Central Asia is the idea that ideological-organizational
strengthening of the Turkestan Communist Party can be achieved only in an uncom-
pro-icing struggle against great-power chauvinism and local bourgeois nationalisn.
The most important task of Turkestan's Bolsheviks in the process of this struggle
should be liquidation of all manifestations of ethnic inequality and extensive
recruitnent of the working people of local nationalities to active participation in
all areas of governmental and cultural-political affairs.

The Red Army came to Central Asia to assist the peoples of Turkestan in their
struggle against the united forces of the White Guardists, basnachi and British
interventionists. It would be able to acconplish its liberation nission if
representatives of the working people of the indigenous nationalities of Central
Asia. which czarisn had in the past not trusted with arms, are recruited into its
ranks. In a report presented at the Fifth Regional Party Conference (January 1920),
V. V. Kuybyshev pointed out that recruitnent of working people of the indigenous
nationalities into the Red Arny was directly linked with the question of national
self-determination. Exposing the great-power chauvinists and local bourgeois
nationalists, H. V. Prunze and V. V. Kuybyshev upheld the internationalist prin-
ciples of building arned forces in Turkeatan.

The struggle against the basnachi could be successful only on the basis of unity
and conbining combat operations by Red Army units with political work among the
Uzbeks and other indigenous nationalities, ained at enlisting then into the active
struggle against the basmachi bands. These ideas were clearly formulated by H. V.
Frunze in his appeal to the working people of the Fergana Valley.44

A most important task of Turkestan's economy was reestablish-eat of the devastated
cotton growing industry. H. V. Frunze. V. V. Kuybyshev, and especially Ya. B.
Rudzutak linked the restoration of cotton growing with the necessity of providing
raw cotton to the textile industry of the RSFSR and of raising the living standards
of the peasants. Ya. B. Rudzutak substantiated Turkestan econonic policy in the
war years in his report at the Fifth Regional Party Conference and in several other
speeches.

Key problens of the history of the peoples of Central Asia are discussed in the
writings of L. I. Brezhnev. The nost important questions pertaining to building a

12

INJR40FIIC1AL lﬂﬂECHVLY
con-unity -— the Soviet people -- are stated and resolved in his reports, speeches
and articles. L. l. Brezhnev pointed cut that in our country the nationalities
question. in the form in which we inherited it fro. the prerevolutionary past, has
been settled completely, finally and irrc‘kvocshly.“5 Vital theoretical problens of
proletarian and socialist internationalisn and problems of strengthening the
friendship among the peoples of the USSR are elaborated in the books of D. A.
Kunayev and Sh. 3. lhsshidov.“6 Their writings also define the directions of

The historical experience of the struggle against the hamchi is discussed in
speeches and writings of party and government officials of Central Asia: K. Atsbayev,
Yu. Akhunbabayev, I. A. Zelenskiy, A. Ikr-ov, I. Ryslmlov, N. hurakulov. P.
Khodzayev, and others."7

13

MWLUSSONLY
'UK UPPILIAL use UNI-I

"Pom SLAVBS 3m me"

A Land where Lawlessness Ruled

Central Asia stretches thousands of kilometers -- fron the Caspian Sea to Lake
Issyk-Kul', fron the Aral and the Kazakh stappes to the Pamirs. 0n the Bast it
borders with China, and on the South with Iran and Afghanistan.

Central Asia contains an amazing diversity of natural. ethnographic. socioeco-
noaic, and historical conditions. Sandy deserts stretching thousands of versts
and majestic ranges of lofty nountains crowned by glaciers.... Lifeless Izalnyrsi
and oases which astound the visitor with a fabulous wealth of flora and fauna....
Swiftly flowing rivers and the mirrored surface of salt lakes.... The whimsical,
intricately-patterned tiles of the beautiful buildings of Samsrhand, Bukhara,
and Khiva, and the monotony of squat duvals, adobe dwellings and impoverished
kishlaks [villages]....

Before the Great October Socialist Revolution the greater pert of Central Asia
was encompassed within Turkestanskiy Kra y.2 with a population of approximate-
ly 5.25 million.3 mrkastan covered an area of approximately 1.0 million
square versta, equal to two thirds of the territory of European Russia. The
territory of Turkestan was larger than that of Germany. Austro-hungary, Italy
and France combined.

This was a multinational region. Uzbehs, Kirghiz, Kasakhs, Turkmens, Tajiks.
and Kara-Kalpaks lived in this region, but no nationality cowrised an over-
whelming majority. Russians, Ukrainians, and representatives of other peoples
of European Russia began settling in Turkestan in the latter half of the 19th
century, chiefly in the cities. by 1917 they cowrised approxinately lo per-
cent of the region's population.

The lands of the Bukhars enirate and the [hive khanate were situated in the
Ann Darya basin, from the Afghan border to the Aral Sea. HhiI-e Turkestsnskiy
K r a y was a component of the Russian eQire, Bukhara and Rhiva were vassal
states, which maintained relative independence in their internal affairs.

Census counts were not taken in Bukhara and Rhiva. It was believed that on the
eve of the revolution approximately 3 nillion persons were living under the
rule of m emir of Bukhara. while the Khiva than M 600-900 thousand subjects.‘

1‘

POIOFHCIALIJSEMLY
At the beginning of the present century Central Asia's industrial centers,
which were few in mmber, had as neighbors areas in which a clan-tribal system
prevailed, and cities a thousand years old contained newly-built railway
stations. Densely-populated valleys alternated with uninhabited mountain
ranges, and centers of ancient agriculture with an elaborate system of irriga-

tion works alternated with barren steppes across which nomadic herdsnen
wandered.

turkestan was a baclavard region. The overwhelming majority of the population

engaged in agriculture. Factory industry was of a typical colonial character.
It was represented chiefly by small enterprises engaged in the primary process-
ing of agricultural raw materials (cotton ginning, oilseed processing, leather

tanning. etc).S Railroad shops and enginehouses began to be built in connec-
tion with railway construction.

Dekhkan peasant far-ere, who comprised the majority of the region's population,
were the victims of double oppression -- by the local bai and the csarist
colonialists. By 1917 64.5 percent of settled farmers owned 2 desyatinas [d-
l.0925b ha] or less, that is, fell within the poor-peasant category. Approxi-
mately 15 percent of the dekhkans had no tillable land at all, and 35.5 percent
had no working livestock. The peasants were becoming impoverished and falling
into servitude to the bai and the usurers.

The overwhelming majority of nomadic herdsnen (almost 3!. percent of all house-
holds) were also living in great penury: 11.2 percent of the nomads possessed
no livestock at all. At the same tine the feudal-bai elite (slightly sore than
3 percent of households) owned 30-60 percent of the stock.

The lot of the energing Central Asian proletariat was not an easy one. Except
for the skilled-labor segnent of the railway workers, the majority of workers
were toiling for pennies and working in the most difficult conditions.6 The

sajority of the railway workers were Russians, while in industry there were 70

representatives of local nationalities (chiefly Usbeks and Tajiks) for every
100 Russians.

working conditions were truly barbaric. llere are two exanples. V. V.
Zaorskaya and K. A. Aleksander. who made a special study of factory-type enter-
prises in Turkestan. wrote that the length of the workday was virtually un-
specified. that people worked fron dawn to dusk.7 In Dace-bet 1909 the news-
paper TURKBSTANSKIY KUR'YBR described a cotton ginning mill as follows: "In the
mill building. in the ginning departnsnt, there is always an incredible

amount of dust in the sit; there are 3-6 hanging-type lanterns with candle
stubs for the entire mill building. and this is considered illunination; as a
consequence workers are forced to grope their way through the darkness through-
out practically the entire mill. holding a bit of cotton wedding in their
teeth to filter the dusty air as they breathe in. Every week there occurs a

worker accident at practically every one of the mills, resulting in serious in-
jury and sonetines death."8

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
OUR Us titans. \ﬂJI- "out

The population of Turkestanskiy Kray lacked elementary political rights.
Czarist officials treated representatives of local nationalities as "aliens,"
as'becond-class citizens," and burdened the. with unbearable taxes.

The cultural backwardness of the population was staggering. The people were
illiterate almost to a man. In the few schools which did exist, classes were
taught primarily in Russian, while Uzbeks, Tajiks, Kirghiz, Turkmens, and
Kazakhs conprised an infinitesimal percentage of those enrolled in school.

There was not even the faintest senblance of a nodern health care systen in the
region. Doctors practiced only in the cities, while in the hishlaks there

was absolutely no medical care in the modern sense of the word. It is not
surprising that the cmmmon diseases of nan were widespread - trachoma,
scabies, malaria, tuberculosis, guinea worms, and favus. Occasionally
epidemics of typhus, smallpox and dysentery would break out.

The despotic medieval states - the Bukhara emirate and the Khiva khanate --
were even more backward in all respects. Time seemed to have come to a stand-
still here. Social and societal relations were of a stagnant feudal character.
In the Bukhara emirate more than 85 percent of land under cultivation belonged
to secular and ecclesiastical feudal lords and emir officials. In the Khiva
khanate almost 95 percent of irrigated land was in their hands. The dekhhan
toiled under the burden of feudal exploitation. Ha surrendered a large part of
his harvest to the enir or khan as a feudal tax, and he bore the burdens of
corvée labor and numerous other obligations. in Bukhsra more than 50 different
types of levies and taxes were exacted from the peasants.

Bureaucrats did not receive a regular salary. All officials -- from provincial
governors (khakims and beks) to the lowlieet copy clerk (mites) -- lived off '
the general public. Coercion, despotism, extortion and bribery reached
enormous dinensions under such a system. This barbaric system was based on the
despotic rule of the emir and khan, a rule of frightening and ruthless power.

People were subjected to public execution in the cruelest forms for the slight-
est offense. not u>uention disobedience: offenders would be cast down from
high minarets on.to stone slabs, or hung on hooks. Thousands of prisoners
languished in underground prisons - zindsns - swarming with poisonous snakes
and scorpions. Cutting off the tongue was a common punishment.

Outstanding Soviet writer and scholar Sadriddin Ayni, who spent his youth in
Bukhara, portrays a public punish-eat on Bukhara's Registan. He relates how
courtiers of the enir centered out onto the crowded square by the Palace of the
Emits. "The horsemen were all asparkle in their silken, gold-cloth and satin
gowns, belts studded with gold and silver disks and coins. Daggers in gold or
silver sheaths swayed froa their belts." Grooms running alongside the stirrups
pushed aside the common people in their threadbare gowns and drove back the
beggars. "Covered with favus scabs and ashes from head to foot," the beggars
were without trousers or shirts - "a rope girdled their waist, holding a

tattered rag in place of a frontpiece, while a dirty, torn gown hung fron
their shoulders....”

16

FOIICINNCIAI.US£1MNLY
The commander of the guard -- "prince of the night" - called for the "execu-
tors of the emir's wrath" -- the executioners. A prisoner was led out. His
hands were tied behind his back. The executioners ripped off the prisoner’s
gown and proceeded to beat his bare back with cornel-wood sticks. "At each blow
skin would adhere to the stick, and blood would spatter out from the wound in

all directions. After the 75th lash... the persons holding the prisoner flung
his battered body onto the ground...."

The condemned man's hands were bound in front of him. The prisoner was led

up to a pit in the ground. "One of the executioners, brandishing a small
cudgel, approached him in a leisurely and businesslike manner. Swinging his
cudgel, he struck the prisoner in the shins. The prioner fell face down into
the black clay. The executioner grabbed him by the beard and forced his head
into the clay. The second executioner drew from a sheath a shortish knife with
a narrow blade. After dispatching the prisoner, he wiped the blade clean on
the condemned man's gown and returned it to its sheath."

Standing behind the glass door of the Ark (palace), the emir was observing the
execution.9

The peoples of Central Asia had no national statehood. They were administra-
tively disunited. A portion of the Uzbeks, Tajiks, and Turkmenswere residents of
Turkcstanskiy Kray, others were subjectsof the Bukhara enirate, and still
others - of the Khiva khanate.

The czarist government preserved and promoted disunification of the peoples of
Central Asia and sought to keep then in darkness and ignorance. The Muslim
clergy was enormously influential. Religious traditions and medieval customs,
passed on from generation to generation, had taken deep root in the masses.
Women were relegated to the status of slaves and had no rights whatsoever.

The paranja -- a black robe which fully covered the face - was a symbol of the
status of women in those years. A Muslim woman not wearing the paranja was un-
thinkable in prerevolutionary times....

Dawn of a New Life

Double oppression -- national and social - made life unbearable for the work-
ing people of Central Asia. Conditions in the region were becoming ripe for
a revolutionary, liberation struggle.

There was only one road to national and social liberation. This was the road
of socialist revolution, under the guidance of Russia's worker class and its
party, the Communist Party. But the Russian proletariat could carry out its
historic mission, overthrow the rule of czarisa and the bourgeoisie, only in
alliance with the toiling peasantry and the multimillion masses of oppressed
nationalities. In such a country as Russia, revolution inevitably had to in-

volve the working people of all nationalities. Without this it could not
count on success.

Therefore V. I. Lenin, preparing the party for a determined assault on capital-
ism, tirelessly stressed the necessity of an alliance between the revolutionary

17

FOR‘OFIICIAI.USII(HVLY
lvn val-sane; yum v.0us

proletariat and enslaved peoples. "...He asst [link] the revolutionary
struggle for socialism with a revolutionary progra- on the nationalities
question,"10 he wrote in 1915.

The situation in Turkestan worsened sharply during the years of world Her I.

From 1915 through 1917 land under crops shrank by alnost a nillion desyatines.

In 1917 the gross harvested cotton crop totaled 7,845,000 poods as conpared

with 14,900,000 in 1916 and 20,513,000 in 1915.11 Prices on manufactured goods at!
foodstuffs jumped sharply.

when the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia took place in February 1917
and the stronghold of the autocracy fell, the Co-unist Party appealed to all
working people to continue the struggle. The workers of Russia, heeding
Lenin's appeal and setting a course toward socialist revolution, were strength-
ening the alliance with the oppressed peoples of the outlying regions, who were
beginning to realise that theirs was a couon path with the Russian workers and
peasants - the path of struggle, both against the Russian inperialist
bourgeoisie and against "their own" counterrevolution.

A great many facts attested to the growing unity of the working people of the
various nationalities throughout the country, a unity under the red banner.
This process also enveloped Central Asia.

Here are sole exasples. He are in Tashkent, on 1 Hay 1917. The working

people are celebrating their holiday. Throughout the city work comes to shalt,
comercial establishments close down, and streetcars grind to a halt. Deann-
strators -- Russian workers - take to the streets. But they are not alone.
The Uzbek working people have also joined the May Day demonstration! The
colums of denonstrators merge, marching together through the city; joint
political rallies are held, at which both Russians and Usheks speak.

A revolutionary political rally is held in the Kasakh village of lierke, in
Auliye-Atinskiy Uyezd. A person who was present at that rally relates: "...A
throng of Muslims appeared in the distance... led by red flags hearing freedom
slogans.. .. The Russian populace proceeded toward then and, when both groups
case to a halt, the scene was so noving that tears of joy poured free the eyes
of many; freedon songs rang out on both sides, after which their (the par-
ticipants in the demonstration) aspirations were proclained with shouts of
'hurrah' ."12

The Provisional Government -- a worthy successor to czarism -- refused the
peoples equality. The nenes of the administrative agencies in Turkestan
changed, but the working people did not receive any rights. The Turkestan
Oouittee, an agency of the Provisional Government which replaced the governor
general's administration, continued a policy of national oppression.

The masses saw as the only answer an increasingly more vigorous struggle
against national-colonial oppression. for freedos and equality.

The national bourgeoisie stood as an obstacle on the path of the liberation
novelsent of peoples. Bourgeois nationalists sought to seize control of the

18

FOIOI'I’ICMLUSEONIN
movement. They wanted peoples to be isolated and set apart; they greatly
feared establishment of unity between "their" working people and the Russian
proletariat. Seeking to perpetuate the exploitsr systen, they hated the
revolution. This hatred was leading then to forn a de facto alliance with the
great-power Russian bourgeoisie and was nudging then toward a deal with it.

The Central Council in the Ukraine,'Shura-i-Islsn" and "Shura-i-Ulena" in
Central Asia, "Alash" in Kazakhstan, the Dashnaks, followers of the Husavat,
and Georgian Hensheviks, under the cover of the "national flag," fought
desperately against the revolution and betrayed the interests of their peoples.
They claimed to support national equality, however, and made every effort to
demonstrate their allegiance to the ideas of freedom and equality. At first
the bourgeois nationalists succeeded in gaining the support of a certain part
of the population in the national regions, including in Central Asia.

The Bolsheviks of Russia stepped up their activities among the oppressed
peoples, uniting then under the slogan of proletarian internstionalisn, and

arousing then to struggle against the Russian and local exploiters, for na-
tional and social liberation.

The struggle of Russia's worke' -isss was crowned with a great victory. Power
went into the hands of the working people on 25 October (7 November) 1917.

The Great October Socialist Revolution became a revolution for all the peoples
of Russia. Participants at the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets, which
proclaimed Soviet rule, included representatives of the overwhelming majority
of gubernias and cities, as well as envoys of the principal national regions.
Delegates from the Ukraine and Belorussia, Revel and Dvinsk, Baku and Tiflis,
Tashkent and Kazan', Izhevsk and Saransk, together with delegates from
Petrograd, Moscow, the Urals, and Siberia, convening in the white-columned
hall at Smol'nyy, in free declaration of their wishes, ushered in a new era

in the history of mankind.

The storm of revolution smashed the chains which had fettered the peoples of
Russia. The inortal lines of the Peace Decree and the Land Decree were
followed by the loving words of the Declaration of Rights of the Peoples of
Russia. The liberation of the peoples of Russia fron bondage "shall be carried
out resolutely and irrevocably," the declaration stated. Pour terse points in
the declaration embodied the dreams of peoples:

"1) Equality and sovereignty of the peoples of Russia.

2) The right of the peoples of Russia to free self-detersination, in-
cluding separation and formation of an independent state.

3) Abolition of any and all national and ethnic-religious linitations
and restrictions.

6) Free development of the national minorities and ethnic groups in-
habiting the territory of Russia."13

19

FOR 0I1NCJAL USE¢NVLY
‘0‘ VA Cabana. vase. VI‘U‘

Millions of people who until recently had been deprived of all rights ap-
peared before the world as fighters and builders. inspired by the Bolshevik
truth. awakened to a new life. realizing that national equality is inseparably
linked with social liberation. Ruling nations and oppressed nations had ceased
to exist in Russia.

The socialist revolution gained victory conparatively rapidly in the najority
of areas of Central Asia.

Following the example of the Petrograd workers. revolutionary sailors and
soldiers, the working people of Central Asia, led by the Bolsheviks, took power
into their own hands. At dawn on 28 October 1917, whistles blowing at Tashkentb
railway shops announced the beginning of an arned uprising against the
Provisional Govern-eat. 'l'he counterrevolutionary troops of General Korovichenko
were defeated after four days of pitched battle. Soviet rule was proclaimed in
the main city of Turkestanskiy Kray -— Tashkent.

The Soviets seized power slnost sinultaneously in a mist of other towns --
Kushka, Krasnovodsk, Iernez, etc. In the course of the next few weeks Soviet
pWer gained victory in Dshizak and Sansrksnd, Merv and Charjui, and sub-
sequently in the cities and towns of the Pergana Valley.

Russians and Usbeks, ‘l‘urknens and Tajiks. Kazakhs and Kirghiz worked shoulder to
shoulder in the struggle for establishment of Soviet rule. Uzbeks -- railway
workers, tramway workers, etc - fought selflessly against the counterrevolu-
tion in Tashkent. "The workers of Tashtran, Russians and Usbeks," recalled
Shaaurza Khalnukhmdov, a participant in the uprising. who was working at the
tine as a streetcar conductor. ‘rose up as one against the bourgeois Provisional
Goverrnentﬂd‘ At the decisive mnent in the ‘l'aahkent arnsd uprising, arsed
Uzbek volunteers fought their way out of the old city and case to the aid of
the workers who were fighting off fierce ene-y attacks on the railway shops.

The thoughts and feelings of the working people were expressed by a resolution
issued by the workers of an industrial enterprise, adopted in Decesber 1917.
"We, Muslin workers at the Khodshayev Plant," the resolution stated. "have unan-
incusl y resolved to support by all the scans in our possession the worker
governaent -- the Soviet of Soldiers' and Workers' Deputies -- and we extend to
it a fraternal calloused hand which has been exploited for sore than 50 years
b', the kulaks. bai and governnent officials - henchmen of Nicholas II. we
extend a hand to the Russian proletariat, whoa we benightsd Malina view as the
true defender of the worker and toilet class, which has liberated us free the
government official's whip and the bai's fist. He narch shoulder to shoulder
with the Russian proletariat and protest against attemts by the bourgeoisie to
disunite us.... lvle understand quite well who is our friend. and who is our
foe, and we shall not swallow the bait offered by the servitors of the old
regine."1s

By the spring of 1918 the red banner of Soviet rule was waving over the
principal areas of Central Asia -- frol Kushka to the Aral Sea, fron the Pergana to
the Caspian.

20

”MANNY
The exploiters were still in power, however, in the Bukhara enirste and the

Khiva khanate. The masses there were not yet adequately prepared to assault the
old regise. They finally achieved victory in 1920.

The dawn of a new life was beginning on the territory of Soviet Turkestan. In
November 1917 the 3dﬂegknal Congress of Soviets elected a Turkestan regional
council of people's commissars. Soviets began gradually appearing in

rural localities as well -- volost', kishlak, and aul soviets. Historic docu-
ments of Soviet power were published in the local press -- Lenin's peace and
land decrees, the declaration of rights of the peoples of Russia. and the ap-
peal "To All Muslim Toilers* of Russia and the East." The Turkestan Sovnarkom
[Council of People's Commissars] endeavored to be guided in its activities by
these documents. It informed Petrogrsd that it was setting for itself the task
of implementing the decrees of the Soviet Government.

The Fifth Congress of Soviets of Turkestan (20 April-1 Hay 1918) proclaimed an
autonomous Soviet republic.

"l. The territory of Turkestanskiy Kr'ay," stated the document adopted
at the Congress, "is hereby declared to be the Turkeatan Soviet Republic of the
Russian Soviet Federation. The Turkestan Republic shall include the entire

land of Turkestan within its geographic boundaries, excluding Khiva and
Bukhara....

2. The Turkestan Soviet Federative Republic, while governing itself

autonomously, recognizes and shall coordinate its actions with the central
government of the Russian Soviet Federation."16

Soviet authorities in Turkestan nationalized industrial enterprises, establish—
ing a socialist structure within the economic systen. An 8-hour workday was
immediately adopted. New laws were promulgated in the area of social in-
aurance and labor protection, new courts were established, and measures were
taken to organize free medical care and establish a systen of public education.

Hark began on building up productive resources and developing the economy. On
17 Hay 1918 V. I. Lenin signed the RSFSR Sovnarkon decree entitled "0n Alloca-

tion of 50 Million Rubles for Irrigation Projects in Turkestan and Organization
of These Projects."17

Socialist construction was taking place more and more extensive in the cities,
towns, communities, and kishlaks of Central Asia, involving millions of working
people. A bright future lay ahead for these masses, who had until quite recent-
ly been downtrodden and deprived of rights. For the first time in history they

had the opportunity to build a new life, to build with their own hands, to
build for themselves.

:—Th8ed here and henceforth to render the Russian tern trudysshchiyesya, which

extends to peasants and other "workers" to when the term rabochiy, "worker,"
does not apply.]

21

FORIOFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
run UrnLIAI. hat. "no.1

Following the October Revolution V. I. Lenin advanced the task of "raising up
the lowest strata of society to take part in a historic building process."18
This task was being successfully accomplished throughout the country, including
in Central Asia.

The "lowest strata" -- toiling Uzbeka, Tajiks, Kirghiz, Thrkmens,Kazakhs, and
Kara-Kalpaks -- proceeded with building a new life, shOulder to shoulder
with the workers and peasants of the entire country. They boldly joined the
tanks of fighters for socialism and welcomed the victorious revolution.

Their mood was expressed by Sadriddin Ayni in the famous "Freedom March":

0 slaves! Rise up from the dust,

Illuminating the world with the Red Banner!

Cast down the yoke of submissiveneas and fear -
The d:wn of freedom has broken.

We shall scatter dejection and grief,

We shall dissipate falsehood as smoke,

Through the boundless expanses of the entire world
We shall establish justice forever.19

His words were seconded in the far-off Pamirs by one of the few inhabitants who
knew how to read and write, Hukhabbat Shakh-zade, in a poem dedicated to the es-
tablishment of Soviet rule in mountainous Badakhshan:

...Pormer slaves have become free,
The weary have straightened their shouldersé
The traces of sorrow are filling with dust. 0

The socialist revolution in Turkestan was a component part of the socialist
revolution in Russia. The Communist Party was able to create an alliance of
working people (for the most part peasants) of different nationalities with the
Russian worker class. New opportunities, unprecedented in history, opened up
for the peoples of Central Asia -- to transition to socialism, bypassing the
capitalist stage of development.

Due to a number of historical and economic conditions, however, the socialist
revolution and the building of socialism encountered additional, specific dif-
ficulties in Central Asia.

The camp which was hostile to Soviet rule contained, alongside Russian factory
owners and bankers, local exploiter strata: feudal lords, bai, the bourgeoisie,
the reactionary Muslim clergy and their nationalistic counterrevolutionary
parties ("Shura-i-Islam," "Alash," and others). Soviet rule was op-

posed by representatives of the kulak-colonialist elite and the colonial ad-
ainistrative edifice. The officer and kulak stratum within the Cossacks
(Scmirech'ye, Orenburg, Aral) also sought to destroy the achievements of the
revolution. The former exploiter classes -- Russian and local indigenous --
proceeded to form a united alliance, in spite of the fact of certain con-
flicts between them.

22

IIHI(IWHCJA1.USE(NNLY
Although Soviet rule had removed the underpinnings of ethnic hostility,
czarian and the Great-Russian baurgeoisie had left in ‘Durkestan "a darkness of
aninosity toward and distrust of the Great Russians."21 This distrust, which
had been taking root for decades and which had been rekindled hy nationalists
after the October Revolution, could not be eliainated inediately. Counter-
revolutionaries nade use of it for the struggle against Soviet rule.

One must also hear in aind the fact that the leftist Socialist Revolutionary
Party. which shared agencies of Soviet authority in the mrkestan Republic on
a parity basis with the Bolsheviks, utilized for their own purposes the in-

adequate ideological and organizational conditioning of the Bolshevik organiza-
tions of Turkestan.

while in the central parts of the country the left Socialist Revolutionaries
remained in executive Soviet agencies only up to the Treaty of Brest Litovsk.
in Turkestan, as a consequence of their influence on a certain segaent of the
workers, not to mention the pstit-bourgeois strata of the population, they
participated in the activities of the Soviets during the entire year 1918 and
at the beginning of 1919. The left Socialist Revolutionaries, sonetiaes
openly. but for the nost part covertly, assisted the class eneuy in the
struggle against the dictatorship of the proletariat.

The dominance of feudal and patriarchal-clan relations inpeded class differen-
tiation and growth of class consciousness on the part of the working peep)“.
To this was added the econonic backwardness of the region, the stall nunbt s

and weakness of the national proletariat, the doainance of the Huslin religion,
and enormous cultural backwardness.

It was more difficult to establish an alliance between the proletariat and the
peasantry of other nationalities than with the peasantry of the sale nationali-
ty. It was sore difficult for backward peoples, which had not gone through

the stage of capitalist develop-eat, to procud toward socialise than for
developed peoples.

All this could not halt the advance of the revolution, but it nade the
struggle for victory aore lengthy, cowlex, and intense.

23

5‘0! OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
swan val-~59... Uht- - ‘-

IHPERIALIST INTERVBNTION All!) CIVIL WAR

Counterrevolutionariee and Interventionists Unleash War

The socialist revolution took place with the support and active participation
of the overwhelning najority of the population of Russia. but the classes and
social strata which had previously been in power proceeded to engage in a
tenacious struggle against the victorious revolution. These were landowners
and capitalists, as well as a substantial sag-ant of csarist officialdoa and
the officer corps.

Over the course of a century csarisn created unique, privileged military
cadres - Cossack troops. Very large in nu-ber, they settled over a vast ter-
ritory (on the Don, in the Northern Caucasus, Southern Urals. in Se-irech'ye,
in Siberia and the Far East). Of course a sharp sociopolitical stratification
was also taking place along the Cossacks - the toiling Cossacks took the side
of the revolution, but the Cossach leadership elite initially succeeded in
leading a certain segnent of the toiling Cossacks against Soviet rule.

The higher clergy opposed the revolution -- Orthodox, Catholic. and Muslin -
as did the feudal and senifeudel circles in the national outlying regions.

Finally, the rural bourgeoisie - the kulaks - also took an openly anti-Soviet
position.

The Second Congress of Soviets had barely ended when fighting began on the ap-
proaches to the revolutionary capital. Parser prenier Kereneky, fleeing
Petrograd. fonented an insurrection. Together with General Krasnov. he
gathered together several dlitary units and proceeded to such. with the ob-
jective of "pacifying" the victorious workers and peasants. The troops of
Kerenski and Krasnov got as far as the close approaches to Petrograd. but they
were defeated and thrown back by revolutionary workers, sailors, and soldiers.

During the first half of 1918 nunsrous counterrevolutionary underground organiza-
tions plotted conspiracies, insurrectiona, sabotage, terrorist acts, and en-
gaged in anti-Soviet propaganda. The enenies of the Soviet Republic were work-
ing energetically to for. military forces. The so-called Volunteer Arty was
organized in the northern Caucasus, asde up of officers supporting the anarchy.
It was headed by crarist generals H. V. Alekeeyev, L. C. Kornilov, and

26

“WWO!!!”
A. I. Denikin. Anti-Soviet detachments were forned in Cossack-settlement
areas. '

Swift crushing of the first attempts by the counterrevolution to unleash a
civil war (the rout of Rerensky-Rrasnov at Petrograd, Dutov in the Southern
Urals, and Kaledin on the Don) convincingly demonstrated that the Soviet
authorities, supported by the overwhelming majority of the population, pos-
sessed immeasurable superiority over the forces of counterrevolution.

Nevertheless armed resistance by counterrevolutionaries did not cease. This
was due to the fact that the capitalist nations, engaging in an anti-Soviet
intervention. were opposing the Soviet Republic. The Kingdom of Romania oc-
cupied Bessarabia. British, Japanese, and 0.5. interventionist troops were
put ashore in the Soviet North (Murmansk, Arkhangel'sk) and in the Far East
(Vladivostok). At the end of May 1918 the Czechoslovak corps mutinied on the
Middle Volga and in Siberia. Operating jointly with Russian counterrevolu-
tionary forces, the White Czechs captured a number of cities and towns along
the Volga and in Siberia, overthrowing Soviet rule there.

The interventionists established a regime of terror in the occupied regions.
Communists, Soviet and trade union officials were thrown into jails, concen-
tration camps, and shot.

Fourteen nations of Europe, North America and Asia took part in the anti-
Soviet intervention. A principal role was played by the major capitalist
powers -- the United States, Great Britain, France, and Japan. And although
during the year following the October Revolution the capitalist world was
split by the continuing war between the Entente on the one hand and Germany
and its allies on the other, the groupings of belligerents were warring
against the Soviet Republic. Ger-an and Austro-Rungerian occupation of vast
areas of Russia interwove with the Anglo-French-Jspanese-Amsrican interven-
tion.

All land and sea lines of communication between Russia and the outside world
were cut. The imperialists established an almost total blockade of the
Soviet Republic. The interventionists united with the “bite Guardist counter-
revolutionary forces. They supplied them with money and ares and conducted
joint military operations.

By the middle of 1918, when the intervention by the Entente and white Guard
actions began to be conducted on a large scale, the brief respite period of
peace received after the Treaty of Brest Lioovsk came to an end. The Soviet
Republic found itself drawn into a war against a foreign invasion and domestic
caunterrevolution. The fate of the peoples of Russia depended on whether the
Soviet Government would be able to fight off the onslaught of its enemies and
defend the cause of the revolution.

The flames of the war forced upon us by the imperialists blazed throughout the
country. A fierce struggle against the interventionists and White Guardists
was raging in the North and South. in the Heat and East.

25

FOR OFFIJAI.US£(NVLY
a use vs a swans. HUI— ones!

In the summer and fall of 1918 the "Volunteer" Army seized a large part of the
Northern Caucasus. Generals Krasnov and Hamontov fomented a Cossack insurrec-
tion, occupied nonskaya Oblsst. and proceeded to advance on Tsaritsyn and
Voronth. The Czechoslovak mutineers and White Guardists occupied the whole of
Siberia and a number of cities along the Volga - Samara, Simbirsk, and Kasan'.
The young republic was surrounded by a flaming ring of battle fronts. The red
banner of the Soviets now flew only over the cooperatively small territory of
Central Russia.

The Soviet State was being put to a severe test. "The greatest honor and
greatest difficulty of being the first socialist detachment in the struggle
against world imperialisn fell to our lot,"1 stated v. 1. Lenin in July 1918.

The situation in Turkestan was particularly difficult. That region's econoaic
backwardness and the specific features of the sociopolitical conditions, which

have been discussed above. nade the resistance of the exploiters extremely
fierce. '

Anglo-American imperialisa dearly wished to see the overthrow of Soviet rule
in Turkestan.

Central Asia attracted the foreign imperialists for the sane reason that any
colonialist casts a covetous eye on foreign soil -- ainerals and agricultural
raw materials (primarily cotton), cheap labor, the region's strategic position,
etc.

To understand the role of the Anglo-American imperialists in unleashing civil
war in Central Asia and in organising the basmachi, we might drew attention to
certain facts fro. the history of their penetration into this region. This
penetration followed the classic scheme. First there appeared in Central Asia
"specialists" in "study" of the culture, ways and customs of the "natives,"
instructors in processing of cotton, developaent of livestock raising. con-
sultants in geological prospecting and railway route surveying. archeology,
etc, as well as journalists and tourists. They would collect and process in-
fornation of an economic, political and military character and would send the
collected data on to their masters, who were generously financing their cul-
tural-educational and philanthropic cover activities.

In addition to "Kulturtraeger," Turkestan attracted businessmen and
entrepreneurs, as well as diplomatic officials. who sought to establish ex-
tensive contacts with the colonial administrative authorities. the owners of
cotton plantations and cotton ginning mills. and the owners of coal nines and
oil wells. It was they who sounded out the ground for obtaining oil con-
cessions. contracts for building railroads, constructing irrigation projects.
etc. And finally, at the end of the last century and the beginning of the
present century, the first foreign commercial and industrial firms began to
appear in Central Asia.

0.5. and British capital sought with particular persistence to get a foothold
in the pearl of the region -- the Pergana Valley. American and British com-
panies obtained stock in the principal business activities in the Pergana

26

IIHICHﬂﬂClAl.lElE(HULY
Valley. In 1909, for example. the Hoover and Urquhart oil companies purchased

the Haylisay oilfield from Russian entrepreneurs and established the "Pergana
Oil Company."

An American by the name of Hilliam Hay, who settled in Andizhan in 1912, was in-
volved in the Pergana ”Turkestan Trade-Industrial Coepany." At his initiative
the company established direct contacts with 0.3. industrialistsﬂ the 0.3.-
owned Vacuum Oil Company established a warehouse in Rokand; the Santa Petroleua
and Trade Cbmpany, established in 1898 in Ferganskaya Oblaat. was financed by
the Russian General Petroleum Corporation, established in London and operating
under British laws; the Chimion Petroleum and Mining Conpany, established in
1905, was also connected with British capital. Two thirds of the fixed

capital of the Central Asian Kyzyl-Kiya Coal Company belonged to the Saint

Petersburg International Colmercial Bank, which had ties with British. French.
and German capital.‘

Shortly before Horld War I, a branch of the Singer Company was opened in Russia,
with 50 million rubles of stock capital. This company maintained representa-
tives, warehouses and stores in almost all the cities and towns of Turkestan.
The conclusion that "the Singer Company's entire vast agent network in
Turkestan did not deal so much in selling sewing machines as in espionage ac-
tivities: the company's agents collected information on the type of occupa-
tions of the population, on the condition of the roads, on the size of crops
and livestock herds. on industry and trade"5 is quite valid.

Establishment of an extensive network of banks in underdeveloped countries
played a special role in the economic expansionism of the 0.8. imperialists.
One of the largest banks in Central Asia - the Russo-Asian Bank (established
in 1910. a successor to the former Russo-Chinese Bank. established in 1896),
was closely linked with 0.8. financial capital (especially with (Vanderlip) and
Hoover); branches were opened in Tashkent. Samarkand, lokand, Andirhan.
Hargilan, Naaangan. Bukhara, Novyy Urgench, Ashkhabad, Merv. and Kerki. These
branch banks contnﬂkd the activities of practically all the cotton plantation
owners. The bank acQuired a large part of the stock of the Kokand-hamangan
and Tokmak railroads, the Russian Petroleum Company. the Rokand Electric Com-
pany. and the Central Asian Oil Company.6 It was also involved in railroad
construction. in particular construction of the Andishan-Osh line. Construc-
tion of the Fergana Railroad, which took place during World Var I. was sub-
sidized to a considerable degree by 0.8. capital.

Following the victory of the October Revolution, the iaperialists refused to
abandon their plans of colonial enslavement of Central Asia. They ‘Bre aware of
Turkestan's strategic and geographic position. The fact that the region ad-
joined Afghanistan, Persia, China, and India as well as its revolutionizing in-
fluence on the peoples cfthese countries could not help but concern the Anglo-
Amcrican colonialista. Closely contiguous to the enslaved East and containing
potential resources for the struggle against imperialism. Turkestan was a
bridge. as it were, linking Soviet Russia to the colonial countries. It was
awakening and calling on oppressed peoples to engage in a resolute struggle
against colonialism. and through its own experience confirmed the necessity and
possibility of destroying this scourge of mankind.

27

FOI!OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
a use vs. eke-IQ. sou—- Vl‘hb

The isperialists' anxiety increased in connection with the first successes
achieved by the young Turkestsn Republic in building socialisn and col-ence-
nent of accoaplishing the tasks, advanced by the 00-min Party, of transfora-
ing Turkestan into a node] republic, into a beacon of socialisn in the East.
The consolidation of Soviet power was a deadly threat to the doaination of
ilperialisn in Asia. The inperialists were hoping that, by strangling Soviet
rule in Turkestsn, they would protect their colonies froa Russia's revolution-
izing influence.

In conditions of the co-encing civil war Turhestan was also needed by the
iaperialists as a bridgehead enabling thee to establish a continuous front of
intervention and counterrevolution in the southern, southeastern, and eastern
parts of Russia. They figured that arsed opposition activities in Turkeetan
would force the Soviet Governnent to deploy considerable ailitary forces into
the region, thus weakening the decisive fronts of the Soviet Republic. The
close proximity of the nation's borders enabled the inerialist forces to

carry out a direct sued incursion, to conduct aggressive subversive activities,
and to offer every assistance to the counterrevolution.

The basaschi becsne the shock force of the counterrevolution in the anti-Soviet
struggle which developed in Turhestan.

Near the end of Rove-her 1917 Central Asian counterrevolutionaries - Russian
and local capitalists, aerchants, usurers, feudal lords, the ﬂuslis clergy, and
and nationalist politicians - proclained Turkestsn'e "autonon" and forasd
their own "government." The town of Kohand, situated in the Pergans Valley,
becane the seat of this "governnent." Koksnd was one of the region's oo-ercisl
and industrial centers and a stronghold of the ﬂuslis clergy (it contained 382
aosques and 52 aedresas [Muslin secondary and higher schools]; there were sp-
proxinately 6000 ainiaters of the huslia religion in Kokand); the leading

forces of Turkestan counterrevolution ands their way to Roland after the
victorious October Revolution.

The program of the Rokand "govern-ant” called for reestablislaasnt of the Roland
khsnate and organization of a Central Asian caliphate. It also called for
restoration of all types of feudal and capitalist ownership, stripping woaen
of their rights, reestablishent of the shariah courts, as well as the laws
promulgated by Russia's bourgeois Provisional Governnent.

Advancing the slogan of “Turkestsn autonoay," the exploiter classes were seek-
ing to use for their own purposes the aspiration of the assess toward na-
tional independence. They advocated autonon only because this was advan-
tageous to then, because the struggle against the power of the toilet assses
could be concealed behind national garb.

The Roland "autononists" were supported by the Ruhhara eairste and the Rhiva
khsnate. the Turkestsn Socialist Revolutionaries and Hensheviks. the aaabers of
the local "Union of the Russian People,” Turkestsn Zionist organisations,
and toner officials of the Provisional Government. They also establietsd con-
nections with the Kazakh and Rashhir nationalists and with the Ukrainian des
[mum-u]. which recognized their "govern-ant" as the sole legitinate authority
to Turheetsn.

28

”WWW!”
The ”autononists" also worked in close alliance with other comterrevolutionary
forces, including with csarist Cossack ate-ens such as A. I. Dutov,7 and with

white Guardist generals — the hitterest eneaies of any autome for the
peoples of Russia.

All this convincingly characterizes the class nature and political thrust of the
"liokand Autonoly.” The "Rokand Autonouy" was created not to defend the national

interests of the peoples of Central Asia but for struggle against Soviet
rule, rule of the toiling people.

British and 0.8. ailitary-diplonatic circles very actively supported the
Kokand "autononists." 0n 15/28 January 1918 the British Govern-ant sent to
the 0.5. Coveth a neeoruuh- on the need for intervention against Soviet

Russia and on supporting White Guardist organisations and "govern-ants in the
southern and southeastern parts of Russia."8

Colonel house. a friend of Hilson, explained in co-snting on the sixth of the
"lb Points“ that one of the reasons for occupation of the Siberian Railroad
by 11.5. troops was to support "autonoeous governments in Russia's Southeast,"
including, as is evident froe the test. the "Kokand Autonomy."9

U.S. President Hilson drafted a progran for bringing an end to Soviet rule, for
territorial dissederlsent of Russia and enslav-ent of the toilers, in which a
certain role was also assigned to Central Asia. In Uilson's "14 Points" and

in co-entary on than by House and Lippeann. Central Asia is viewed as a

future 0.8. colony. He read in the sixth point: ”There is no inforestion which
would enable one to forn an opinion on a correct policy toward Huslin Russia,

that is, in short, toward Central Asia. It is quite possible that it will be neces-
sary to grant to some power a linited ssndate to govern on the basis of a
protectorate."1° This point was confined in an expanded variation of this

docueent. approved by Hilson as an official prograe for the 0.8. delegation at
the Paris Peace Conference.]-1

The vague wording "governnent on the basis of a protectorate" in actual fact
meant an attent to turn Central Asia into a u.s. colony. Addressing the
Paris Peace Conference in 1919 on the question of a nandate systen, Hilaon sat-
plained that a sandate syst- would apply to "Gerssn colonies, territories of
the Turkish enire. plus other territories." when asked what he eeant by
"other territories," Rilson replied: ”The for-er Russian ire." or nore
precisely - the Caucasus. Central Asia, and other regions. 2 On a geographic
sap prepared by the State Departnent for the [1.8. delegation. the regions

which were proposed to be detached fros Russia included Central Asia. which
case within the U.S. 2009.13

Great Britain showed particular interest in overthrowing Soviet rule in Cen-
tral Asia. First of all this was due to fears on the part of British iaperial-
isn over the fate of its vast colonial possessions and its desire to incor-
porate Turkestan into the British aspire. General Dunsterville. leader of the
British interventionist sission to Baku and ‘l‘ranscaucasia. acknowledged that
by seizing the territory of Turﬁstan and Baku, the British were attemting to
close the door to Central Asia. 0n 6 "arch 1918 A. J. Balfour, Britain's

29

POIOFFIGALIBEONLY
a-.. ~.a.-..-— .-... ..a—.

foreign ninister, stated that the British Government was devoting considerable
attention to Asiatic Russis.’~5

During the holding of the Paris Peace Conference, British agents in 'l‘urkestan
were attempting to put together a delegation of bourgeois-nationalist elements
and the reactionary Muslim clergy for a trip to France, in order to advance
demands "for liberation of Turkestan iron the Bolshevik yoke." British ruling
circles were also ready drawing up a presentation for the "Turkestan delegation"
in Paris. It included the denand of recognition of the "national self-deter-
nination" of 'l‘urkestan on the basis of the principles laid out hy_Hilson. The
British Government pronised to support these demands.16 Concealed behind all
this was the idea of turning Turkestan into a colony. In case this plan
failed, the British inperialists were planning to set up a kingdon in Central
Asia, headed by the enir of Bukhara, Seyid Ann-khan.

The British Government was planning on using in Central Asia its considerable
military forces stationed in the Near mid Middle Bast. At the beginning of
1918 a British general stated: "He nust consider the possibility that it will
be necessary for British soldiers to stand security duty in the oases of Merv
and Samarkand."17

The British consulate in Kashgsr (initially D. McCartney was serving as consul,
and subsequently Lt Col P. Btherton)wss sending agents, arm and noney to
Fergana. Representatives of the British military co-and also arrived there
fron Heshhed (Iran).

The struggle agdna tie "Rom Autonomy" became one of the first pages of the
civil war in Central Asia. It was here that the basnachi entered the scene as
an active force of Central Asian counterrevolution. Irgash, a former crininal,
who had gathered together a substantial band (up to 1500 men) of declasse’
elenents, became chief of allitia in Iokand. One of the leaders of the
'autonony," hustata Chokayev, consented that lrgash's detachments cosprised the
nilitary support of the Kokand "government."

A book by J. Cascagné entitled "hes baseschis" was published in Paris in 1925.
In 1918 its author had been engaged in archeological excavations in Turkestsn.
This was not his principal activity, however. therefore his book contains a
great deal of information on the mrkestsn counterrevolution, and particularly
on the basnachi. "The Kokand Autonomus Government," writes Castagne', "fearing
the threat of the Bolsheviks, began negotiations with the basmachi and invited
then to enter its service.... Irgash was the first to respond to this appeal:
this highwayaan and convicted crininal had gathered together an inpressive
band made up of professional thieves."

Later (in 1919) Atansn Dutov sent a personal message to Irgash. In this aes-
sage the leader of this band of cutthroats was called a "valiant leader of
glorious Fergana drhigits [young sen, skilled horsemenl." Dutov appointed
Irgash to the rank of sotnik [Cossack lieutenant] and appealed to "Allah and
his great prophet Urdu-had" to come to the aid of "the true protector of the
interests of Russia in the li'ergana."18

30

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
No less colorful a figure was another leader of the basnachi -- kurbashi
Hakhkan—khodzha. A notorious criminal, who had been sentenced in 1913 to 12

years at hard labor for robbery and nurder, he was distinguished by a highly
refined cruelty.

The bands of Hakhkan, Akhundahan and other kurhashi. while perforning the
political function of supporting the Kokand "Govern-eat," were at the sane tine
robbing nearby villages. As the struggle becane nore intense, the baa-achi
proceeded to engage in purposeful acts of terror. 1n the environs of Kokand
they began use annihilation of supporters of Soviet rule, particularly those
uho refused to obey the "government's" decree ordering nobiliaation into the

any of "autononists," those who had not surrendered to the hasnachi their
horses. food, etc

At the beginning of February 1918 the ”government” decided to consolidate its
position. To accosp‘ish this it was necessary to seize the Kokand fortress,

the telegraph office, and to destroy the Soviet of Vorkers' and Soldiers'
Deputies. During the night of 12 Iehruery "autononist" forces -- for the seat
part basnachi - noved on the fortress. The Red Guard, however, repulsed the
assault. The basnachi fanned out through the town. Blood poured in the streets

and in the hoses: everybody suspected of pro-Soviet synpathies was ruthlessly
annihilated.

0n 1/ 1!. February 1918 the Turkestan Sovnarkon declared nartial law in
Fergansksya Ohlaet and declared the railroad in a state of siege.

In organizing the struggle against the banachi. the Soviet authorities were
supported by the workers and the dekhkans.

In Deceaber 1917 sass neetings, political rallies and congresses of workers

and toilers of the old city were held in Tashkent, Sanarkand, and in Kokand. It
these neetings it was declared that the "autononous govern-set" consisted of
representatives of the exploiter classes and therefore should not be sup-
ported. At the Sanarksndskaya Oblast Congress of Soviets. delegates fron
Khodzhent (now Leninabad, in the ‘l'ejik SSR), Dehirak. Ora-hubs and lattakurgan
reported that the toilets in the localities "do not recognise the autononous
governnent and trust only the Soviet autho:.’ities."3l»9

1n Decenher 1917 a congress of Uzbek proletarian organisations of Syrdar'inallya,
Fergsnskaya. and Senarkandslzaya ohlasts convened in ‘l'ashkent. 'l'he congress
voiced a protest against establief-ent of the "Rskand Antone-y.”

At the beginning of February 1918 Red Guard detachnents fros Skobelev (now
Fergana). Perovsk (now Kayl-Orda), and Andiahan cane to the assistance of the
Kokand Hilitary Revolutionary Co-ittee. Of particular significance was the
arrival in Kokand of a Red Guard detach-ant fron Tashkent and detachnents
previously sent against the White Cossacks.

The Military Revolutionary Co-ittee formed in the new town of Kokand, lads up
of representatives of the Kokand Soviet and railroad workers, headed by
Bolshevik Yefin Adrianovich Bahuahkin, was accoqlishing an enornous assent of

31

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
l-UR UHILIAL use. um.)

work.“ Munindthan Shakirov was a III-bar of this eo-ittee, delegated fron
the Muslin trade unions.

The Kokand "Union of Muslin Toilers," headed by Yusup Povur Shensutdinov,
‘i'ashpulat Urazbayev and others joined in the struggle against the sutonoaists.
under Bolshevik guidance. Ya. R. Gililov, who had been sent fron Turkestsn in
October 1917 by V. l. Lenin personally to "agitate among the local population,"
was also in Koksnd.21

Repeated attenpts by the Irgesh detecbent to capture the fortress encountered
the unbending staunclmees of its defenders, headed by Ye. A. Bsbushkin.

At this tine Pavel Geraeinovich Poltoretskiy, one of the top officials of the
Turkestan Co-unist Party, arrived in lokand. At the Turkestan Congress of
Muslin workers, convened in Kokand at the end of Decenber 1917. he stated: ”Re
are not against one. «or for the poor, but we are against bai autonony.... we
seized power free the dussien bourgeoisie not in order to hand it over to the
Muslin bourgeoisie. He seized power for the Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers'
Deputies. Re have worked and are continuing to work to recruit the support of
the Muslin toilers."22

Disagreenents arose anong the "autononists." Representatives of the ”Ulena" --
an extrenely reactionary nationalist organization - gained the upper hand.

The "Ulenists" renoved the for-er leaders of the "eutonony" - Chokayev and
Chanyshev. On 18 February Irgaah was appointed head of the "govern-ant.” A
basnahi cutthroat - head of "govern-cut”! The actions of the oonnterrevolu-
tion had truly becone e tragiconic farce.

Irgssh, who also appointed hinself "co-snder in chief," once again attewted
to take the offensive, but again without success. The Bad Guard took the of-
fensive on 20 February. Street fighting lasted are than four days. The
besnmhi host failed to save the antipopular "tokand Autonony": Irgash was
soundly defeated and his detect-eats scattered. Irgssh fled with a snail group.
he was followed by other kurbashi.

A resolution adopted on 3 March 1918 at a general neeting of Uzbek workers and
toilets of Kokand, held following the rout of the "autonodcs." stated:

". .Jle Muslin toilers and workers curse all autononous adventurists and
recognize the Russian Worker-Peasant Socialist Republic, and subait to the
authority of the Soviets of Worker, Soldier, Peasant, Dekhkan and Muslin
worker Deputies."23

One of the participants in the February fighting recalls that ”following the
liquidation of the Kokand 'sutonosists,‘ the prestige and authority of the
Soviet of Horkers' and Soldiers' Deputies increased to an even greater degree,
and the mu. toilets ranked the-selves even sore solidly behind it."“

The Basaechl played a unique role in the Rhive khenate.
Dehunaid Kurban Mened, known later under the nane Dehunaid-khan, began basnschi

activities here long before the revolution. Cruel, greedy, cunning and an-
bitious, Dzhunaid and his detachnent nade bandit raids on neighboring tribes

32
mementos“
and robbed Usbelrs and Kara-Kalpaks. In 1911 he mdered his own brother and
appropriated his property. he succeeded in uniting several Turban tribes
under his authority and in establishing an araed detect-sent which was quite
large by Khiva standards.

In 1915-1916 Dzhunaid asde several raids on lhiva. atte-pting to seize power
and at the sale tine robbing the populace. At. that tine Russian troops as-
sisted the khan of Khiva. Dshunaid was defeated. withdrew into the sands of
the Kara Run and subsequently ends his way to Iran.

The situation changed considerably after the revolution. Comterrevolutionary
circles saw in Dshmaid a suitable ally for the struggle agath the toilets,
against Soviet power which had emerged victorious in Turhestan. Colonel
Zaytsev, who con-ended Cossack units in lhiva and who was an active white
Guardist. established contact with Dshunaid.

In January 1918 1600 araed horse-en under the co-and of Dshmaid-hhan en-
tered Khiva. lsfendiarz than of Khiva, suhnitted to Dahmaid and minally
reasined on the throne. 5 Dshunaid becane dictator of lhiva.

Thus the baaaachi were elevated to the rank of governaental authority. Es-
tablisl-ent of the Drhunaid-khn dictatorship strengthened and activated
coxnterrevolutionary forces. Soon the [hive hhsn-basaachi oounterrevolution
becaae a ailitary offensive.

1n the asantiae the fleece of civil war were burning increasingly aore
strongly in Turkestan. For an extended period of tine Turhestan was cut off
froa the central regions of Russia by the blazing battle fronts.

The Orenburg Front arose on the northwestern avenues of approach to Turkesten.
It was forned in July 1918 as a result of an insurrection against Soviet
authority by the Orenburg white Cossacks, led by Dutov, their seizure of
Orenburg and the withdrawal of Red Arty detacl-ents made: the mend of

6. V. Zinov'yev in the direction of Tashkent. Turkestan's link with the
central part of the country by the only rail line at that tine to Central
Russia. running east of the Aral Sea, via Aktyubinsk and Orenburg to the Volga
(through Sahara), was cut. Another route — via Krasnovodsk and the Caspian
Sea to Baku - was also closed.

In July 1918 anti—Soviet insurrectiona flared up in the towns of Zakaspiyskaya
Oblast in Turkastanskiy Kray. The Socialist Revolutionaries, lienshevihs and
Turk-en nationalists seized power in Ashkhabad, Kiryl-Arvat, New. and
Krasnovodah. Soviet Government officials - fearless oo-issars P.
Poltoratskiy. Ya. Zhitnikov. V. Teliye. S. Holiboshho and others — were shot.
Thus the Transcaspian Front was foraed.

On 12 August a colon of ailitary vehicles painted in caaouflage colors
crossed the border at Artyk Station. British troops had entered Soviet soil.
The interventionists (under the co-and of General B. Halleson) occupied
Aahkhsbad and other towns in the Transcaspian.

33

POIOFI‘ICIALUSEONLV
I'UK 0"“.th U“ URL!

The undisguised British intervention in Turkestan was a conponent part of the
overall interventionist plan of struggle against Soviet Russia drawn up by the
Bntente. After the fall of the Soviet Covernnent in Baku at the end of July
1918 and the appearance of British occupation troops there early in August.
the hostile chain encircling the Soviet Republic remained unlinked only in
one place -- in Turkestan. With the beginning of British intervention in the
Transcaspian the chain girdling Russia closed, as it were.

The White Guardist newspaper 601.05 3mm A211 stated on 17 August 1918 that
the interventionists would not be satisfied with seizure of the Caspian: ”They
assuredly have sore extensive nissions. Our eo-on task is to wipe out the
Tashkent neat and remove anything blocking the Snare-Krasnovodsk line. The
strategic importance of this great rail lineis i-ense. 1t closes the British
Baghdad front with the Volga, Czechoslovak, end Ural fronts." That sane news-
paper also openly discussed ".8. plans for intervention in Turkestan, utilizing
the Vladivostok-Samara and Senate-Krasnovodsk rail lines. U. Churchill wrote
that anti-Bolshevik gwernnents protected by Allied troops had becone es-
tablished in Russia's outlying regions.26

In the Senirech'ye (territory of the present Kazakh 88!!) the officer elite in
the Cossack villages of Kopal. Sarkand. Topolevskaya, AbsIn-ovskays.
Aresanovskaya, and others had nutinied. They were given assistance by the
white Guardist troops of the 'Provisional Siberian Goverment.” A Senirech'ye
Front was for-ed.

The four Turkestan fronts were not isolated coabat sectors. Both their
energence and the ultinate objectives pursued by their organizers attested to
the fact that they were not only interlinked but also were being guided by a
single director.

Dosestic counterrevolution had nerged with the inperialist intervention.

On 29 July 1918 V. I. Lenin, analyzing the country's nilitsry situation in aid-
1918. defined the Turkestsn situation as follows: “...Sone of the cities in
Central Asia are in the grips of a counterrevolutionsry insurgency with the
obvious participation of the British, who have consolidated their position in
India and who. having seized total control of Afghanistan. have long since
established for thenselves a base for expanding their colonial possessions.

for strangling other nations. and for attacks on Soviet Bussia."27 The
"Turkestan Alliance of Struggle Against Bolshevisa" (this counterrevolutionary
organization is called the "Turkestan Military Organization" -- ‘l'VO - in

any books). established in the spring of 1918 and uniting white Guard officers
and czarist officials, was operating in an alliance with local bourgeois
nationalists.

The interventionists and White Guard were laying siege on Red Turkestan fro-
all sides. They were greatly assisted by arned basnshi detach-eats. which were
active in many areas.

The civil war in Turkestan was a conponent part of the civil war which was
raging through the Soviet Republic. The course and outcone of the srned

MWWWLY
conflict here would be determined by the overall military-political situation

of the Soviet Republic and by the development of the cowat operations of the
main forces of the Red Aray on the decisive fronts.

During the years of civil war Soviet Turkestan was like a besieged fortress.
The courage end herois- of the worker class and the toiling dekhkans of

Turkestan. displayed in combat against their cnenies, earned the recognition
of all the peoples of the Soviet Republic. -

The fact that Soviet Turkestan. cut off fro. the central regions and fighting
under extremely difficult conditions against the united forces of the inter-
ventionists. White Guard and nationalist oounterrevolutionaries stood its
ground and fought off the onslaught of its enenies, says s great deal. It
attests to the vital strength of the Soviet syste- and the deep bond between
the Soviet Governent. the Co-unist Party and the mass. ﬂow fer fro-
reality are the clains of bourgeois falsifiers that Soviet govern-eat was in-
posed upon Central Asia free the outside and was not supported by the toilersl
It is inconceivable that Soviet power in Turkestan, if it lacked a bond with the
the people, could have energed victorious in such incredibly difficult condi-
tions. Even senifest ensnies of Soviet rule were forced to acknowledge the
steadfastness of the toilers of the Turkestan Republic. For exasple. in an
anti-Soviet eeigr‘ voluee entitled "Senna vekh" [Change Of Landsarks], Pub-
lished in Prague in July 1921, we read: "...Suffice it to point to the fact
of existence of the Turkestan Soviet Republic in 1918-1920, a fact which has
been given little thought up to this tine. Totally cut off fro- Hoscow, sur-
rounded on all sides by the forces of Kolchak, Dutov, Denikin, and British
occupation troops. and lacking transportation, fuel and breed, the Bolsheviks

in Turkestan succeeded in holding power to the very end, for a period of a
year and a half."28

Fighting Turkestan

The heroic struggle of the Soviet people, led by the party, against the in-
vasion by interventionist troops and the "bite Guard counterrevolutionaries
went on for sore than 3 years.

The interventionists and white Gards were advancing from all sides. There
were nonths when three fourths of the country's territory was in the hands of
enemy troops. The Far East. Siberia. the Urals. a large part of the Volga,
Transcaucasie and the Northern Caucasus. the Ukraine. Belorussia, the Don,
and a masher of gubernias in Central Russia experienced the burden of foreign
and white Guard occupation. The hostile areies were threatening the capital
of the republic, Moscow, and had drawn close to the cradle of the revolu-
tion - Red Petrograd. holding Soviet Russia in the ring of a blockade. the
imperialists were endeavoring to strangle it with the bony hand of hunger.

But no difficulties could crush the will of the Soviet people. workers and
peasants fro- all parts of Russia rose up in a patriotic war against the in-
terventionists and Hhite Guard. The party transformed the country into an
armed cap. It directed the battle front and the hone front of the Soviet
Republic, built a heroic arsy and a reliable, solid hose front.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI UfflLIAL no: \II‘LI

The unlers of multinational Central Asia made a large contribution to the
common cause of victory over the enemy. For a large part of 1918 and 1919
Turkestan was entirely cut off from the central areas of Soviet Russia. The
Turkestan Republic was fighting off the onslaught of its enemies on several
fronts. In the North, along the rail line linking Turkestan with the
Central Region (north of the Aral Sea), the Hhite Cossacks and Kolchak forces
were advancing. In the Northeast (east of Lake Balkhash), fighting was in
progress on the Semirech'ye Front. In the Southwest (west of the Amu Darya),
the Red fighting men of the Transcaspian Front were battling the British in-
terventionists and Uhite Guard, who had seized a large part of Zakaspiyskaya
Oblast.

The rulers of the Bukhara emirate and Khiva khanate were active participants in
the anti-Soviet struggle. They turned their territories into counterrevolu-
tionary bridgeheads and on several occasions undertook undisguised armed

forays against Soviet Turkestan.

The actions of the counterrevolutionary forces in Central Asia were coordi-
nated and guided by imperialist circles.

At a British cabinet meeting held on 13 November 1918, Lord Hilner, represent-
ing the war ministry, stated that the interests of the British empire de-
manded that Bolshevism be wiped out "in areas east of the Black See." Be ex-
plained that he was referring to "the Caucasus, the Don, and Turkestan."29
Several bases were established on the territory of Iran, Afghanistan. and
China, from which all counterrevolutionary activities against Soviet Turkestan
were directed. Particularly notable among these nests of counterrevolution
were Hcshhcd (Iran) and Kashgar (western China). The headquarters of General
w. Malleson's British forces which were occupying the Transcaspian became one
of the centers of organization, support and supply of the Central Asian counter-
revolution. The plan for combating Soviet rule in Turkestan drawn up by
Halleson called for mounting a number of successive attacks by British troops
and basuuxhi.detachments, as well as organization of uprisings by local na-
tionalists and Russian Hhite Guardists in the major cities of the Turkestan
Republic. According to this plan, anti-Soviet insurrections were to he or-
ganized in Tashkent, Samarkand, and in the towns of the Pergana Valley; the
Fergana basmachi were tasked with capturing Tashkent and other towns in
Turkestan.30

British and American agents were sent into Turkestan. U.S. Consul Roger
Treadwell arrived in Tashkent in May 1918, bearing credentials signed by 0.8.
President Wilson. Tresdwell immediately commenced vigorous anti-Soviet ac-
tivities. He united around himself all foreign missions and representations in
Turkcstan; at his instructions, they stepped up espionage and subversive ac-
tivities directed against the Soviet authorities. F. Kolesov, chairman of the
Sovnnrkom of the Turkestan Republic, noted in a telegram to the RSFSR Sovnarkom
that "Tugiestan is being flooded with ambassadors and consuls of the various
powers."

In the spring of 1918 a special groap was formed in Delhi to conduct subversive
activities in Turkestan. It included Major (according to other sources --

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Lieutenant Colonel. Colonel) F. H. Bailey, Captain (according to Other sources --
Major) L. U. S. Blacker, and former British Consul in Kashgar D. McCartney.
They arrived in Tashkent in August 1918 as an official British mission.

The "mission" soon established close contacts with Treadwell and, under his
direction. begun conducting subversive activities against Soviet rule through
many channels. Subsequently Treadwell recalled this in a lecture presented in
Hongkong in 1928. he stated that "in 1918 I was in contact with British
Colonel Bailey, who had been sent from India via Kashgar to Tashkent to

gather intelligence."32 In Bailey's book "Mission to Tashkent," published in
London in 1946, the author discusses in detail Treadwell's leadership role in
subversive anti—Soviet activities.

The true objectives of the “mission," as Lieutenant Zaytsev, who had been in
contact with it, later stated, consisted in "preparing for and organizing an
armed uprising in Turkestan against Soviet rule and in supplying the insurgent
detachments with money and arms from British bases close to Turkestan (Heahhed,
Kashgar, Afghanistan). The mission was invested with broad powers and
authority in regard to performing these missions."33

At the end of the 1960's Soviet historians working in the Indian National
Archives (in previously closed-access files of the British colonial authorities)
discovered a classified report by Bailey on his espionage activities in Soviet
Turkestan in 1918-1920. This report contains many facts on Bailey's contacts
with the basmachi, Irgash in particular.34 Bailey wrote: "Soon after my ar-
rival (in Tashkent -- Auth.) 1 made contact withshoml believe was the head of
several anti-Bolshevik organizations."35 He was evidently referring to the
head of the "Turkestan Alliance for the Struggle Against Bolshevism." The
members of the "mission" agreed to yrovide the "Alliance" with guns, rifles and
considerable financial assistance. The "Alliance“ in turn immediately made con-
tact with the Fergana basmachi leaders.

People from the "Turkestan Alliance for the Struggle Against Bolshevisn" --
Colonel Zaytsev and Colonel Kornilov (the brother of General L. G. Kornilov)
went to the besmachi with a group of military instructors. with the in-
tention of undertaking reorganization of the hasmachi hands, in order to con-
solidate them into a 10,000-man mounted cavalry corps consisting of 2
divisions (8 regiments) with 2 mountain horse artillery batteries. In addi-
tion. they proposed to form infantry rifle units. The hasmachi army was to
total approximately 25,000 men. Organization and training of the basmachi were
to follow the model of Cossack units.36 The basmachi were assured that Great
Britain would supply them with everything they needed to fight the Soviet
authorities. The Bailey "mission" pledged on behalf of their government to
furnish the basmachi with arms: "a) from Chitral-Gilgit across Hustagh Pass to
Kashgar. and from there via Irkeshtam and Osh; b) from Peshawar through the
Khyber Pass, and on through Afghanistan and Bukhara."37 The British represen-
tatives gave assurances that everything would be "shipped as needed and in
sufficient quantity."38

The basmachi army was assigned the mission of participation, together with
other counterrevolutionary forces in Turkestan, in a combined plan to

37

FOR OFFICLAl.lEﬂi(HVLY
overthrow Soviet rule. The basmachi were to make their way to Tashkent
through the Kendyr-Davan Pass in the Turkestan range; across the Hurts-Rabat
Steppe. bypassing the mountains, and thenon to China: and across the Syr
Darya. 33h“ information is confirmed by materials contained in Bailey's
report.

Arriving in Pergana, at the beginning of October Zaytsev held a meeting with
the basmachi kurbashi, who gave full approval of the British imperialists'
plan. A unified basmachi army was not established, however. This was due
primarily to the fact that plans to enlist the toiler masses in the basmachi
bands failed to pan out. Colonel Zaytsev himself subsequently wrote about this
in a frank manner: "Talk to the effect that the grateful local populace was
offcring material support to the basmachi bands proved to be an outright lief”

Nevertheless assistance given by inerialist agents and the white Guards
enabled the basmachi to consolidate and subsequently to step up their activi-
ties.

in the meantime the basmachi detacllents of the Khiva dictator Dzhunaid-khan,
who was working in close collaboration with the interventionists and white
Guard. had begun open military actions against Soviet Turkestan. Lieutenant
Khodzhakuli-khan paid a visit to Dzhunaid-khan on the instructions of the
British coll-and authorities and the Transcaspian white Guard. lie brought with
him fron Aahkhabad 3000 rifles and a large quantity of a-unition.

Between aid-September 1918 and the end of Hatch 1919, Khiva detachments
mounted a number of raids into the territory of the Amudar'inskiy Division
(an area of the Turkestan A588 situated on the border with the Khiva khanate).

Late one November night in 1918, Dzhunaid‘s basmachi crossed over onto the
right bank of the Ann Darya and laid siege to the administrative center of the
Anudar'inskiy Department. Petro-Aleksandrovsk (now Turtkul').

Dzhunaid issued the ultimatum that if the town did not surrender, the entire
population. including infants, would be massacred. The bamchi plundered
villages in the vicinity, drove off horses. camels and sheep, hauled off grain.
cruelly tortured prisoners, and murdered peasants and artisans. The small
Turtkul' garrison, however, assisted by armed workers and volunteers -
Uzbeks. Turkmens, Kazakhs, and Kara-Kalpaks -- fought off the attacks of the
basmachi. Participants in the heroic defense recall: "Only women, children
and the elderly remained in town; everyone capable of using a weapon had gone
out to defend Turtkul'.""1

Sustaining heavy casualties, at the beginning of December Dzhunaid-khan with-
drew.

As already noted, for many reasons the struggle with the interventionists and
White Guard assured a particularly difficult and intense character in Central
Asia. An extremely unfavorable strategic situation - a protracted lack of

direct comunication with the country's central regions and the impossibility
of obtaining military and economic assistance from there -- placed Turkestan

38

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in an exceptionally difficult predicament. An acute shortage of manufac-
tured goods and foodstuffs was felt in the region. All available resources

were utilized for the defense effort. Turkestan's few workers were fighting
on the various fronts.

There was a shortage of cadres in the localities for extensive party and
Soviet activities aimed at consolidating Soviet rule. Sons local officials,
lacking adequate political maturity, experience and knowledge, made mistakes.

But our enemies -- imperialist agents, white Guardists, feudal-clan strata,
the reactionary clergy, and nationalists — were stepping up their activities,
exploiting economic difficulties, the backwardness and ignorance of the masses
of the indigenous population. Growth of the basmachi becane possible under
these conditions, creating in a ntnber of areas of Central Asia a serious
threat to the rule of the toiling people.

On 15 January 1919 the Turkestan Republic's representation in Moscow,

acting on instructions from Tashkent, reported to V. I. Lenin the situation in
Turkestan and requested that he take inediate measures "on the Orenburg Front
in order to link up with the Turkestan troops as quickly as possible.“

At this time counterrevolutionary forces were organizing insurgencies and con-
spiracies in the cities and towns of Turkestan, with the aim of preventing
unification with Central Russia. On 19 January 1919 an anti-Soviet insur-
rection broke out in Tashkent, during which 16 Turkestan comissars were
brutally murdered -- 'l'urkestan Conunist Party and republic government leaders,
including V. D. Votintsev, chairman of Turk'l‘ani, V. D. Figel'skiy, chairman

of the Sovnarkom [Council of People's Conissars], N. V. Shumilov, chairman of
the Tashkent Soviet of Workers' and Peasants' Deputies, V. N. Finkel'shteyn,
A. Ya. Pershin. and H. s. Kachuriner. ‘l'he insurrection was put down thanks to
the staunchness and courage of Tashkent's worker class.

On 22 January 1919, carrying out V. I. Lenin's instructions, Red Army divi-
sions, advancing from the direction of Samara and with the active participation
of the armed forces of the Turkestan Republic, captured Orenburg. The first
enemy encirclement of Turkestan was brought to an and, and ’l‘urkestan was

linked up with Soviet Russia.

In spite of the brief duration of Turkestan‘s 11an with Central Russia
(from January to April 1919), the government of the RSPSR and the RKP(b)
Central Committee gave Soviet Turkestan enormous assistance in soviet and

party organizational development and in organizing defeat of the counter
revolution.

0n the instructions of Ya. H. Sverdlov, on 25 January 1919 a group of party
and Soviet officials was dispatched to 'l‘urkestan.’°3 0n 1 February 1919

Ya. M. Sverdlov sent off to Tashkent a telegram containing the message that on
the instructions of the Central Conittee, another group of Soviet and party
workers was leaving for Turkestan. It also stated that the party Central Con-
mittee and the Sovnarkom were taking "measures to strengthen Soviet rule (in
Turkcstan -- Auth.) and to increase the army's combat effectiveness."“

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IV“ U". 050'... vua- 95‘...

On 12 February 1919 a Special (Temporary) Co-ission on Turkestm Affairs
was created by decree of the RSFSR SIR. Co-ission numbers included Sh. z.
Bliava (chair-an), A. S. Kiselev, and P. A. Robozev.

The RKP(b) Central Co-Iittee and Soviet Govern-eat also gave Turkestan con-
siderable economic assistance at the beginning of 1919.

The situation in Turkestan took adnrp turn for the worse in the spring of 1919
in connection with Kolchak's offensive.

On 11 April the Elite Cossack Any of Atanan Dutov captured Aktytbinsk.
Kandagach and ungodrharskaya stations were abandoned.... Soviet troops were

withdrawing to Aral'skoye More Station. mce again Turkeatan was encircled
by its enenies.’05

In the latter half of 1919 Turkestan's unitary-political situation changed
radically. By that tine the Red Arny had routed lolchsk and was pushing the
eneny eastward. In August 1919. at the initiative of V. I. Lenin, the Eastern
Front was divided into two fronts - the Eastern and Turkesun.‘6

The Turkestan Front was established on 16 August 1919. Outstanding Soviet
nilitary leader I. V. Frunze assumed co-Iand of the front. F. I. Baranov.
Sh. z. Eliava, and (sonewhat later) V. V. Kuybyshev were naned meters of
the Revolutionary Military Council. In the latter half of August and at the
beginning of Septe-ber 1919 the front's troops launched an attack on Kolchak's
Southern Arty. At 1435 hours on 13 Septeder. at Hugodzharskaya Railway
Station, located between Orenhurg and the Aral Sea, troops advancing fro. the
north linked up with units of the Aktyubinsk Front which were defending the
approaches to Soviet Turkestan. Hilitary telegraph operators tapped out the
words of a priority message sent by H. V. Frme and Sb. 2. Rliva to V. I.
Lenin in Moscow: "The troops of the Turkestan Front congratulate you and the
Republic on this joyous news."’°7

The blockade of Turkestan had cone to an end. The link between this country's
central regions and Turkestan was pernanently restored.

Units of the Turkestan Front conpleted liberation of the Tranacaspian
(Krasnovodsk, last stronghold of the white Guard. fell in February 1920) and
wiped out (at the beginning of April 1920) Hhite Guard forces in the
Senirech ' ye .

After the railroad was restored to service. trains set out for Tashkent carry-
ing the goods needed by Turkestan. Soviet Russia, itself in the clutches of
hunger and in critical need of nanufactured goods, unselfishly shared its
neager reserves with Red Turkestan. The toilers of Turkestan in turn dis-
patched to the proletarian center trains loaded with cotton and freightcars
filled with dried fruits. On 11 October 1919 H. V. Frunze joyoualy reported
to V. I. Lenin that track repairs were completed and that the first train
loaded with cotton had arrived in amounts.“

To assist Turkestan in consolidating the Soviet syste- and to ensure cor-
rect inplenentation of nationalities policy. the mm Central Co-ittee and

60

MOMCIALUSEONLY
Soviet Government formed a Commission on Turkestan Affairs (Turkkomissiya) and
dispatched it to CentralAsia.0n 8 October 1919 V. I. Lenin signed a pertinent
VTle and RSFSR SNK decree. The party Central Committee instructed the
Turkkomissiya to exercise "top-level party oversight and supervision in
Turkestan on behalf of the mm Central Co-ittee.”"9 The Turkkomissiya.
consisting of Sh. 2. Eliava (chairman), H. V. Prunze, V. V. Kuybyshev, Ya. B.
Rudzutak, G. I. Boki» and P. I. Coloshchekin, proceeded to engage in diver-
sified activities promoting consolidation of the Soviet system in Central Asia.

in November 1919 V. I. Lenin addressed a letter to "Comrade Communists of
Turkestan." "Establishment of correct relations with the peoples of Turkestan,"
wrote V. I. Lenin, "is now, one can state without exaggeration, of enormous.
world-historic significance for the Russian Socialist Pederative Soviet
Republic.

"The position of the Soviet Horkers' and Peasants' Republic toward weak, former-
ly oppressed peoples will have practical meaning for all of Asia and all
colonies throughout the world, for billions of people."50

V. l. Lenin called upon local Russian Communists to make every effort to es-
tablish friendly relations with the peoples of Turkestan and to prove by deeds
the sincerity of their motives and their desire to eradicate all traces of
colonialism in the interests of the struggle against world imperialism.

V. l. Lenin pointed out that such a policy should be a model for the entire
East.

Lenin's letter played an important role in uniting the broad masses of the
indigenous nationalities behind Soviet rule and the Communist Party. V. I.
Lenin's instructions played an enormous role in organizing the struggle
against the basaachi.

of enormous significance for the entire subsequent life of the peoples of
Central Asia and the entire Soviet East was Lenin's report at the Second All-
Russian Congress of Communist Organizations of the Peoples of the East,
presented soon after dispatch of the letter to Turkestan (22 November 1919).
The leader of the proletarian revolution explained how the theses of Marxism
shOuld be applied to the unique conditions of the East, where the main enemy
is carryovers from medieval timam and where the peasantry comprises the
principal toiler masses.51 It was essential to accomplish all-out strengthen-
ing of the dictatorship of the proletariat by combining overall class in-
terests with the specific national features of the peoples of Central Asia.

This was the general situation in Central Asia in 1918-1920. without knowledge
of this situation it is impossible to understand the history of the struggle
against the basmachi during the civil war years, its specific features and
stages.

The Basmachi Fergana Front
The Fergana Valley.... One of the most ancient centers of civilization in

Central Asia and one of its most fertile and densely—populated regions. This
vast (covering an area of approximately 20,000 square kilometers) basin,

41

FOi 0‘11C1A1.1EHB(NVLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

situated along the niddle course of the Syr Darya, is surrounded practically on
all sides by nountain ranges: the Chatkal on the north, the Pergana on the east,
and the Alay and Turkestan on the south. study-flowing rivers, running out of
these ranges, provide water to orchards and crops, pastures. groves of walnut
and cherry ph- trees. The Fergana is also rich in co-ercial ninerals.

As a result of enay actions. for a umber of years this fertile region was the
arena of savage, bloody, ruinous fighting.

Let us exasine sane of the socioecononic and political factors and geographic
conditions of Ferganskayn uslast.

Following the annexation of Central Asia to Russia, Perganskaya Oblastf’2 by
right becane Turkestan's nuber one cotton growing region.53 Intensive
develop-ant of cotton growing led to radical changes in the econony and aociel
conposition of the population of this region. An inortsnt result of the
develop-est of co-ercial cotton raising was the fact that the econony in kind
was drawn into annoy-exchange relations. As a result of this the process of
differentiation anong the dekhkana becane intensified, and a substantial por-
tion of the peasants were dispossessed of their land. All this attested to
energing capitalise.

Tables prepared by Uzbekistan econonists on the basis of figures fro. the
survey naterials of Senator Palen indicate that in the volosta of Perganskaya
Oblast included in his survey 38.5 percent of households had less than one
desyatina of land, and 26.6 percent of these households averaged 0.26
desyatina. The above enunerated households occupied 6.8 percent of the total
land acreage. Half of all the land was concentrated in the hands of the bai.
who comprised not nore than 10 percent of all landowners.“

0n the eve of the Great October Socialist Revolution the process of dispos-
session of the toiling dekhkans fron the land additionally intensified. This
is persuasively attested by figures fro. the l9l7 census. According to these
figures, land ownership in Perganskaya Oblaat was as follows:55

Grouping of households by Average Lendholding, Total Quantity, 1
Landholding, Desyatinas desyatinas acuaeholds Land
Up to l 0.62 51.0 9.8
Pros 1 to 3 1.71 30.1 23.6
Free 3 to S 3.65 9.1 15.2
Pro. 5 to 10 7'0 603 2003
From 10 to 20 13.6 2.5 15.3
20 and are 36.7 1.0 16.0

Figures on individual uyerdu in Perganskaya (blast present an even note
graphic picture. in Andizhsnskiy Uyezd, for exawle, 165 large bei landhold-
ings totaled 7226 desyatinas. while 9008 dekhkan homehold possessed only
3062 desyatines. In this uyesd 90.5 percent of households were chayriher
[sharecropper] landholdings averaging hslf a desyatina, the owners of which
were forced to work for the bai for one fourth of the harvest.“ In

62

MWMONLY
Nannganskiy Uyesd 68.1 percent of the dekhkan households owned fron 0.5 to
1.5 desyatinas of land, while each bai ludholding was at least 25 desyatinns.57

Pros the above figures one can conclude that in Perganskaya Oblast a large
group of bei med the bulk of the land.

Together with this, there was particularly noticeable here a process of co-
alescence of the Imaian nerchant-ueurer bourgeoisie with that group of bai
which was engaged in cotton trading and usury. A local urban co-ercial and
industrial bourgeoisie was also beginning to appear. In Andishenskiy Uyerd,
for example. Hirkanil' My” owed 5000 deeyatinas of land as well as a
nunber :5 industrial enterprises; his wealth was estinated at lb-l? nillion
rubles.

The Huslia clergy wielded enornous influence in the Pergena. Suffice it to
say that there was a noaque for every 325 persons, while for Central. Asia as a
whole each opaque served 700-1000 persons, and in prerevolutionary Russia a
parish served a population of 10-12 thousand. There were 15,000 ninisters of
religion in the Pergana. 'l'he reactionary heli- clergy, extensively utilizing
lslan. nade every effort to arouse the baa-schi.

One should also bear in nind the consequences of settlenent policy in the
Fergana. The crarist govern-eat, in establishing Russian settlenents, pursued
the objective of obtaining support for the struggle against the toilers of
indigenous nationalities. It figured that each settlenent should replace a
battalion of Russian troops.’9 The first party of i-igrents arrived in the
Fergana in 1891, and the first Russian settlenent was established at the
Kurshab urochishche [an isolated terrain feature]. By 1916 there were 50
such settlenents. A considerable nount of irrigated land had been taken away
f roe the indigenous population. A powerful hulak am -- a base of support
for the autocracy in Central Asia - was established in the Russian settlenents
thanks to the csarist authorities.

Thus an analysis of just a few aspects of the scone-y of Fergenshays Oblast and
the social nakeup of its population indicates that on the eve of the victorious
October Revolution there existed a particularly strong elenent of the ex-
ploiter classes there. The wealthiest anong these (Hirhanil' uminbeyev,
Tenirbekov. Abdmneur Hangbashi, Usnen Keri Iharov, Kudrst Khosrat, and others)
were aaong the organisers of the basaachi and offered then eaterial and other
assistance.

Perganshaya Oblast. the nest populous in the Turkestan A883. was the center of
the cotton ginning. coal mining and petroleu industry of all Central Asia.“

At the sure tine Russian capitalise was tasking every effort to inpede the
growth of industrial production in the Fergena. Therefore the process of
proletarianisation of peasants experiencing financial ruin dragged on in the
Fergsna, while pauperisstion of the peasants was proceeding rapidly.

in 1913 there were sore than 15.000 industrial workers in the Fergana Valley,
including 3517 Russians, 92107 Uebeks. 519 Kirghiz, N5 ‘rajiks, and 1252

43

MWWWIJ
FOR OFFICIAL U56 ONLY

representatives of other nationalities.“ In addition, 35,000 workers were
teoyed at industrial-co-ercial establish-eats, in cottage industry and
handicraft activities, and in storage and warehousing activities.

lnterethnic relations were extra-sly couple: in the Fergana. As my as

20 different nationalities were living in the valley: Uzbeks, Kirghiz, Tajiks,
Kazakhs, Russians, Ukrainians, Uigurs, Tatars, Arnenians, Bukhara Jews, etc.
The colonial policy of caries also left a sad legacy in the area of ethnic
interrelations, aggravated by the fact that the peoples living in the Pergana,
just as throughout Turkestan, either were still living in the Middle Ages or
had recently abarked upon the road of capitalist developnent. The organisers
of the baseachi also took advantage of all these factors.

The process of establislnent of Soviet rule in Perganskaya 0b1ast dragged on.
In the Fergana power was not taken over by the Soviets fro. the agencies of
the Provisional Govemeent until 6 Dec-her 1917, while in Tashkent and other
areas of Turkestan Soviet power was victorious in lovaber 1917, and the
Thirdllegimal Congress of Soviets (15-22 Novel-her 1917) proclaimed transfer of
power to the Soviets throughout the region.62

Five days before the convening of the Third wood Congress of Soviets, on
10 Novenber 1917, the Ferganskaya Oblast Soviet of Workers', Soldiers' and
Peasants' Deputies, headed by rightist Socialist Revolutionaries, cane out
against establish-ant of Soviet rule, declaring that questions involving the
region as a whole should be settled prior to convocation of a Constituent
Assembly by the region union of nunicipal and senatvo edninitltrations.63 The
leader of the Pergana Hsnsheviks and editor of the oblast newspaper ZNAHYA
svoswv, Pavlyuchenko, spoke out at the congress against establish-ant of
Soviet rule in the Fergana and throughout Turkestan.

At the oblast congress of soviets which was convened at the beginning of
Member 1917, a bitter fight erupted with the Socialist Revolutionaries and
Hensheviks on the question of recognition of the Turksstanskiy Kray Sovnarkoe
and on transfer of all power in the localities to the Soviets of workers',
Peasants' and Soldiers' Deputies.“

In the cities and towns of Pergansltaya Oblaat all authority was not transferred
over to the Soviets until the end of Decenber 1917 and beginning of 1918; in
Kokand on 25 Deceaber, in Nanangan on 7 January, in Skobelev at the beginning
of January. etc. Soviet rule was established such later in the najority of
kishlaks in the Pergana.

Tho oblast Sovdep [Soviet of Horkers', Peasants', and Soldiers' Deputies]
elected in Deceaber 1917 following establishment of Soviet rule in the Pergana
proved incapable of operating, as a result of sabotage by the Hensheviks and
Socialist Revolutionaries. In March 1918 Ye. A. Dabushkin, leader of the
Kokand Bolsheviks, sent a telegraph nessage to the Sovnerkon of the Turkeetan
Republic that theoblast Sovdep "is not doing its job and should be dissolved in
short order."65

No

FOIOFFICIALIJSEONLY
‘rhe oblast congress of Soviets which was convened in March 1918 voiced op-
position to organization of an oblast Sovdep on the grounds that the uyasd
Sovdeps were allegedly sufficient.“

In the localities the old volost adninistrations frequently functioned in
parallel with the Sovdeps. In sons cities the nunicipal dunes and the so-
called public safety co-ittees were not disbanded.” 0n the eve of the
October Revolution the public safety co-ittsea were nerged into the Iansngan
and Deb Soviets, as a result of which the soviets were cluttered with csarist
bureaucrats, nationalists and other hostile elenants.

An oblast Sovdep was finally elected on 8 October 1918. It adopted a decision
not to establish soviet executive co-ittees in the localities, but to or-

ganise cmittees of the poor.68 lst'ablislasent both of Sovdeps end co-ittees
of the poor, however, procudsd very slowly.

Hensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries. memes,” white (herds and bourgeois
nationalists. who had here and there nnnaged to nake their way into inportant
positions, nsde every effort to wreck the work being done by agencies of
Soviet authority in the Pergana. In Septenber 1918 the Psrgana Bolsheviks
reported to V. D. Pigel'sltiy. chairnsn of the ‘lhrkestan Republic Sovnarkon,
about the destructive efforts of the "leftist" Socialist Revolutionaries
against Soviet authority.70 a report on the situation in the Pergana
presented at a nesting of ‘l‘urk‘l'sn on 15 Hay 1918 stated: 'Tiensheviks and
rightist Socialist Revolutionaries. who have becone ensconced in the Skobelev
Soviet, are undernining Soviet authority like warns. ‘l'he soviet is passing a
great neny enactments which are destroying the authority of the Soviet Govern-
nent.... Total anarchy is reigning in the volost. There are no soviet or-
ganizations. Volost adninistrative officials are instituting shariat
judicial rule.... Bolshevik-co-snists are being nest foully persecuted. The
facts about declaration of regional autonony are being distorted.”1

Not only socioecononic and political factors led to the situation where
Ferganskaya Oblast becsns a basnnchi center during the years of civil war. An
inportant role was played by the fact that the "Rokand Autonony” was es-
tablished in the Fergana, in the old part of Kohnd, at the end of Novenber
1917. It is not surprising that the first basnechi bands, headed by Irgash,
one of the "rulers of the autonony," and a forner co-on crininal. ensrged fron
the boson of the "Koksnd Autonony.” In addition. the "government" of the
"Kokand AutononY' proclained in one of its declarations that all arned

elenents on the territory of “Durham. including co-on crininals. were given
amnesty and invited to join the ranks of the "national any."72

The following fact is also of certain interest: at the tine of the collapse of
the "Roland Autonony,” certain leftist Socialist Revolutionaries, who were
in connsnd of Red Guard units and other detachnents. allowed a substantial
portion of the "autononists" to escape into hiding, in spite of the fact that
they had considerable nilitary force at their disposal. One of the partici-
pants in the struggle against the "autononists," Bolshevik P. Yeliseyev. wrote
about this in his nenoirs: "Due to shortsightedness, and perhaps crininal
action as well (by the leftist Socialist Revolutionaries - Auth.), the bands

65

FOIOFFICIAIJJSEONLY
DUI menu“. a.“ VAL!

were permitted to escape.... with such force (on the side of the Soviet
authorities -- Auth.). I was sure that not one autononist would be able to
get away."73

Gathering together his basaachi band and seeking to enlist Uzbek toilers into
the ranks of the basmachi, Irgssh exploited nistakea regarding the nationali-
ties question, which had been made chiefly by the Dashnaks and leftist So-
cialist Revolutionaries when crushing the "autonoay."

Finally, the fact that Perganskaya Oblsst was situated on the frontier enabled
the basmachi bands to obtain weapons and anmition fron China, Afghanistan.
and Bukhara. and to escape into hiding following their defeat.

Irgssh fled into China soon after collapse of the ”Kokand Autonomy" and the
first clashes with Soviet troops. Sons tine later he returned to the Pergana
Valley with a band of $00 nen. The band had obtained weapons and equipment
fron reactionary circles in Afghanistan and fron the enir of Bukhara. Seven
saall gangs joined Irgssh in the Pergana. including Khal-khodsha's band, which
consisted for the east part of col-son crininsls who had been convicted at
various times for aurder and robbery. It is not surprising that Khal-kbodsha's
basaachi were distinguished by particular savagenesa. In one kishlak [hal-
khodzha's band brutally tortured a dekhkan who had decided to speak the truth
about the basmachi. ‘l'hey severed his tongue. ears and nose. The basnachi
punished another dekhkan, who had dared go to prayers without a chains [turban],
by fashioning a mold of dough on his head and filling it with boiling oil.

Since basnachi bands had begun to unite behind Irgssh. and since he had ex-
perience in forming aore or less regular detach-ants, Pergana counterrevolu-
tionaries were placing their hopes prinarily on bin. Several defeats. however,
inflicted on Irgssh by volunteer and militia detachments, undermined his
reputation. Hadaain Akhaetbekov (“admin-hen becans the favorite of the
Fergana counterrevolutionaries. At an underground neeting he was and chief
of all the basaachi of the Pergana Valley.

Hadanin-bek. just as Irgssh, was sentenced in 1913 to 14 years at hard labor
for criminal offenses. During the days of the "Kokand Autonomy" he served as
chief of the Hargilan nilitia and, with the assistance of the Socialist
Revolutionaries, remained in this position for sons time afterwards. Madanin-
bek put together a fairly large band and undertook aggressive actions against
the Soviet authorities. lie also enlisted into his detachnent Russian Hhite
Guard of ficers. who served as ailitary instructors. Soon eight rather large
bands joined up with Hadanin-bsk. lie underth a considerable effort to gain
control over the bands of Irgssh and Isladul. “ads-in was not sparing with
pronises. offering Irgssh honorable positions. But Irgssh and Islankul then-
selves dreaned of leading the Fergana basnacbi. Mada-in called hi-elf ‘ruler
of the Fergana." and co-ander in chief of the Muslin arned forces -- "anir
al'-nuslimin." The clergy of Bukhara and the rergana surrounded his and his
nyrnidons with the aureole of "fighters for Isles" and defenders of the in-
povarished . 7"

46

MWUSEONLV
The basaachi terrorized the population and aurdered party and soviet officials.
They nurtured particular hatred for the industrial workers -- Uzheka, Tajika,
and Kirghiz, who were uniting the toilet nasses. In a short period of tine in
the first half of 1919 the basaachi murdered 100 Uzbek Commists froa the
Andizhan old-town party or anization.75 Half of the Kuvinskiy [Kuvasay] party
organization were killed.7 The kurbaahi Khal-khodzha nassacred almost all the
menhers of the trade union forned in Osh in 1918.77 At the end of 1919 1mm.
killed in Chust 200 poor dekhkans and workers who were actively supporting
neasures instituted by the Soviet authorities.

Haas nurders of workers and Co-unists of local nationalities comprised an in-
portant part of Malachi terrorist activities.

The basmachi raysged towns and villages and robbed the innocent inhabitants of
towns and auls. In addition to outright robbery, baseachi kurhashi sed
taxes on the civilian population in the for- of bread, rice, and horses, 9 and
denanded women for their dzhigits. According to the figures of Fergana Front
headquarters, the taxes extracted b y- the basnachi free the civilian popula-
tion amended by 25 tines the taxes paid under the czarist regile.80 The
hasnachi blockaded industrial centers and other cities, making it difficult for
then to obtain food and water.

The hasnachi also sought to disrupt rail transport operations, on which the
vital activities of the Turkestan Republic so such depended. They were hoping
that the destruction of rail lines would create insurnountahle obstacles to the
shipping of cotton. which was needed by the country's entire textile industry.
Attacks on the railroad began to be carried out on practically a daily basis.

Basnachi bands would frequently attack industrial enterprises, especially
cotton ginning aills. They denolished irrigation systems and hindered fern
work. Hunger and destitution raged in the fertile Pergana Valley.

Alarming reports traveled one after the other frou the Pergana to Tashkent.
"The band of the notorious robber Irgaah is operating in Kokandskiy Uyezd. The
population is terrorized,"81 telegraphed oblast military couissar

r. Buravlev on 30 July 1918. "Bamchi have attacked Sharkov kishlak...";32
Hadanin has entered Old Nargilan...";33 "Basmachi have attacked the town of
Chust"; "A band has attacked Crunch-Hazar Station";3‘ "Battle with hamchi by
Dordok kishlak. Enemy lost 58 men";85 "we encountered a frightful scene in
Sharikhan: bodies of Russians littered the streets, 2‘ in all, hoses and
shops had been looted, with all goods of value taken, such as cloth, wheat,

f lour. rice. livestock, as well as various household goods...,"35 0. Ye.
Konovalov. col-under of railway detacI-ents, wrote in his report to Iain
operations headquarters.

The Red Army’s first engagements with the basmachi (in July 1918, for example,
against detachments of Irgash in Kokandskiy Uyezd) ended in failure.87 which
was due to unskillful organization of nilitary operations. Small (100-150 nan)
detachaents operated against the basmachi, without a unified plan or coenon con-
nand. The discipline and combat training of some detachments was poor.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
svn votes“... s—ve. we‘ve

The hsseschi love-est in the Pergana had picked up steal by the end of 1918.
The baa-achi were displaying particular activeness in Rnkandskiy. Rsnnganskiy,
and Andizhanskiy uyesds. In Septeder they engaged Red Arly units in sore
or less large skirsishes at Gorchakovo Station and in the 01¢ Hergilsn etee.33

Top authorities of the Turkestsn Republic nobilised all resources to overcone
the bsenachi threat. The Supre-e Military Board for Defense of the Republic
headed by V. D. Pigel'skiy, chair-nan of the Turkestan Republic Sovnsrkon, ar-
rived in Pergana in Decenber 1918.- in order to take effective eeasures on the
spot to coshat the hugely.

An Operations Staff for Direction of the Struggle Against the Boomer-hi was elected
at an oblsst Red Arny congress in l’ergena on 7 Dece-ber 1918.39 Uyezd opera-
tions staffs were also for-ed.90 The Co-uniu Party was supported first and
tore-est by the workers of the Fergsns. Those areas of Pergsnsksys Oblast

where large detach-eats of the proletariat were concentrated -- Rysyl-Kiya,
Sulyukta, Chi-ion, Fedchenko, and kokand - sarched in the vanguard of the
struggle against the basal-chi.

The Kyzyl-Kiye Bolshevik organization, which contained 250 persons in its
ranks at the end of 1918.91 divided the workers into three relief units, one of
which was in position at all tines in trenches dug around the nines. As a
rule the niners kept their rifles with then at all tiles. even when going down
into the nines on a work shift. A cavalry detect-ant was organised at the
nine. which protected the residents of neighboring kishlaks. Detach-eats of
Kyzyl-Kiya niners were detailed to assist the gsrrisons of uyesd towns in the
Fergana. V. D. Pigel'skiy wrote of the Ryryl-Kiya people that they "are read
at all tines to swing into action at the request of the Soviet authorities."9
"The Kyzyl-Kiya nines," the newspaper IZVESTIYA, organ of TurkTsIR and the
Turkestan (to-mist Party. stated on 6 Decenber 1919. "are in truth an srned
casp.”

A ZOO-nan worker detachment to comt the bassechi was for-ed in Chi-ion at
the beginning of 1918.93

The proletarian detach-eats designated to fight the baseschi canined Uzhek,Kirgidz._
and Taj ik workers. They were particularly nunerous in the Kyzyl-Kiya. Chinion,
and Sulyukta detachnents. The umber of workers of local nationalities in-
creased in the course of struggle against the bssnachi bands.

The participation of toilers of the indigenous nationalities in the struggle
against the bassachi fostered strengthening of friendship along peoples. Pros
the niners they acquired revolutionary ideas, a spirit of collectivisn, and
proletarian internationalisu. All this was of decisive significance not only
for defeating the hasnschi but also for consolidating Soviet power in Central
Asia.

Former prisoners of war also fought alongside Russians, Uzbeks. Tajiks,
Kirghiz and Razakhs in the Pergsns proletarian detachments. One of the or-
ganizers of the former prisoners of war was hungarian worker Rail Baku, a
Chinion oilfield worker. In Chinion he joined the ranks of the Conunist
Party and was elected deputy to the workers' Soviet.“

(08

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Red Guard detach-eats fron the najor cities of the Pergana also took part in
the struggle against the basaachi. Notable anong these detaclnents was the
Kokand detach-eat. It contained Kokand railway workers. workers fron cotton
ginning nills and numbers of the Union of Muslin Toilets. According to the
figures of the [okand Soviet. nore than half of the detachment neabers were
Uzbeks. Kirghiz, and Tajihs. All (to-mists able to bear arns were assigned
to the Roland Red Guard detach-ant and party druzhina [detach-eat]. At the
request of the Bolsheviks. the Kokand Soviet established a unitary-political

headquarters for lotsndskiy llyezd, which directed the struggle against the
hasnachi.95

The Andishan detach-ant was oo-anded by Georgiy Hikhaylovich bil'din. leader
of the city's Co-nnists and for-er worker at the Nansngan Machinery Plant.
At the end of 1918 a detach-sat was forned in Hargilan of workers froa the
cotton ginning nills (587 n e n ).96 A Red Guard detachnent was operating
actively in Alty-Arykshaya Volost. nade up of Uzbek and ‘l'aj ik volunteers.
They were co-anded by Abdurskhnan Mad'yarov. chair-nan of the volost revolu-
tionary co-ittee.

Party druzhinas, forned in my cities of the republic, were a solid support to
Soviet power in the struggle against the bamchi. In addition to Russian Con-
nunists. they included Uzbek Conunists and representatives of other local
nationalities. In Roland and certain other cities of the Pergana, party
druzhinas were for-ed exclusively of Co-unists of local nationalities.

In addition to the Pergana units, detach-eats tron other oblasts and cities of
the republic, chiefly fron Tashkent, took part in the struggle against the
basnachi.

The baa-achi novenent gained strength following the crushing of the counter-
revolutionary insurrection in Tashkent in January 1919. The inperialists and
domestic counterrevolutionaries true this point forward began placing their
aain hopes on the hasmchi.

By the beginning of 1919 two principal basnachi centers had becone defined:
1) the grouping headed by mdanin-bek (Shobelevskiy, Andizhanskiy. and
Nanangeggkiy uyezds) .97 and 2) the grouping headed by Irgssh (Kokandakiy
Uyezd).

In the spring of 1919 basnachi nomted bandit raids in the Ooh, Dshalal-Ahad,
Nanangan. and a nunber of other areas of the Fergana Valley. The bands of
Hedasin-bek, lrgash. Kurshirnat. and Anan-Palvan were active in the Pergana.
By the end of March 1919 their total nubers exceeded 7000 nen.

The fighting for Nanangsn went on for 7 days. The hands of Nada-in, Kurshirnu.
Raklusankul, Anan-Palvan. and Akhundzhan were attacking the city from four dif-
ferent directions. Basnachi disnantled the tracks on the rail line linking
Nanangan with Kokand. They captured the old city, looting and perpetrating
acts of violence. Naasngen arned workers and Red Army detachnents which had
arrived tron Skobelev. Roland. and Sanarkand dislodged the basnachi.

1.9

FORMALUSEONLY
Substantial basmachi forces had massed in Oshskiy Uyezd. From here they mounted
mounted raids into the Dzhalal-Abad and Andizhan areas. Two volosts -
Naukatskaya and Kapchagayskaya - were entirely in basmachi hands.

In connection with growth of basaachi numbers, TurkTsIK, pursuant to party
reginxn.committee Instructions, at the beginning of February 19 decided to send
into the Fergana an Extraordinary Commission for the Struggle Against the
Counterrevolution in the Fergana. The commission's mandate stated that it was
authorized to take extraordinary measures to wipe out the baamachi, to re-
organize the Fergana operations headquarters and military units, to introduce
a fieég court martial, and to suspend the operations of administrative agen-
cies.

On 24 February the commission published an appeal "To Red Armymen and Red
Guardsmen on the Territory of the Fergang" calling upon them to carry the Red
Banner with honor and pride and to fight courageously against the basmachi.

The appeal stressed that there should be'ho acts of coercion or insult toward
the poor Huslims,who are comrades of us Europeans. 0n the contrary, the Muslim
should be given comprehensive material and moral support."100

In connection with the fact that the Oblast Operations Headquarters was unable
properly to direct the struggle against the basmachi, which was becoming in-
creasingly more complicated with each passing day, on 3 February 1919, at a
combined meeting of Fergana party, soviet and military agencies, it was
decided to establish a new headquarters of the Pergana Front, headed by the
commander of the front, M. V. Safonov. On 5 February the commission ratified
this decision. Two front command groups were formed: the Osh-Andizhan, and the
Kokand-Namangsn.

The Fergana proletariat armed themselves both for the purpose of defending their
enterprises and mines and to take part in military operations against the
bssmachi. A report from the Extraordinary Commission to TurkTsIK stated: "The
entire Fergana is an armed camp."101 The 22 March 1919 issue of the newspaper
NASHA GAZETA stated: "In many localities factories have shut down, since the
workers and employees have been mobilized to arms." The struggle against the
basmachi in the Fergana was gradually becoming a struggle of all the people.

Emergency measures to mobilize forces against the basmachi were urgently needed,
since at the beginning of 1919 there occurred increased coordination of the

operations of all ccunterrevolutionary forces opposing Soviet power in Central
Asia.

The basmachi received extensive financing from abroad. In February 1919 the
British consul in Kashgar handed over 100,000 rubles to the former czarist
censul to pass on to the basmachi kurbashi. Russian merchants residing in
Kashgar and White Guard elements who had fled there from Turkestan allocated
155.000 rubles for the basmachi, on the advice of that same British consul.102
The basmachi were supplied with weapons and ammunition, and intensified pan-
lslamic propaganda was conducted among the basmachi.1°3

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the spring of 1919 the Turkestan Communist Party undertook a number of ac-
tions to expose imperialist agents who had been infiltrated into the republic.
0f great importance was disclosure of the true countenance of Treadwell and
Bailey. when the Turkestan Cheka [Extraordinary Commission] obtained aub-
stantiated information that these persons were the principal directors of anti-
Soviet actions by basmachi bands which were being organized in the republic,105
Treadwell was placed under house arrest by decision of the RSFSR Narkomindel
[People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs]. In March 1919 the U.S. Government
ordered him recalled from Turkestan.1°5 Bailey, however, went underground.
Bailey discussed this move with Treadwell. devoting particular attention to

the possibility of establishing direct contact with the basmachi.1°6 He re-
named in Central Asia until the end of 1919-beginning of 1920.107

By the beginning of April 1919 Soviet forces in Turkestan, inspired by the
overall success of the campaign against Kolchak, won a decisive victory over the
British interventionists, forcing them to abandon the Transcaspian region. Hith-
drawing, the interventionists took with them cotton, oil, livestock, costly
Turkmen rugs and other valuables which they had plundered during their almost
12-month stay in Central Asia.

The struggle against the colonialista by the toiler masses played a decisive
role in the collapse of plans to enslave the peoples of Central Asia. The
Narkomindel's representative in the Turkestan Republic, Bravin, wrote in his
report for March 1919 that the local toiler population trusted the Soviet
authorities and that they had no desire to come under the yoke of the British.
"They know the British well,“ he noted, "from what has happened in Afghanistan.
Persia, and India. They are even less pleased at prospects of coming under the
control of any of the local khans."

Failure of the British intervention in Turkestan was promoted in large measure
by the situation prevailing in Afghanistan at the beginning of 1919. The emir
Khablbulla, a henchman of the British, was killed there on 20 February. The
new emir. Amanulla, declared Afghanistan an independent state. In April 1919
he sent a delegation of emissaries to Soviet Russia to conduct talks with

V. I. Lenin. The events in Afghanistan could not help but cause concern on
the part of the British imperialists over the state of affairs in neighboring
India. and influenced their decision to withdraw fron Turkestan.

From this point on, British imperialism devoted even greater attention to the
basmachi. British military personnel were observed on the Soviet-Chinese
border, in Kashgar (in the vicinity of Tashkurgan). Military installations
were being constructed here under their supervision.1 9

The counterrevolution was attaching prime importance to further expansion of
basnachi actions. This is attested by the fact that a special mission con-
sisting of two generals and two British officers was sent from Kolchak's head-
quarters to the Pergana.11° and the fact that Hadamin-bek was conferred the
rank of colonel.111 Thus the basmachi were being given de jure recognition as
a component part of the overall Russian counterrevolution. The tasks of this
mission were revealed in a letter written by the chief of Kolchak's general
staff to the former consuls in Kul'dzha and Chuguchak dated 8 October 1919.

51
FiﬂRCHﬂﬂCJAL.US£i0Nl¥
"The military mission." the letter stated, "has been assigned the task of es-
tablishing close contacts and relations with representatives of friendly powers
in order that. with material support on their part... partisan detachments can
be organized of the inhabitants of some of the areas of Turkestan to combat the
local Bolsheviks."112

April 1919 was marked by large-scale basmachi operations, which were a com-
ponent part of the campaign of the Entente which was launched in the spring,
the main role in which was played by Kolchalt's army. These operations were
coordinated with counterrevolutionary uprisings in Turkestan aimed at over-
throwing Soviet rule.

The complicated situation in the Pergana demanded that emergency measures be
taken. D. Ye. Konovalov, deputy co-ander of the Fergana Front, traveled to
the Osh sector to organize the struggle against the basmachi there. Lacking
large forces but actively supported by the population, he was able to conduct a
number of large-scale operations, in the course of which he inflicted ap-
preciable blows on the basmachi in the area of Osh and Dzhalal-Abad.

In April the basmachi suffered defeats in Andizhanskiy and Skobelevskiy uyezds.

A detachment formed by Yuldash Akhunbabayev, deputy chairman of the Dshoy-
Bazar Sel'sovet [Village Soviet] in Skobelevskiy Uyezd, distinguished itself in
the fighting. This 34-year-old poor dekhanin, for whom the October Revolution
openai upa new life, fought with weapon in hand for the happiness of his people
against their enemies -- the basmachi. Subsequently Yuldash Akhunbabayev

became "all-union elder" [vseuzbekskiy starosta]--chairmn of the Uzbek SSR
Central Executive Conittee.

0n ll April 1919 the forces of Hadamin and Osipov were surrounded and defeated
between Kokand and Serovo Station. Only 63 men from Osipov's bands managed to
escape and fled to Bukhara with their leader. Hadamin-bek's forces were also
badly mauled. Many kurbashi (Akhundzhan, Tuychi, and others) stated that they
were surrendering to the Soviet authorities. They went over

to the side of the Red Army. An important role was played by the

amnesty offered to basmachi who would surrender, announced by TurkTsIK
on 7 May 1919.

On 9 May 1919 TurkTsIK, the republic Sovnarkom and Narkomats issued a
proclamation entitled "To the Toiling Muslim Population of the Pergana”, ex-
plaining the substance of the amnesty.113 The Turk‘l‘sIK and Sovnarkom Special
Extraordinary Comission for the Struggle Against the Basmachi, under the
chairmanship of K. Ye. Sorokin. one of the leaders of the ‘Nrksstan Republic,
traveled to the Fergana. The chsion was instructed to implement the act
of amnesty.114

The purpose of the amnesty was not only to isolate from the basmachi that
segment of the toiling population which supported them but also to reestablish
agencies of Soviet authority wherever they had been destroyed by the basmachi.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In June 1919 a decision was made iamediately to arm party members and es-
tablish new fighting druzhinas. Not only Communists but also

mun-party. poor dekhkans were enlisted in these druzhinas. Uzbeks, Russians,
Kirghiz, Tajiks. and Kazakhs -- representatives of all the peoples inhabiting
the Fergana Valley - fought shoulder to shoulder in the druzhinas.

The mood prevailing in Turkestan at that time was precisely expressed by
representatives of the kishlaka of Urmitan and Revat in Pal’garskaya Volost,
Sanarkandskaya Oblast. They stated the following in a resolution on fighting
the basmachi (June 1919): "Expressing complete willingness and desire to as-
sist in the struggle against the bandits not only by supplying foodstuffs but
also with weapon in hand, we earnestly request (from the Soviet authorities --
Auth.) that you issue whatever weapons possible, both firearms and cold

steel. If there are not enough weapons to go around, we shall accompany the

detachment carrying stones, in order in some way to help smash the robber
bands."115

Toward summer's end fighting in the Fergana again heated up. Contributing to
this was uniting of the basmachi with other counterrevolutionary forces. In
particular, a deal was reached between Hadanin-bek and the leaders of the
counterrevolutionary "Peasant Aruy.“116 This "army" was for-ed in the course
of the struggle between the Russian peasant settlers and the basmachi, chiefly
in the Kugart Valley. Command positions in the'Peasant Army" were seized,
however, by counterrevolutionary elements. Soon its military council became
entirely kulak. and former czarist general A. A. Mukhanov was named chief of
staff. Cossacks from the Semirech'ye joined the ranks of the "Peasant Army."

0n 1 September Honstrov, the "army's leader? and Hadanin-bek signed an agree-
ment calling for joint actions against the Soviet authorities. Unification
of the basmachi and the "Peasant Army" resulted in establishment of a united

front of the Muslim bai and clergy on the one hand and Russian kulaks and
White Guard on the other.

The question of joint actions by the "Peasant Army“ and the basmachi against
Soviet rule cannot be viewed as an isolated episode of the civil war in
Turkestan. Archival documents indicate that counterrevolutionary forces with-
in Turkestan attached great importance to this unification and that it was
organized with the objective of engineering as overthrow of Soviet rule
throughout Turkestan at the moment the Red Arny was approaching the borders

of the Turkestan Republic, in order to divert to the Turkestan front sub-
stantial forces from the decisive fronts. This is indicated by the date of

this unification (September 1919), the methods and forms of struggle against
Soviet rule.

The united basmachi and kulak forces totaled 20,000 men117 and were armed
with two cannon. 13 medium and 11 light nachineguns. White Guard officers
proceeded to reorganize the basmachi bands.

Toward the end of the summer of 1919, on the eve of unification of Turkestan

with the central regions of the country, the Fergana basmachi had become
stronger and presented an even more serious threat to the Soviet authorities.

53

lull OlﬂﬂCJAL USEiCHVLY
. -.--~o-o.. .... can...

By mid-August 1919 the aain forces of the baamachi had nassed in the Andizhan
sector.

Party and soviet agencies, jointly with the con-and authorities and the
Revolutionary Military Council of the Turkestan assn, took additional seasures
to organize resistance to the basnachi. The Revolutionary Military Council of
the Pergana Front (Bolshevik D. l. Spssibov, chair-an) was formed in August
1919. This council carried out a number of important neasures in a short
period of time. First and foremost, it consolidated scattered small detach-
nents into a single striking force, forming two regiments (a cavalry and an
infantry regiment) and an artillery battery.

The Revvoyensovet [Revolutionary Military Council] of the Fergana Front, how-

ever. lacked the time to forn large combined units. The city of Osh, against

which the enemy was planning to mount a first concentrated attack, contained a
garrison of 300 bayonets and the snall Pamir border guard detachment.

0n 1 Septenber bands surrounded Osh and presented an ultimatum to its defenders.
Rejecting the ultinatun, the gurisonheld off the basnschi in 68 hours of con-
tinuous fighting.

Seeing that the city was not yielding, the Hhite Guard and basnachi decided

to flood it by diverting mountain streams :hoo town. The situation was as fol-
lows. as the defenders described it: "The fort was half flooded with \ater....
The water caused part of the wall to crack, and it was about to collapse. In
order to reduce the pressure of the water, we were forced to work in the water,
building dikes and opening breaches in the fortress wall. Taking no tine out
to rest or sleep, personnel sanned the firing ports in the fortress walls."11
The Osh fortress fell on the third day. Only a few commanders and nen suc-
ceeded in making their way to Andishsn.

Occupying the city, the basnachi and white Chant inmediately proceeded to rob
the civilian population. Ten nillion rubles and precious stones were removed
fros the national bank.119

Several days later the basnachi succeeded in capturing Dshalal-Abad. The fall
of Deb and Dzhalal-Abad greatly conplicated the situation in the Fergana Valley.

Following the capture of Osh, the enemy proceeded to advance in the direction
of Andizhan. Skobelev, and Nanangan.

On 15 September 1919 a meeting of basmachi leaders was held in Old Hargilan.
headed by Hadanin-Bek. Russian White Guardists, and local bai. They dis-
cussed preparations in Perganskays Oblsst for a general uprising. which was
to merge with the basnachi offensive against the oblast's najor cities. At
the seeting it was decided to seal off the Pergana from the rest of Turkeatan,
diﬂylw destroying rail, telephone and telegraph lines.120

The offensive was conducted chiefly against the oblast's large cities. The
basnachi organizers and leaders apparently realised that they could not bring
an end to Soviet rule as long as Soviet authority was preserved in the cities

54

FINI(HNHCJAI.USEIXVLY
and as long as the worker class exerted guiding influence on the dekhkans. The
attempt by the basmechi to mount an offensive on the cities of the oblast was

also aimed at undermining the strengthening alliance between the worker class
and the dekhkan toilets.

In addition to military operations on the basis of the decision adopted in
Hargilan on is September. Madamin-bek and Honstrov began disseminating through
the Fergana all kinds of leaflets and proclamations directed against Soviet
authority. In one of these proclamations they called for the convening of a

Constituent Assembly, at which they promtunitbat half of the seats would be
given to Muslims.12

The Pergana Bolsheviks mobilised all resources to crush the counterrevolution.
Political rallies and meetings were held in all the oblast's towns and

garrisons, at which resolutions were adopted expressing readiness and willing-
ness to defend Soviet rule.

0n 7 September the following resolution was adopted at a meeting of the
Skobeicv garrison: "Having heard a report by the commander of the Fergana
Front and having discussed in detail the status of the Pergana in connection
with the Dzhalal-Abad events, we Red Armymen of the Skobelev garrison declare
that headquarters of the 'Peasant Army.‘ entering into an alliance with the
bandit bands of Hademin-bek, is seeking to stir up the toiling peasantry of
Dzhaial-Abad. But we Red Armymen refuse to respond to this act of provocation
and call upon the toiling peasantry of Dshalal-Abed to march shoulder to
shOulder with us, for truth is on our side. for we are not replacing the rule
of labor with the rule of capital."122

The worker class of the Fergana and the overwhelming majority of the toiling
dckhkans joined with the Red Army in the fight against the united forces of
the basmachi and the Hhite Guard. 0n the instructions of the Ferganskaya
Oblast Party Committee, the Revvoyensovet of the Pergana Front decreed that
all Red Guardsmen in the oblast were to be entered onto the ro“s of the Red
Army.123 0n ll September 1919 the co-and authorities of the Fergana Front
reported the following to Tashkent: "...Practically all work has come to a
halt; everybody's efforts are focused on defense of the republic."124

The heroic defense of Andizhan began in mid-September. The enemy's forces
exceeded by fourfold the strength of the Andithan garrison. On 17 September
1919 the basmachi commenced an assault on the city.

On one of the first days of de deﬁuwe a city-wide emergency party meeting was
called in the park of former mill owner Ruzi-Akhun. The following item stood
on the agenda: "Defense of the city against the attack of the white Guards.
kulak bandits and basmachi." The adopted resolution stated that all Com-
munists were to be declared mobilized and placed on full fighting status.125

The Andizhan party organization126 also mobilized the non-party
toilers of the new and old city. New fighting drushinas and Red Guard detach-

ments were forned of workers from the Besh-Bosh Hill, railway workers, and
workers from the oilseed mills. instrudorss. K. Kuzy-Akhmedov.127 Abdul-Ari:
Khusanbayev. and others gave military training to the Communists of the old

',55

POI OFFNJAI.USE(NVLY
0v” veeaseoeas so-.. ~.l~.

city. A defense headquarters was established, headed by one of the leaders
of Andizhan's Red Guard units, V. IRSidorov. and V. A. Stubs, a battalion con-
nander of the 2d Pergana legisent.

Barricadea fashioned of bales of cotton were being constructed in the town, and
stores of water were being accmleted. Several wells were dug. since the
baseschi had cut off all the nsin aryke [irrigation ditch. canal) which had
supplied the city with water. Trenches were dug around the city beginning on
the first days of Septenber.

During the days of the siege. the Andizhan Cheka discovered and neutralized an
underground comterrevolutiooary organisation linked to the hasnschi and the
Hhite cards. The basaschi had been hoping that they would be able. with the
assistance of aeobers of the underground and counterrevoiutionary propaganda.
to provoke an uprising against the Soviet authorities, especially in the old
part of Andiahan.129 These plans cans to naught. The old town. together with
the new town. became a unified fortress.

The defense of Andirhan was taking place in extr-ely difficult conditions: the
city was acutely short of food, drinking water, am and mition. furro-
Kssyn Aid-adov recalls: ”Our dail ration was 200-300 gr-s of bread and 2-3
spoonfuls of buckwheat porridge." 30 Another participant in the defense of the
city also describes the eatrenely difficult conditions of daily life for the
city's defenders.131

The Andizhan party organization undertook a mﬂaer of neasures to disintegrate
the eneny's ranks. Agitators were dispatched to the eneny's can, who worked
both anong the basnachi and sang the ”Peasant Any." Peasants fro. the
villages of Ivanovskoye and Hikhulovskoye left the Andiahsn siege forces as a
result of lolshevik agitation.”2

The defense of the city was directed by the party organization. headed. by

C. H. Bil'din. chair-an of the Andizhan Dyesd-city party co-eitteo. Detach-ants
for-ed of townspeople fought bravely shoulder to shoulder with the led Arty-
aen. The fighting non of the eta-mist drushina were placed in the east
difficult sectors. Towospeople who lacked weapons evacuated wounded and
brought amnition and food. 0. H. lil‘din died a hero's death in one of the
skirnishes.

The Andizhan garrison and the townspeople held off the essay onslaught for 6
days and nights. Their courage and steadfastness were marded. On 22 Sep-
teaber the Kassn' Coupoaite Reginent ineni Gintsburg, under the co-snd of

A. P. Sokolov, h. V. Safonov's detaclnent, and the nounted detacbent ineni
Third International. under the co-snd of party a-ber 8. T. Kurhelo, arrived
to aid besieged Andirhan. The arriving mite attacked the basnschi without a
pause. The fighting raged on for 68 hours unabated. The resistance of the
basnschi was broken on the third day. Their thinned bands proceeded to with-
drnw froe Andizhan in disarray. led Am units and volunteer detachnents or-
ganized pursuit of the retreating essay. 0. I. Spasibov. chair-en of the
Rewoyensovet of the Fergana Front, was killed in action on 2‘ Septeder. 0n

MWIBEONLY
26 Septsuaer the bassachi abandoned Osh, and on 30 Septenber — Dzhalal-Abad.
Mada-in-bek and ﬂoutrov took refuge in the Gul'chs mountains.

Thus when turkestan becane linked up to the central regions of the country, a
serious defeat had been inflicted on the bannehi thrOugh the heroic efforts of
the Red Any, the worher class and toilets of the indigenous nationalities, and
a new plan to overthrow Soviet rule in Turksstan had been thiarted.

The basnachi continued the struggle, however. they decided to disrupt
celebration of the second anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolu-
tion in the worker co-nities, cities and towns. On 7 lovder 1919 baseschi
attacked neny co-nnities. Particularly stubborn fighting took place in the
Chi-ion oilfield.133

1n the fall of 1919 the organisers of the counterrevolution mdertooh energency
neasures to step up bassachi activities, since at this tine Denihin was ad-
vancing on lbscow and needed the support of all comterrevolutionary forces.
They decided to hold a secret neeting of leaders of the basnachi and the

routed "Peasant Arny," with the participation of representatives of the
reactionary Hoslin clergy and the nationalist bourgeoisie. In October 1919
for-er czarist consul in China Uspensltiy, a henchnn of the British, en-

tered Soviet territory fron Kashgar. A seating of bassechi kurbashi and

white Guardists was held on 22 October in the border village of Irkeshtan.

A "Provisional Pergana Govemnent" headed by HadaIin-belt was for-ed for the pur-
pose of uniting counterrevolutionary forces. “lite Guardist lianstrov was

nased wander in chief, and for-er czsrist general Hukhanov was designated
his deputy. An attorney by the name of ﬂansherg, who was a British spy. cotton
trader Khakis Azizkhanov, and other political edventurists were used to the
”government."

Ties between the British i-perialists end the basnechi becane even stronger
following formation of the ”Provisional Goverment." British intelligence of-
fered every possible support and assistance to the puppet govern-ant. weapons
and ammunition were sent fron Kashgar to Pergana via Colonel 8therton.13‘

At the end of October (or beginning of Blonder) 1919 an Anglo-Afghan delega-
tion consisting of British intelligence officers and Afghan feudal lords
traveled clandestinely to the village of Kara-rape (Perganskaya Oblast) to
neet with Mada-in-bek. First they visited several basaachi detaclnents. The
delegation provided noney to the baanecbi. Banachi prisoners and defectors
testified that following the "arrival of the Afghans entire detacbents were
toned of the sons of bai. well dressed and with the finest mtﬂ."135

Following the Irkeshtan nesting the ”Provisional Pergana Govern-cut." with
the assistance of Russian white Guardists and british officers. atteupted to
gain the allegiance of all basaschi leaders. to end the personal discord

existing anong then. and to draw up a cell-on plan of struggle against Soviet
rule.

On the last days of October 1919 all the isportant besnachi hurbashi con-
gregated in the kishlak of Ai- for a unique kurultay (congress).J-36 Also in

57

momnmsmv
eves vaaasmn. sou-a ~.~~s

attendance were representatives of Great Britain, the Bukhara enirate. and
Turkestan bourgeois-nationalist groups. Pursuant to the decisions reached

at the kurultay, the approxinately lSObands which were operating in the
Fergana at that tine were consolidated into four large codained units under the
co-and of Hadanin, lrgash, Khal-khodzha, and Kurshirnt.

Following unification, the basnachi again coalesced nounting attacks on Osh and
Dzhalal-Abad. on nearby kishlaks and Russian settlements, robbing and terroriz-
ing the dekhkans. At the end of November 1919 approximately 5000 basaachi
surrounded a detachment of the Kazan' Regi-ent which totaled only 122 Red Army-
nen. Soae of the soldiers were killed in the savage fighting, while the
basnachi brutally tortured the survivors. ‘l'hey threw the autilated corpses in—
to the Karadarya River.

But resistance to the bands was growing. Chinion oilfield workers, together
with the garrison. repulsed a basnachi attack. On 22 love-her 1919 the united
forces of Hadanin-bek and Khal-khodrha, totaling 1‘00 nen, mved on Dzhalal-
Abad and neighboring Russian calamities. The local residents net the first
basaachi attack. having repulsed it, they launched a counterattack together
with a snail Red Array detnchnent which had arrived on the scene. Eighty
basnachi renained on the battlefield.

Following the final joining of Turkeatsn with the country's central regions, a
new stage began in the struggle against the bamchi. By year's and fro- 60 to
50 relatively large basmachi bands were operating in the Fergana Valley, each
of which contained fron 100 to 200 men. There were also several larger
hasnachi bands. In addition, dozens of smaller detachnents were rampaging
throughout the valley. All these bands were in constant novenent. shifting

f ron one uyezd to another.

Prior to the arrival in Turkestan of representatives of the am» Central
Connittee, the RSI-'SR Sovnarhon and the VTle (Iurkkonissiya). "there was no war
as such being fought on the Fergana Front... Only a chase after an elusive
adversary,“- 7 wrote the chief of staff of the 2d Turkestan Division in
November 1919.

The Fergana Valley, to use the expression of one of its proninsnt in-

vest igators. Acadenician Hiddendorf. was a “trough anong surrounding nountain
masses."138 Mountains ringed the valley. leaving only a narrow gateway, lo
versts wide. at the western end near the Hakhran fort. At the other end dif-
ficult. rugged mountain trails led into the valley.

The few cities of the Fergana were situated for the soot part in the middle of
the valley. The valley was intersected along its entire extent by numerous
says (rivers), aryhs, narshy paddy fields, and planted tree stands.

The encircling nountains. which separate the valley fron the other regions of
Turkestan. a high population density and highly-dissected terrain created

favorable conditions for the basnachi and node coabat operations difficult for
Red Arny regular units. Actually there was no continuous front in the Pergana

Valley; engagenents would occur unexpectedly at various locations and would be
of brief duration.

58

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Upon studying the situation in the Pergana Valley, the ‘rurkkoniseiya reached the

the conclusion that it was necessary radically to alter the tactics of conbat
against the bamchi.

At the sane tine it adopted the decision to note every effort to step up sass
political-explanatory work anong the inhabitants of the kishlaks and sole of
Turkestan - explanation of the essence and reactionary ache-es of the basnschi,
the goals and tasks of the Soviet authorities. It is not nere happenstance
that H. V. Frunte stressed in one of his first orders: "The difficulty lies

not in overconing the eneny nilitarily - that is not very difficult for us --
the difficulty lies in ensuring that the entire nultinational Muslin toilet
population understand that the hasnachi are also their ens-y and that struggle
against the basnachi is the sacred task of the toiling people."139

Henceforth the political, econonic and nilitary neasures of the Soviet authori-
ties were tied into a single. coordinated unit. Considerable attention was
focused on correcting nistaltes made by local authorities, who did not always
take into consideration the specific features of the econonic systen and
customs of the peoples of Central Asia. Party agencies intensified scrutiny to
ensure strict observance of Leninist principles of nationalities policy,
directed local authorities to treat the religious feelings of the population

in a deferential manner, etc. In addition to political rallies and neetings in
the cities. towns and kishlalts, as well as discussions in chaylthana [tea-
houses]. the Turkkonissiya reco-ended eqloying such a forn of agitation as
conducting discussions with elderly Huslins and honored residents of kishlalts
81d the old sections of towns and cities.1"°

The Turkkonissiya also strengthened the party organisations of Ferganskaya
Oblast. Reregistration of all nsnbers of the oblast party organization was
conducted, and its ranks were purged of alien and hanger-on elenents.

Party organizations proceeded to work actively snong young people. Konsonol
ranks grew rapidly. By January 1920 Turkestan Konsonol had a nenbership of
6000, nest of when were young sea; 25 percent of the Konsonol nenbers were
young people of indigenous nationalities.

Alongside extensive agitation work. the ‘l‘urkkonissiya, pursuant to the in-
structions of the man Central Connittee, undertook vigorous neasures to
strengthen agencies of Soviet authority in the Fergana and to achieve ex-

tensive enlistnent of toilers of the indigenous nationalities into the build-
ing of a Soviet society.

Since the basnachi leaders were operating for the nest part in rural areas. a
course of policy was adopted which eined at creating solid support among the
dekhkans. Also of great importance was correct iapleaentation of food policy
and offering of naterial assistance to the toiling dekhkans.

0n the instructions of the regbtnl connittee of the Turkestan Conunist Party
and the Turkestan Republic Sovnarkon, detachnents were forned in all cities,
towns and large kishlaks situated in areas of basnachi operations, the detach-

nents being forned of party, Reasons]. and trade union aenbers to protect their
city. town or village.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'm Wrasse. by... UA‘LI

Prominent Conunists distinguisied the-selves in the struggle against the
basnachi, including 3. Usaankhodzhayev, A. Had'yarov, S. Arifbayev. I. lluradov.
A. lsayev. and l. Alinkulov. Hany Co-nists (Khodshs Palvan. Khasan Saib,
Khodsha Hanadzhan. etc) gave their lives in this struggle.

New tactics in the nilitary struggle against the has-achi consisted in the fol-
lowing: Red Arny units, upon occupying localities of operational and acoustic
isportance, would fora highly nobile detachnents in these localities, which
would nount raid actions against the basaschi. who lacked operational and food
supply bases, forcing the enemy to accept open conbat at locations where it
was easier to wipe out the eneny with the aid of mbile reserves.

Revolutionary couittees were establist in large co-unities in which Soviet
garrisons reneined. The public, feeling the support of the garrisons behind
then, began taking sore active part in the struggle against the basaachi. The
Fergansltaya Oblast Revolutionary Co-ittee noted in its report for liovesber
1919 that the najority of the indigenous population had a favorable attitude
toward the Soviet authorities and were willing to support theml‘l Therefore
the baa-achi were deprived of the possibility of cutting the cities and towns
off from the kishlaks and of disrupting food supply to the cities; strengthening
of bonds between the cities and Itishlalts was leading to increased influence by
the urban proletariat on the dekhkan nssses.

Soviet troops did not liait theneelves to nounting a single attack but con-
tinued pursuit of the enemy. cutting off his avenues of retreat. Larger aili-
tary forces were being sassed in the Fergana Valley with this objective.

By the beginning of 1920 the 2d Rifle Division (II. A. Verevltin-Bokhal'sltiy —
subsequently lieutenant general - served as division co-snder), 12,360 sen
strong, with 52 nachineguns, was deployed in the Pergsns. Of particular in-
portance was arrival in the Fergana at the beginning of 1920 of the let Volga
Tatar Brigade (brigade co-ander Yu. Ibraginov. later A. A. Tal'lwvskiy),
which had been forned in Katan' by decision of the RSPSR lathe-ins and which
had distinguished itself in conbat on the Eastern Front. The Tater brigade was
sent to Turkestan on the personal instructions of V. l. Lenin. The Turk-
komissiya recouended that all Fergana party organisations lake use of the
arrival of the Tatar brigade to conduct a large-scale political carpsign
directed toward explaining to the local toilers the nationalities policy of the

Soviet authorities and for all-out conduct of agigstion and propaganda work
with the aid of brigade political personnel.“2

The Turkestan Front Rewoyensovet and the Turklnonissiya for-ed a brigade aili-
tary council. giving it broad authorities. Ya. Chanyshev, the Tatar brigade's
military conissar. was nased council chairman, with RaIthin Rakhiﬁabayev,
chair-an of the Andishan Revolutionary Co-ittee, party uyesd co-ittee
secretary Gmnerov, and R. lslasov. TurkTle representative. naned as nesbers.

Highly-mobile detachments were for-ed of Con-unists and personnel from the
Tatar brigade, and also contained representatives of local party organisations

and progressive youth. These detachents traveled practically throughout the
entire Fergans Valley; asny political rallies, neetings and conferences were

60

FOIOFHCIALUSEONLY
held, at which the nationalities policy of the Soviet authorities, the ideas
and goals of the Conunist Party were explained to the toilets.

Preparing for aggressive operations against the basmachi, party and soviet
agencies did a great deal of work in the area of forming ethnic units. As a
result, three ethnic cavalry regiments and several other units, representing a
total strength of 6500 men, were deployed on the Fergana Front. The In-
dependent International Cavalry lrigade, made up of for-er prisoners of war.
also took part in the struggle against the basaachi as a Red Army unit on the
Fergana Front. The brigade was commanded by E. P. Kurhelo. It mounted at-
tacks on the basmachi in the Koksnd. Namangen, Andizhan, and Osh areas.

Combat operations against the basmachi were directed by H. V. Prunze. V. V.
Kuybyshev arrived in the Pergana in February 1920 to handle direct organiza-
tion of the struggle against the basmachi bands.

The initiative on the Fergsna Front was firmly shifting over to the Red Army.
During the first months of 1920 (from January through March) several operations

were successfully conducted, ending in the defeat in detail of a number of
large bands.

At the beginning of January 1920 the main forces of the Red Army and volunteer
detachments were put into action against lrgash's band, which had dug in at
its base fortress of Bachkyr. But the ancient wells failed to save the
basmachi. Red Army units and volunteer detachments took the fortress by storm.

At the sane time an attack was launched against Kurshirmat in the Gul'cha-
lrkeshtam sector. Kurshirmat sustained heavy casualties, but succeeded in
withdrawing with remanants of his band into the high-mountain Alay Valley,
which contained avenues of egress to the border.

The rout of the Irgssh and Kurshirmat bands threw the ranks of the Fergana
Valley basmachi into disarray. Some bands, cornered by advancing Red Army

units and volunteer detachments, opted for capture over total rout. The 500-
man Khamdam band. the bSO-man Hakhkam-khodzha band, and the GOO-man Akbaralibend
surrendered together with their leaders.

Disintegration began in the bands which continued to resist. Many disenchanted
dekhkans deserted from the basmachi bands and surrendered to the Soviet
authorities. More than 900 men gave themselves up just between 20 January

and 2 February 1920; many of these joined volunteeer detachments. Hadamin-bek,
attempting to improve the situation. again commenced aggressive actions, but
was routed by the Tatar brigade. having lost 200 horsemen, he fled across the
Syr Darya.

The leader of the Pergana basaachi began truce talks with the Soviet authori-
tics. At the same time he was attempting to take advantage of the lull in

the fighting to move the remaining hands into the mountains. The Fergana

Front Revvoyensovet. while entering into talks with Hadamin-bek, did not cease
organizing pursuit of the enemy. Hadamin-bek was forced to capitulate. 0n

0 March 1920 he signed an agreement with the Red Army command authorities which

61

F0! OFFKJAI.USIZCNVLY
a vs. vs a any“... wuo- ‘1. ea.-

specified his total subnission to Soviet authority. On 12 “arch 1920 “admin-
heh's 1200 nounted warriors ceased resistance.

The ma cawaigi against the hmhi in tin early nonths of 1920 coincided with
brilliant victories won during that sane period by the Red Any on the nain
fronts of the civil war - on the Southern front over the any of Deniltin, and
on the Eastern Front over the reanants of Xolchak's forces.

in order to consolidate the successes achieved in the struggle against the
bassechi. the Turkkonissiya, jointly with the Turkestan Front levvoyensovet and
the Soviet Goveth of ‘l'urhestan, proceeded to rebuild factories and nills in
the Pergana, began construction on a rail spur fro. the Kyryl-Kiya lines.

began utilization of neglected land, began cleaning out the aryks. shipping
cotton to the Center {central region of the European part of the RSPSR], etc.

The dekhkan toilers of the Pergana, just as throughout mrkestan, saw with
their own eyes that the Soviet authorities were mswervingly iqilenenting a
nationalities and agrarian policy ained at inroving their situation.

The most inportant of the political measures carried out at that tine was re-
establish-ant in the kishlaks. under the supervision of the party regional and
ohlast connittees of the agencies 0 f authority which had been destroyed
by the baa-achiJ-h

At the end of March 1920 elections to local soviets were held in a amber of
localities in Perganskaya Oblast.

0n 2 April 1920 the Turkestan Front newoyensovet issued a decree ordering
indennification of the public for losses sustained as a consequence of req-

u isitioning of property for the needs of the war effort (horses, canals,
wagons, etc).1“ Extensive assistance began to be given to the public.

which had suffered fron the bassechi raids. A fund of 50 nillion rubles

was established for this purpose. A network of tea and food relief stations.
shelters, nedical care facilities, and hostels for persons without shelter was
organized throughout the Fergana.

Peace in the Fergana did not last long, however. A new hasnachi wave erupted
there in the sinner of 1920. H. V. Praise characterized it as ”rebirth of

the basnschi front."1"5 The revival of the basanchi was due to the fact that
the basic conditions which had engendered the class struggle. which assuned

the forts of arned cosbat, could notyet be entirely elininated by this tine. in
particular. the exploiter classes of Central Asia and the reactionary Muslin
clergy attenpted to use any pretexts to keep the basnschi flue fron becosing
extinguished. in addition, the inperialists of the Bntente were asking
preparations for a new anti-Soviet camaign. l’lacing its principal hopes on
white Poland and Hrsngel's am. the Entente was at the sane tine attenpting to
organize against Soviet rule continued actions by all counterrevolutionary
forces in the outlying regions of the Soviet Republic. The Central Asian
basnachi comprised one of these forces.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the Fergana the plans of the agents of imperialism were connected with the
name of Kurshirmst, a former side of Madamin-bek. Following the surrender of
Madamin—bek, beginning in April 1920, Kurbashi who were continuing the struggle
against the Red Army began to gather aromd Kurshirllat.“6

‘rhe counterrevolution was continuously seeking to unify the basmachi forces
under the direction of a single leader. As soon as any one of the chiefs ad-
vanced to a "leader" position. he would i-ediately be given every possible
support and assistance. Such was the case this tine as well. Kurshirmat
received financial assistance, plus a magnificent title to enhance his
"authority." At a meeting of Fergans kurbashi in July 1920 he was named, as
Irgssh before hin."amir al'-muslimin" [cmnder of the ﬂuslims].

In mid-Hay 1920 the Fergana once again becue the arena of savage struggle.

Attempts to persuade the kurbashi to surrender voluntarily were unsuccessful.
Concentrated in their hands were the most reactionary elements and co-on
criainals. veterans of m-erous mrders and robberies. Nevertheless the
Soviet authorities continued in their efforts to end the bloodshed. In May
1920 with the assistance of Hedamin-hek, they succeeded in getting a truce
envoy from Kurshirnat's cap to meet for peace talks. At the same time a
delegation was sent to Kurshirmat, consisting of regimental co-issar S. 1..
Sukhov and HadaIin-bek. But Kurshirmat refused to engage in peace talks and
handed over S. 1.. Sulthov and Hadamin-bek to the tender mercies of his
myrmidons. On 110 May 1920 they were beheaded in the Tamasha urochishche.

The kurbashi Akhundzhan and Parpi, who had previously surrendered, once again
came over to the side of the basmachi.

By midsummer of 1920 approximately 30.01) basaachi had massed in the Fergana.
They included many dekhkans who had been deceived or forced to join the hands

by threats. This category of basmachi would seek to leave the bands at the
first opportunity.

The large scale of basmachi operations in the Fergana Valley once again made
this region an arena of acute class struggle. Following Kurshir-at's brutal
execution of Sukhov and Hadamin-bek, naturally all peace talks were halted.

A Turk‘l’sIK decree placed the entirety of Fergsnsksya Ohlast under martial law.

H. V. Frunze and Sh. 2. Bliava arrived in the Fergana in mid-Ha 1920 to take
over direct supervision of the struggle against the bamchi.“ An enlarged
session of the party oblast couittee was held inediately after this, at

which matters of stepping up party work in the oblsst as well as the struggle
against the basmachi were discussed.”8

After receiving an on-the-spot briefing on the situation, )1. V. Frunze tele-
graphed V. l. Lenin: "...Firm and decisive measures are essential; otherwise
the Fergana will he lost for an extended period of tilne."1~’°9 He reported to
V. l. Lenin that the main forces of the Turkestan Front had been sent into the
Fergnna.15° It is true that these were not very large forces but, operating in
a close link with the masses and in solidarity with volunteer detachments, the

Red Army comprised a cementing nucleus of the people's armed struggle against
the bssmachi.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
eves val-vetoe- e—H... ~.t~s

H. V. Frunze visited all the principal areas of the Fergsna where the struggle
against the baamschi was being conducted. Talking with col-sanders and men,
the toiler population, party and soviet officials, and addressing nuaerous
political rallies and meetings of workers and dekhkans, he inspired them for
the struggle against the basmachi. Acquainting himself in detail with party-

soviet work, he gave assistance to local organisations with his advice, cor-
rected their mistakes, and guided their activities.

During H. V. Prunze's stay in the Fergana, preparations began for executing
the order issued by the Turkestan Front Rewoyensovet which called for mobi-
lizing toilers of indigenOus nationalities into the Red Army.

It was decided to issue an appeal to the toilers of the Pergana to become ac-
tively involved in the struggle against the basmachi. V. I. Lenin pointed out
that when a threat to the republic arose, the party considered it to be "its
duty to appeal to the worker-peasant masses and to describe to then the dif-
ficult situation which has developed. He appealed to them and indicated on
whom the salvation of Soviet Russia depends and what exertion of energy is es-
sential in order to focus all resources on one specific task."151

An appeal entitled "To the Muslim Population of Ferganskaya Oblast," signed by
H. V. Frunze, was made public on 2‘ May. "Comrade Melina!" the appeal stated.
"We, representatives of Soviet authority, appeal to you, the residents of the
cities. towns and auls of the devastated, blood-soaked Pergana.... You must
come en nasse to the assistance of the authorities in wiping out the baseschi.-.

Hasten your gathering into a harmonious fraternal faaily under the Red Banner
of Soviet rule."1-52

The appeal, printed in the local languages, was widely disseminated (sore than
20,000 copies).

Frunze sumoned to the Fergana an agitation train operated by the political
directorate of the Turkestan Front. At his suggestion, agitation-organizer
courses of instruction were set up in the Pergana for representatives of the
kishlaks; persons enrolled in these courses "should very shortly become
bearers of the ideas of Soviet rule among the kishlak population."153

At the beginning of June a special politprosvetotryad [political education
detachment] was formed in the Pergana, to work among the people of the kishlaks.
The men of the politprosvetotryad, along whom was pioneer of Soviet Uzbek
poetry Khanza Khakin-zade, an ardent orator extolling Soviet rule, assisted

the Red Army not only with words: they frequently took direct part in combat
actions.

In May 1920 the regional Konsonol con-ittee issued an appeal to young people to
become actively involved in the struggle against the hemehi. "All organiza-
tions have responded to the appeal of the RKSH [Russian Young (Jo-nunist League]
regjxmal committee calling for mobilization for the Pergana Front," reported the
newspaper IZVESTIYA. "Many comrades are requesting to be sent to the front.
Volunteers are coming from the most remote localities."15"

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ye.N.Unnasbayev, H. I. Nazarov, and H. Yu. Yuldashev were among the leaders
of the Kokand Komsomol and organizers of the struggle against the basmachi.
Kokand Komsomol member Abdulla Nabiyev, who organized a scout detachment of
Uzbek Komsomol members and who performed important tasks for the Red Army
command authorities, displayed a model of selflessness.

As a result of the mobilization appeal, instead of 9350. 11,675 toilers of

indigenous nationalities reported to the induction stations of Ferganskaya
Oblast.

Taking into consideration experience to date in combating large basmachi bands,
on 15 May 1920 M. V. Frunze ordered commencement of military operations on a
wide front. The main forces concentrated in the area of the principal

basmachi bases in the Alay Valley. A composite group operated here. consisting
of two regiments and an ethnic Kirghiz battalion. The composite group was com-

manded by E. P. Kuzhelo. A mobile detachment was formed in the Pergana Valley
proper.

All party and soviet agencies were mobilized for the struggle against the
basmachi. In the interests of more precise coordination of operations, ad-
ministrative functions in Ferganskaya Oblaat were temporarily turned over to
the military command authorities.

The Red Army units had the task of pursuing thebandsuntil they were complete-
ly destroyed. even if it became necessary to operate outside of their as-
signed area.

E. F. Kuzhelo's composite group operated in the most difficult and critical
sector. On 25 Hay 1920 the group departed from 05h and headed into the
mountains. The first engagement with the basmachi took place on a mountain
pass. The bandits had taken up positions there in advance and had fortified
them. But they were unable to withstand the onslaught of the Red Armymen and
retreated up a gorge leading to the Alay Valley. into the Sufi-Kurgan area.
On the morning of 29 Hay, however, when the detachment's advance guard ap-
peared at Sufi-Kurgan. the basmachi wOuld not accept battle and hastily with—
drew toward the Alay Valley. The basmachi leaders considered this area in-
accessible to Red Army units. The rarefied air required special training for
adaptation. One would tire rapidly. Tenacity. persistence, stamina and
belief in victory, however. gave the commanders and men additional energy.
For two weeks the Red cavalry-en relentlessly pursued the basmachi. Neither
the accustomed conditions nor the difficult passesand gorges saved the enemy.
Part of the bssmachi forces was defeated in detail in the Alay Valley, while
part eseaped across snowy passes into other areas.

A romposite detachment under the command of P. H. Paramonov. setting out from
Kokund on 30 May. conducted several successful operations against the basmachi
hands of Snli-Maksum, Aman-Palvani and Atakuza.

The succezses of the Soviet troops greatly influenced the attitude of the local

populace. Th: dekhkans gradually lost the fear caused by the basmachi acts of
terrorism and came out increasingly actively against the bandits. The basmachi

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rtm UI' Hyena. \a-Il— ‘l.‘.n.

did not feel secure even in the most remote areas of the Panirs. Unhappy with
the constant requisitions and coercion, the toilers themselves were nking
preparations to put an end to the basmachi bands. On 26 June 1920 the dekhkans
of mountain kishlaks held a clandestine meeting. The following day a volunteer
detachment made up of local villagers attacked a stronghold containing a bandit
base and seized stores of weapons and widen.

In July 1920 Kurshirmat attempted to launch an offensive. He came down out of
the Alay Valley, intending to cut the Kokand-Fergana and Andizhan-Namangan rail
lines. This raid was a failure, however. In four large operations (in the
Corbua—Yaz"yavan, Angichek-Bulak-Bashi, Shaarikhan-Zarkent, and Yaz"yavan-
Hinbulak areas), Soviet troops, with the support of the local population,

dealt the basmachi decisive blows. Remnants of the baamachi detachments fled
in the direction of Balykchi-Chinabad.

Thus within a short period of time the Turkestan Co-ission of the Walk and
the RSFSR SNK, the Central Conittee of the Turkestan Cos-mist Party, and the
Rewoyensovet of the mrkestan Front, with the direct participation of party,
government and military leaders (V. V. Kuybyshev, H. V. Prunse, Sh. Z. Eliava,
etc). succeeded in mobilizing the toiler masses, uniting their efforts with

the operations of the Red Army, and thwarting attempts by the basmachi to
launch an offensive.

In August 1920 party and soviet organizations elaborated new measures for
wiping out the basaachi bands. It was decided to establish a military council
in the Fergana, transferring to it all civil administration.15s On 12 August
the question of combating the basmachi was also discussed at an oblast con-
gress of the Pergana party organization. The necessity of stepping up the
struggle against remnants of the hasmachi bands was also incorporated in the
resolutions of the Fifth Andizhan Uyezd-City Party Conference, which was held
at this time. in August Turk'rslx and the Revvoyensovet of the mrkestan Front
granted the Perganskaya Oblast Military Council emergency powers to combat the
hasmachi.156

Carrying out its assigned task. the Pergana Military Council proceeded to
implement special measures. In addition to stepping up political education
efforts among the toilers, it introduced, in particular, a system of hostages --
bai, mullahs, and relatives of basmachi still at large.

At the same tine the famed brigade of Red Conmards and ethnic volunteer units
or Kirghiz and Kazakhs, which had arrived from the Center, were sent into the
Fergana.

Basmachi activity did not diminish however. Their actions at the end of 1920
contained a specific feature, expressed in the fact that they were aimed at
undermining economic life in the Turkestan Republic. Precisely at this time.
when Turkestan's economic relations with the country's central regions were
developing and growing stronger, the organizers of the basmachi were endeavor-
ing to inflict maximum damage on the economy, in order to impede the economic
recovery of Turkestan and thus to weaken the economy of the country as a

66

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
whole. The basmachi were assigned the mission of depriving Russia's textile
industry of cotton and of leaving 'mrkestsn without coal, oil and foodstuffs.

For this reason their efforts were directed chiefly toward the destruction of
industrial enterprises, mines, oilfields, rail lines, telephone and telegraph
lines. irrigation works, cotton and foodstuffs storage facilities.

In the past acts of arson by basmachi bands on cotton ginning mills, destruc-
tion of rail lines and attacks on oilfields and mines had as a rule been
sporadic, from occasion to occasion, while now acts of sabotage were assuming

a massive character and were being carried out according to a plan conceived
and worked out in advance.

The following table contains a smary of bassachi raids on the Fergana Rail-
road and cotton ginning mill burnings in July-October 1920:

Number of Length of Demolished Tracks ﬂower of Cot-

Raids and Telegraph Lines ton Hills hated
July . . . . . . 16
August 11 32 versts 9
Septanber 17 31 varsts 15
October 5 . . . 2

Sources: Central State Archives of the Soviet Army. Fund 110. List 3. File 522,
sheets 16-18; USSR Central State Archives of the October Revolution,
Fund 130, List ’4, File 786, Sheet 37.

At the beginning of August, according to incomplete figures, the bass-chi
burned up 100,000 poods of cotton, 33,000 goods of raw cotton, and 12,000 poods
of seed grain just in Andizhsnskiy Rayon.1 7

In October raids were mounted simultaneously on the Shurab coal mines and on
the Chimion oilfield.158 At the beginning of November six basmachi bands
attacked the Sulyukta coal nines, the republic's second most important.
located in the southern part of the Fergana Valley. Baa-achi also surrounded
the Pos'yetovka area. where a cotton wool sill was under construction,159 and
attacked the Santa oilfield.160 In mid-Nov-ber basmachi attacked the
ozokerite fields near Hel'nikovo Station, as a result of which operations in
these fields were shut down.161 Significantly. at this same time basmachi
operating in the Turkmen and Kara-Kalpak areas munced an attack on the
fisheries on the Muynsk Peninsula in the Aral Sea. This once again confirms
that basmachi operations were being directed from a single central head-
quarters and were being carried out according to a unified plan. He could
also cite a number of other eunles. All of them indicate that during those
days when the White armies were defeated, counterrevolutionary forces were

undertaking attempts to retard or thwart our country's movement onto the path
of building socialism.

Having analyzed information on acts of economic sabotage, the Turkestan Front
Revvoyensovet undertook a mﬂer of measures to protect industrial installa-
tions and rail lines. The party kraykom [regional committee] instructed

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’UI WI’ILIAL var. U-‘LI

local organizations to organize, with the assistance of command and political
personnel of military units, party druzhinas and territorial battalions to
aid the Red . Such units were formed in Kokand, Andizhan. llamangan. and
other cities.16

At the beginning of September 1920 H. V. Prunze stated in a conversation with
V. V. Kuybyshevz'i consider it essential... to place under arms the entire
worker and white-collar population of this oblast, with the exception of
those performing vitally essential functions. This measure, providing
assistance to the military in the formof workers acquainted with the enemy's
tactics. will in my opinion make it possible to achieve results in short
order."163 H. V. Prunze's instructions were carried out. hills. oilfields
and railways, protected by Red Army detachments, party druzhinas and other
worker class security units, began operating more or less normally.

An important role in mobilizing all manpower and resources to defeat the
basmachi was played by the resolutions of the 5th Congress of the Turkestan
Communist Party and the 9th All-Turkestan Congress of Soviets. Of particular
importance were congress resolutions pertaining to continued enlistment

of representatives of toilers of indigenous nationalities into agencies of
governmental authority.

Following these congresses, important measures in the area of the nationali-
ties question were carried out in Turkestan. promoting defeat of the basmachi.
These included the following: nativization of the edifice of government, ex-
tonshe enlistment of representatives of local nationalities into the government
structure, adoption of teaching in the mother tongue of the pupils and students
in the schools, and use of the languages of the nationalities of Central Asia
(alongside the Russian language) in commercial office and administrative ac-
tivities. A report by H. S. lseyev, secretary of the Ferganskaya Oblast Com-
mittee of the KPT, dated 12 February 1921, noted that "a number of political
campaigns have been conducted since the 9th and 5th congresses, resulting in
the fact that the basmachi are gradually beginning to disintegrate."16“ in ad-
dition, the 9th All-Turkestan Congress of Soviets decided to send 10 percent
of the congress delegates into the struggle against the basmachi, while the

3th Congress of the K21 mobilized a number of delegates for political work in
the Fergana. Following mobilization of the KPT Central Committee, 100 Com-
munists. representatives of local nationalities, left for the Fergana Front.

In October 1920 the Tudmmuo [Turkeatan Bureau} of the RKP(b) Central Committee
decided to send into the Fergana half of all party workers who had come to
Turkestan from the Center, including at least 20 graduates of the Communist
University imeni A. N. Sverdlov, who had been sent to Turkestan by the RKP(b)
Central Committee.l65 On 20 October 1920 the Orwyuro [Organization Bureau]

of the RKP(b) Central Commitee decided to send party officials to the Pergana
for permanent-assignment party work.166

The activities of party organizations produced appreciable results: the local
toilet population began joining people's militia detachments and militia

assrstance detachments which were being formed at this time. These detach-
ments became quite active in 1921.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In his address at the Fourth Conference of Cubernia Chekas on 6 February 1920,
V. I. Lenin stated that “A substantial majority of workers and peasants in
those outlying localities which were under the yoke of the Uhite Guard, the
greater their numbers, the more firmly they have come over to our side."167
These words apply in full measure not only to the workers but also to the
dekhkans of Turkestan. The Oblast Congress of Soviets of the Fergana, held in
August 1920, affirming the participation of the local population in the
struggle against the hasmachi and in the local soviets, informed V. l. Lenin
of these facts, which were important for the Pergsna and for all of Turkestan.

The "Koshchi" [poor peasant] unions, established on the basis of the resolu-
tions of the 5th Congress of the KPT, began playing a significant role at this

time in the struggle against the basmmchi. Their members actively participated
in self-defense detachments and in volunteer militia units.

The struggle against the basmachi in the Pergana was alleviated at the end of
1920 by two most important circumstances: by the victory over the main forces
of the interventionists and white Gmnds (the rout of urangel' and the

armistice with Poland) and by the victory of the people's revolution in
Bukhara (September 1920).

Our enemies refused to capitulate, however. The nationalist counterrevolution
and the basmachi leaders worked out a plan of establishment of a coalition of
all counterrevolutionary Muslim elements in the East to combat Soviet power.
On 7 November 1920 Kurshirmat, who called himself "the chief kurbashi of the
Fergana Ishmuc army," the Bashkir nationalist Il'darkhan Hukani. and the
Kazakh nationalist Dzhunazakov appealed to Dutov168 to join this bloc and to
begin Supplying the basmachi with arms, ammunition and instructors for the
purpose of organizing a new basmachi army.169 This counterrevolutionary ven-
ture, however, proved to be just as unsuccessful as its predecessors.

An end to fighting on the civil war fronts made it possible to redeploy ad-
ditional military units to the Fergana. By the end of 1920 several rifle
brigades and cavalry regiments arrived there from the Semirech'ye and the
former Bukhara Front. At the same time the Fergana Army Group was established,
under the command of G. V. Zinov'yev, and subssquently of P. I. Baranov,
member of the Turkestan Front Revvoyansovet.17 It saw action in the Namangan,
Fergana. Kokand, Andizhan, and Osh combat sectors.171

Fierce engagements were fought with the basmachi in the Namangan, Andishan, and
Osh areas. Basmachi bands in the Andizhan-Osh area totaled approximately

1500 men. The 15th Independent Dungan Cavalry Regiment was operating against
this force. The band lost 150 basmachi killed in an engagement on 30 November
1920 and fled into the Bulak-Bashi and Corbua areas.

Combat operations against basmachi bands were also conducted in the vicinity
of Koksnd. There were more than 1000 basmachi in this area. In two engage-
ments the bands lost approximately 120 men. The remainder, unable to with-

stand the onslaught of the Red Armymen and volunteers, dispersed into small
groups.

69

FOR1OFEKJAI.USE(NVLY
ea ocean...” --~ -..~e

A battle raged for four days and nights at the Dzhalal-Abad railway station.
Enjoying a substantial superiority in numbers. the basaachi surrounded the
station. The handful of Red Armymen were in an exceptionally difficult

plight. Food and water supplies ran out. They were running extremely short

of ammunition. 0n the fourth day the enemy began launching continuous assaults.
At that moment when the Red Army-en had run out of almunition and the basmachi
were attacking from all sides. an araored train appeared on the horizon. It
scattered the band with artillery and machinegun fire.

Araed clashes with basmachi bands continued in the Fergana Valley throughout
the entire south of October 1920. The bandit units were disintegrating under
the attacks by the Red Army and volunteer detachenta. Faced with this situa-
tion. the basmachi kurbashi of the Pergana Valley, with the participation of
agents of foreign intelligence services. held a 2-day conference, in hopes of
uniting their forces and jointly finding a way out of the predicaaent. At the
cost of great efforts, success was achieved in reconciling the two baemachi
leaders of the Fergana -- Kurshirmat and Huetdin - at this meeting.

Red Army units and volunteer detachments continued pressing the bands in the
Fergana Valley. In October-December 1920 practically the entire territory of
Ferganskaya Oblast was cleared of basaachi. Remnants of the shattered bands
took refuge in the Alay Valley.

The Turkestan Coamunist Party realized that the successes against the basmachi
on the battlefield had to be consolidated by carrying out econoeic measures.

An important role in the struggle against the basaachi was played by a
TurkTsIK decision, adopted at the initiative of the Turkkonissiya. to abolish
the food monopoly in Ferganskaya Oblast and to open bazaars for free trade.172

On 25 December 1920 an oblast conference of dekhkans was convened in the
Pergana. at which reports on the following topics were presented and dis-
cussed: l)thecurrent situation; 2) land reform; 3) tasks of food commissars;
4) tasks of public education in the village; 5) the struggle against the
basmachi; 6% economic development; 7) organization of a union of toiling
dckhkans.17 The resolutions of this conference and their implementation
fostered mobilization of the dekhkans for the struggle against the counter-
revolution.

In the Summer of 1920 the government of the RSFSR allocated substantial funds
to the purpose of boosting the Fergana economy. Turksstan was allocated 150
million rubles for rebuilding the irrigation system of the lergana. which had
been demolished by the basmachi, and for restoration of cotton growing. In ad-
dition, money was allocated for the purchase of 5000 poods of seed grain and
for purchase abroad, primarily in China, of livestock for distribution to the
dokhkans. Another important measure was opening up of the border with China
for unrestricted import of grain and livestock into the Pergana.

The government of the Iurkestan Republic in turn substantially reduced
government taxation of the dekhkans. while those kishlaks which had suffered

70

FOI‘DFFKJAI.USE¢N‘LY
heavily were fully exenpted fron payment of taxes. The toilers of the Fergana
were given large-scale assistance in supply of foodstuffs and nanufactured
goods.

The military-political aeasurea taken by the Turhestan (Jo-mist Party and the
Turkestan front Revvoyensovet in the summer and fall of 1920 resulted in

the total defeat and scattering of aany baaaachi bands; this ends it possible
for the front command authorities to make part of their forces available for
the western Front and thus to contribute to the defeat of the white Poles.

The situation of the basmachi who were operating in nountain areas worsened
with the onset of winter. The Bed Arny, with the active support of the
population. prevented the hands fro. remaining long in kishlaks. The kurbashi
undertook attempts to penetrate into populated localities but. encountering
resistance. would once again withdraw into the mountains. On 26 Novenber 1920
Red Army detachments launched another attack on the forces of lurshiraat and
Aliyar. which were attenpting to break through into settled areas. As a result
the basnachi fled in the direction of Sokh, where they were again overtaken

on 25 Novenber and scattered into saall groups.

In November 1920 more than 1200 basmachi, who had been taking refuge in the
southern part of Kirghizia. concentrated in Narynskaya Volost, with the in-
tention of living off the local population. On this occasion as well, how-
ever, they were unable to carry out their plans. A Red Arny detachment ar-
rived in Narynskaya Volost to protect the local population. It hit the
basmachi encanpnent with a surprise attack. Hand-to-hand fighting ensued, in
which the basmachi suffered heavy casualties.

in the first half of Decenber 1920, following several successful operations,
two bands were destroyed and the Parpi band, which totaled more than 2000 men,
was thoroughly mauled. Ya. A. Hel'kunov's 9th Brigade routed Kasakhay's band
and inflicted a defeat on the band of Aman-Palvan. Kurahiraat's force with-
drew into the Alay Valley. closer to the border.

By the end of 1920 basaachi nunbers had been sharply reduced in comparison

with the beginning of the year. They raved about the Fergana Valley. for the
nest part in the adjacent aountain ranges. Driven out of the densely-populated
areas. they were deprived of their principal bases of food supply. The in-
habitants of the kishlaks and auls refused to provide the bands with feed and
foodstuffs. Increasingly less frequently were the basaachi successful in tak-
ing food supplies by force. They were hindered in this endeavor not only by
the Red Army and the volunteer detachments, but also by the dekhkans then-
selves. Frequently the inhabitants of hishlaki and aula united at their own
initiative and offered resistance to the baaaachi.

in the kishlak of Hayli-Say the weaponless peanut invited hasnachi into their
homes. and then on signal disaraed then one by one, seizing 37 rifles and

32 horses. Such examples are not isolated. But the principal form of
struggle by the population against the bands was their participation in
volunteer druzhinas. nilitia and self-defense detachments. By the end of

1920 they contained more than 15,000 residents of Ferganakaya Oblast.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[UR WIILMI. 90(— U-\|.l

At the end of l920-heginning of 1921 the Soviet nation. having defeated the
gain forces of the interventionists and Hhite Guard, began shifting over to
peacet ise construction.

The long-awaited peace did not yet ensue, however, in the Pergana Valley.
Inspired by external reactionary forces, the chieftaina of the beseechi hands
refused to lay down their area. Years of difficult struggle against the
basaachi still lay ahead for the Pergana.

Areas of Banachi Concentration: Ahlyk, "Hatchinakoye Bekstvo"

In addition to the My: Valley. in 1918-1920 haemachi detachments were

operating in the Angren River valley near Tashkent and in Sanarhndskaya
Ohlast.

[n the Angren River valley, an important grain and rice producing area. which
played an important role in the economy of the Turkestan Republic, the haemachi
bands of Ashurnat and Rakhmnnlnul appeared in the villages of Ablyk. Pengas, and
Ashava. located 80 versts southeast of Tashkent, presenting a direct threat

to Tashkent, the republic's political and military-adeiniatrative center.
Seizing the Kul'davan and Kendyr-Davan passes, which link Tashkent with
Perganskaya Oblast, the basmachi secured their rear and obtained f reedon of
maneuver.

Local party units assumed the brunt of the struggle against the basmchi.
Party druzhinas of Communists from nearby co-aunities in Tashkentskiy Uyesd:
Pskent. Buki. liuratali, Telyau. and Ablyk, as well as detachents of Tashkent
Columnists and workers were dispatched to the area.

Another dangerous focal point of Malachi activity developed along the upper
reaches of the Zeravshan. in a rugged mountain area, beyond the Ohurdon pass,
among the sheer cliffs of the Zeravshan and Turkestan ranges. in the north-
western part of contemporary Tajikistan. The reactionary clergy and hai were
particularly strongly entrenched in this area. skillfully exploiting the
ignorance of the population, clan-tribal traditions and ties. The entire area
bore the name Hatchinskoye hekstvo (the Zeravahan is called the Hatchs along
its upper reaches; the areds administrative center, a large kishlak. bore the
same name). in November 1918 the bai in this area, headed by the local belt
[frudal rule r]. massacred a snall Red Arly detacl-ent and established their
own rule. Counterrevolutionary elenents planned to turn the Hatchinskoye
bekstvo [Matcha heydon] into an "independent state."

Although the scale of activities of the Hatcha insurgents was sma11,17‘ Hatcha
was of enornous importance to the counterrevolution, for it played the role

of binding link between the Fergana bassachi and the Bukhara air, who was
backed by the British imperialists. In addition, the Fergana basmachi
utilized the Math area as a place to regroup their hands and as an avenue of
withdrawal into Bukhara territory during an offensive by large Red Army forces.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Having seized power in the Hatchinsboye bdratvo, at the beginning of 1919 the
basnachi leaders attenpted to gain control over the neighboring hishlaks. The
basnachi proceeded to raid the: and rob the local populace.

A small led Arny detach-eat was dispatched to Hatchinsltaya Volost. Its actions
were little effective, however, since it was able to hold back the baseachi on-
slaudt only in certain sectors. Appeals issued by the Red Any caused and
local authorities to the baseschi to stop the bloodletting were unsuccessful.
The Hatcha basnachi bees-e sore aggressive. Dathane were fleeing to Snarkand
and Pendzhikent to escape fro. these terrorist activities.

The Sansrkandskaya Oblast party co-ittee nobilized Con-mists to fight the
basnachi in the hatchs. An international detach-ant was for-ed in the first
half of 1919. In hay 1919 Muslin bureaus were established in all uyesd and

city party co-ittees in SanarItandekaya Oblast, which proceeded to conduct ex-
tensive political work aeong the assess.

In the neantiee the beseechi kurbashi announced the establishment of an in-
dependent state. called the "Hatchinslwye behtvo." This venture - the
creation of a "state" consisting of reuote nountain kishlaka with a population
totaling several tens of thousands -- pursued two objectives: to enhance the

authority and prestige of the chieftains and to obtain laterial assistance fro-
reactionaries abroad.

In addition, the baseschi leaders declared that their beltstvo was "popular"
(an experienced stage nanager's hand could be discerned in their actions). and
in order to show evidence of this they staged "voting" by the population when
various decisions were rude. Employing the threat of area. the baa-achi
herded the dekhkans to assenbly points, where the "balloting" took place. A

delegation which was to be sent to England for "counsel" and "assistance" was
also elected in this manner.

British authorities held talks with the delegation, figuring to obtain a
bridgehead for aggression in Central Asia. They gave approval of creation of
the "Hatchinskoye belzstvo" and prouised generous aid. In the «nu of 1919
the delegation returned to the Betcha. The pronised support went to the heads
of the baseschi leaders. Operating fro- their refuge beyond the rugged
nountain passes, the baseschi nounted raids and robbed the population in the
surrounding areas. The residents of the kishlaks in Fal'garskaya Volost were
particularly frequently raided.

In Septenber 1919 the Hatcha basnachi launched an offensive toward the city

of Pendzhikent. Taking advantage of the fact that the lain Soviet nilitary
forces were in other areas of Central Asia. they captured l3 kishlaks. A 150-
nan Red Arny detachment arrived fron Sansrkand to assist the toiler population
on the upper reaches of the Zeravshan. The Sanarkandskaya Oblast party con-
nittcc issued arms and anunition to the people of the kishlalrs which were
frequently subjected to attacks by the beseechi bands, and also sent instructors.
The detachnent and local delthkans liberated a nunber of kishlaks.

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a-.. vase-m... --- v.0...

At the sane tine aeasures were taken to defend the kishlaks of Ura-‘l'yubinskiy
and Khodzhentskiy uyezds. Snail ailitary garrisons and volunteer detect-ents
covered the passes leading to the Zeravehan Valley.

At the sane tine the Red Any cot-and authorities and local agencies of Soviet
authority, seeking to avoid further bloodshed, nade one nore attenpt to
eliainate the baa-achi base in the Hatcha by peaceful naans. Following
negotiations, the Hatcha leaders agreed to disar- and pledged to stop raiding
the surrounding areas, but they failed to keep their pronises.

In January 1920 the basnachi again proceeded to conduct offensive operations.
Following engage-ants which had variable access, they withdraw beyond the
nountain passes.

Once again truce talks began. Finally on 12 July 1920 a peace agreenent was
signed between the Red Arly co-Iand authorities and the Hatcha bek. But the
truce again proved fragile. The hasaachi particularly stepped up their ac-
tivities in Septenber 1920, when the population of the Bukhara enirate rose up
in rebellion. The victory of the popular revolution in lukhara foreordained
the defeat of the bastachi in the Hatchinsltoye bekstvo. A special new detach-
ment under the co-and of one of the heroes of the civil war. P. If. Paranonov,
was for-ed in Saaarkand. The Suarkandskaya Oblsst Executive Co-ittee
declared Ura-Mbinskiy Uyezd, where the hurbashi Kholbuta, notorious for his
ferocity. was on the ranpage. to be under nartial law. A total of about 20
bands were operating in the areas of Sanarkandskaya Oblast. each of which con-
tained from 70 to 700 basnachi.

At the end of Septeaber 1920 Red Artsy units fought in the Hatcha for a period
of 20 days, hitting the basnachi hard. The basnachi were not coapletely wiped
out in the Hatcha, however, until 1923.

Basaachi of Bukhara and Khoreea

‘rhe rulers of Bukhara and Khiva were able to hold on to their thrones for
acne tine following the victory of the October Revolution. In the conditions
of the civil war and foreign intervention, the Bulthara enirate and the [hiya
khanate became hotbeds of counterrevolution and an interventionist bridgehead.

As already noted, the Fergana, Hatcha and other has-chi received enormous as-
sistance free the ruling circles of the Bukhara enirate. Buhhara sent the
basnachi arms and honey, and offered refuge following defeat. Dzhunaid-hhan.
the dictator of Khiva, repeatedly attacked the towns of Petro-Alehsandrovsk
and ragga. which were situated in the Anudar'yinskiy Division of the Turkestan
ASSR.

The anti-Soviet activities of the rulers of Rhive and Dukhara hastened the col-
lapse of their despotic regiaes. The nasses rose up to overthrow the basnachi
dictator Dzhunaid and the enir of Bukhara, henchnan of the British inperial-
ists. In this struggle the toilets of Khiva and Bukhara, led by Co-ninists,

relied on fraternal help fron the Russian people and the assistance of Soviet
Russia.

76

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
The toilers of Khiva were the first to achieve victory. In love-her 1919
there began a popular uprising against the dictatorship of Dahunaid-khsn. The
insurgents appealed to the Soviet Government for support. A delegation of
Khiva insurgents arrived inPetro-Aleksandrovsk. On A hove-her the Soviet of
Uorkers' and Dehhltan Deputies telegraphed an appeal to Tashkent. addressed to
the Turk‘rslx and the Revvoyensovet: ”The proletariat of Khiva has risen
against Dzhmaid-khan; fighting is in progress everywhere. A delegation

f roe the people has cone to us asking for assistance. Request your pernission
to send a detachent to assist the insurgent people of lhiva."1 6

The united forces of the Khiva revolutionary detachment and led Arly units in-
flicted a nunber of defeats on Drhmaid-khan. who was being actively assisted
by remants of the Uhite Cossack forces.

At the end of January 1920 Dshunaid was defeated and fled into the desert.
nedirkent. his official residence. fell on 23 January. Revolutionary detach-
nents entered the khan's capital on 1 Pebruary.

The victory of the revolution in [hive was. to quote V. V. Kuybyshev, "the
first link in a chain of revolutions and uprisings in the East which will in-
evitably bring all the comtries of the East which are today oppressed and
enslaved by british inperialiss to conﬁne liberation fron bondage.... heroic
little Khiva was the first to enbark upon the path of struggle. It was the
first to rise up in rebellion. It was the first to gain liberation fro-
despotism.“177

The First All-Khorezn Kurultay of People's Representatives convened in Khiva

on 26 April 1920. It proclaimed the establislnsnt of a people's Soviet
Republic and adopted its first constitution.

The 'Treanble" to the constitution stated that it was solely due to the victory
of the socialist revolution in Russia that theKhivan people had been able to
gain their freedon and independence. ”...The Russian workers and peasants,"
it stated further. "who have helped liberate the people of naive and the
proletariat of the entire world... are the very best friends of the entire
Khiuan people." The Khorern Peoples Soviet Republic (KPSR) arose on the ruins
of the despotic Khiva regine.

[mediate following Khiva. the revolution was Victorians in bukhara as well.
Fearing the growing discontent of the people, the enir stepped up repressive
neasures and was sore and sore obviously turning the country into an anti-
Soviet bridgehead. lie was operating in close contact with the British lili-
tary consand in Mashhad. Dozens of British and white Guard officers were ec-
ting as instructors training the enir's troops. As V. V. Kuybyshev stated,
the Bukhara enirate had once and for all becone a carsvanserai for counter-
revolut ionaries, White Guardists. and world installs-.178

in the neantine the resentment of the toilets. who had been suffering fron
poverty and the arbitrary rule of the enirate authorities. reached the boiling

point. On 28 August an uprising erupted in Charjui. This was followed by
actions by revolutionary forces in other parts of the enirate. "On 28 August

75

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
1920." H. V. Frunze later wrote, "the Bukhara abscess finally burst.” H. V.
Frunze further noted that the Soviet authorities were faced with s dile-a:
"Either to assist the insurgent Suki-arm people and help then cast off the age-
old chains of bondage and denial of civil rights or to rennin spectators to
the incipient struggle and allow the enir to extinguish the gleans of freedo-
in Bukhara. The Red troops of Turkatan narchef shoulder to shoulder with

the people of nukhara against their oppressor." 7

Red Ar-y units. together with Bukharen revolutionary forces, crushed the
resistance of the enir's troops. bukhara was liberated on 2 Septedaer follow-
ing a fierce battle. H. V. Prunze telegraphed V. I. Lenin: “The last strong-
hold of Bultharm obscurantisn and reactionary extrsnian has fallen. The Red
Banner of the world revolution is waving victorioualy over the Registan."18°
Enir Seyid Alia-khan and lost of his dignitaries fled into Eastern Bukhara.

0n 5 October 1920 the sol-er palace of the suit witnessed an unprecedented
event. within its walls gathered the 1950 delegates to the First All-Bukhara
Kurultay of People's Representatives. The Kurultsy proclained establish-ent
of the Bukhara People’s Soviet Republic (BPSR).

The revolutions in Khorezn and Bukhara were of great historic significance.
Raving destroyed the last refuges of ohscurantisn and despotisn. they
brought the toiler masses onto the path of socialist develop-eat.

The revolutions in Khoreza and Bukhsra were not socialist revolutions. The
economic and social backwardness of Khoresn and Bukhara densnded particular
flexibility and gradualisn in effecting revolutionary reforms and in accos-
plishing first of all tasks of an antifeudal and antiinperialist character.
Therefore the Khorezs and nukhara republics did not arise as socialist but
rather as people's Soviet republics. Subsequently, as the Soviet system
became consolidated, Khorezn (in 1923) and Bukhara (in 1926) were transformed
into Soviet socialist republics. The [0’83 and the BPSR entered into a
fraternal union with Soviet Russia, which had given the. cosprehensive as-
sistance.

The building of a new life began in Bukhsra and Khorezn. The nasses had been
liberated. Radical socioeconomic and sociopolitical refer-s were being
carried out.

The onward march of the revolution. however, encountered fierce resistance on
the part of reactionary elements. Feudal-bai ele-ents gave a hostile reception
to every progressive measure. At first there were my bourgeois nationalists
occupying high posts in the young republics.

The basmchi became the main instrument of counterrevolution in Khoress and
Bukhara.

A tenacious, protracted struggle against the basnachi of Dzhunaid-khan was
taking place in Khorezn. The dictator, stripped of his authority. gathered

together substantial forces with the generous and active assistance of British
intelligence. Dzhunaid's army was node up for the nest part of seebers of the

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f-iliea of feudal lords, for-er functionaries of the Khiva hhanate, reac-
tionary clergy, and diehar Hhite Guardists. The bands of Drhunaid-hhan
totaled up to 10,000 no.1 1

Combat operations by Red Army units in August 1920 were unsuccessful as a
result of treachery on the part of the Khivan Jadids.182

On 27 October Dzhunaid-hhan captured hangrad and exacted savage reprisals on
party and Soviet activists. Liquidating agencies of popular rule, he placed
the toner belt Balabiy in charge of the occupied city.

There was no limit to the atrocities perpetrated by Dzhunaid-hhsn. lakir
Belousov, former military couissar of the lat Volga-Tatar brigade, who had
cone to Khoreu, was murdered. The nen of the tort-en volunteer detect-ants
were villainously put to death.

At the end of 1920 Nuhus was surrounded by basmachi. Fighting at the city
walls continued unabated for lb days. As frequently occurred in those years,
there was only a few days supply of food and a-nnition. It was necessary to
husband each and every cartridge, every gran of bread. But the nen of the
garrison and the people's volunteers withstood the siege. when supplies were
running out, Red Any-n P. nus-etov volunteered to take a aessage to the Red
Arny comand authorities in Petro-Aleksandrovsk. Under cover of darkness he
stealthily evaded the bassechi patrols, mde his way past the ring of en-
circleaent. and reached Petro-Alekeandrovsk. A Red Army detach-eat speedily
came to the rescue. The basaachi withdrew.

An RSFSR plenipotentiary delegation headed by H. V. Safonov arrived in

Khorezm and went to work. It was able to mose the counterrevolutionary
activities of a substantial portion of the Jadid party leadership who had close
ties with the baemachi.

The defeat of the supporters of Drhunaid-khan was a result not only of a
heroic struggle on the part of the volumeer detacbents and Red Any units
which had come to assist then, but was also a result of consolidation of
Soviet authority. increased activeness on the part of the Khoresn toilers and
strengthening of the ranks of the Khorezn Cos-mist Party -- vanguard of the
toilet nassea Khoreze,established at the First All-Khoreu Party Conference
in Hay 1920.

of enormous inportance in the defeat of the basnachi was strengthening of the
Khorezn Red Any, which was formed in the course of the struggle for victory of
the popular Soviet revolution. It consisted of dekhkans, artisans, snall
merchants and traders. The political directorate of the Khorezl (Khiva) Red
Army (’urkhiv), headed by Col-unist Hakhnsd Husayev, was established in
Novenber 1920. Purkhiv took over direction of all party work in the republic,
since at this time the bourgeois-nationalist Jadid group controlled the Central
Conittee of the Khiva Comunist l’arty.183

Extremely close ties between the republic and Soviet Russia were a nest impor—
tant condition for strengthening the people's rule in the KPSR.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Iva vrs nuns. was. was”

On 13 September 1920 a treaty of alliance and economic agreement between the
RSFSR and KPSR were signed, providing for nilitary-political and economic co-
operation; also signed was an agreement to provide assistance to the Khorezm

Repubgzc in the development of cotton growing, irrigation, com-unications,
etc.

The struggle againetthe has-achi in the Bukhara Republic was of a no less com!
plex and difficult nature.

Long before the collapse of the enirate, basmachi bands were active in the
mountainous areas of Eastern Bukbara. Alongside co-on criminals, they were
frequently led by nullahs, high officials of the emirate, bets, and tribal
chieftains. The basnachi bands stepped up their activities in the spring of
1919, when many basaachi from the Pergana Valley crossed over onto the ter-
ritory of Eastern Bukhara. Making preparations for the struggle against

Soviet Turkestan, the emir of Bukhare who had entreated the King of England to
take Bukhara into the British empire,185 sought to utilise the hasnachi. he
dispatched nessengers carrying letters in which he proposed the establish-ent
of arned detach-ants.

The Lokay area, situated to the southwest of Dushanbe between the Kafirnigan
and Vakhsh rivers, became a focal area of basnachi activity. Basnachi had long
been active in this area, in conditions of extreme econonic and sociocultural
backwardness and prevalence of clan-tribal relations. Persons fleeing the
blood vengeance of fellow tribesnen had traditionally settled in that part of
the Lokay situated beyond the Vakhsh. Many of these people readily joined the
ranks of the basnachi.

One Ibragin-bek, who had close ties with the leadership elite of the two
largest Lokay tribes, became chieftain of the Lokay baa-achi.

On 21 March 1920 the enir of Bukhara sent lbragin-bek a letter containing an
appeal to enter into'btruggle against the infidels."186 Ibragin-bek was happy
to cone to the defense of the emir. Not all the Lokay tribes, however, sup-
ported Ibragin-bek. The cannon working people and even entire tribes had no
desire to join bands. Hostility between tribes grew more intense on these
grounds. One of the tribes joined the basaachi only under threat of severe
reprisals. and then only after lbragin-bek executed the tribe's chief mullah,
who had been opposed to the beseechi.

in the neantine the former enir and his retainers, who had fled the capital,
arrived in Eastern Bukhara. It was not nere happenstance that they chose
Eastern Bukhara as their base. Seyid Alia-khan and the Bukhsra counter-
revolutionaries placed high hopes on this region. Massive nountain ranges
and the nearby frontier would enable them, when it becane necessary, to take
refuge in rugged mountain gorges or across the border. Ibragim-bek's large
basnachi bands were operating precisely in this area.

The enir settled in Dushanbe for a short period of tine and set about to con-
solidate his authority in Eastern Bukhara. In the latter half of September 1920

Seyid Alia—khan convened a kurultay in Dushanbe, which was attended by the

78

INDI‘OFFICIAI.USIZ(MVLY
leaders of the Bukhara, Fergana, Khorezm. and Samarkand basmachi, Russian
Uhite Guardists, British and Afghan advisers. They adopted a common plan of
action against Soviet rule. Soon several caravans delivered British rifles
and cartridges to Eastern Bukhara.

Assisted by the British. Seyid Alia-khan organized large bands, which he con—
centrated in the Kulyab. Gissar and Dushanbe areas. By mid-November 1920 his
detachments had seized Baysun and Sherabad. The former emir announced con-
pulsory nobilization of the dekhkans. By the beginning of December 1920 his
army totaled 7000 men. It acquired artillery - 30 guns. Five hundred camels
were loaded with bales carrying ammunition. The enir's troops included
soldiers sent by Afghan feudal lords. Capturing shakhrisyabz, Kitab, and
Yakkobag by the end of December 1920 and carrying out a new mobilization in
these towns, the emir enlarged his army to 15,000 men.

The basmachi dealt brutally with the civilian population. Townspeople would be
killed even for going out into the street. contrary to prohibition, when the
former enir was riding along it. During the single night spent in Karatag,
Seyid Alin-khan's retinue of of dignitaries and basnachi hacked several persons

to death with sabers, for the most part persons who resisted the looting and
violence.

The Lokay band, prominent among which was the large band of Ibragim-bek‘s

father-in-law, played an appreciable role in Eastern Bukhara during the forner
enir's sojourn there.)-87

The acts of violence by the basnachi aroused the people's wrath. On 16 Deceizer
1920 the dekhkans of Karateghviloyst [province] rose up in rebellion against
the emir. The uprising was mercilessly crushed. The residents of Sherabad,
who had sent delegates to Ternez requesting that Red askers [soldiers] be sent
to their aid as quickly as possible. also rose up in rebellion.

The difficult situation in Eastern Bulthsra densnded i-sdiste leasures.

The struggle against the bassschi in Eastern Bukhara and the northern areas of
present-day Tajikistan would not be an easy one. The soldiers of the Red Army
and the volunteer detachments had to fight fierce engagements against large
bands which had well equipped bases. In the nountains the basmuchi con-
structed unique fortresses with secret passageways and laid in large stores of

provisions. feed and equipment. There was also a shop for the manufacture of
cartridges.

The Central Comittee of the Bukhara Communist Party (BC?) and the Bukhara
Revolutionary Committee initiated an extensive political campaign among the
public. Prominent BCP leader Alimdzhan Akchurin went to the Gissar and Karshi
areas, while Fayzulla Khodzhayev, chairman of the Sovnarkom of the BPSR, went
with 15 political workers to the Shakhrisyabz area. A "political assault
group" under the leadership of Sagdulla Tursunkhodzhayev was dispatched to
Dushanbe for this purpose. Dekhkan kurultays were held in a number of viloyats
of thc BPSR. at which the dekhkans discussed matters connected with forming
people's self-defense detachments and assisting Red Army units.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘\l'| UI‘I’ILIRI. I as. \I.‘..I

Political expeditions were sent into many areas to conduct agitation-ex-
planatory work.

RSFSR envoy plenipotentiary V. V. Kuybyshev did a great deal of work in the
Bukhara Republic. On 17 October 1920. in a telegran to the co-ander of the
Turkestan Front, he requested that Soviet Bukhara be given fraternal assistance,
stepping ug the pace of operations by the front's forces against the

basmchinl 8 At the end of October, at a joint meeting of med>ers of the
Turkkonissiya and the front's comand authorities, with the participation of

the RSFSR envoy plenipotentiary to Bukhara, V. V. Kuybyshev's proposals Ber-
taining to the struggle against the basaachi were discussed in detail.18

Units of the Turkestan Front were being concentrated to engage the army of the
former emir and the basnachi. In hove-her 1920, by order of G. V. Zinov'yev,

comander of the lat Array, all Soviet troops in the BPSR were consolidated in-
to the Bukhara Group of Forces, with the objective of conducting a Gissar ex-

pedition. By January 1921 five Red Army brigades. including 2 rifle and

3 cavalry brigades. had arrived in the Bukhara Republic.

At the end of 1920 the Bukhara Hilitary Comissariat, under the leadership

of Bolshevik B. Shegabutdinov. began the job of forming a Bukhara People's Army,
and subsequently a Red Army. The con-and authorities of the Turkestan Front
sent comanders and political workers to assist him.

A specially formed detachment mounted the first operation in the Gissar
sector. Its mission was to mop up remants of the enir's forces, to clear the
Cissar Valley of these troops and basaachi bands, and to create conditions
there for the cstablishnent of Soviet rule.

By the end of December 1920 units of the Terms: garrison had liberated
Sherabad, the Samsrkand group had captured Kitab, while another group had taken
\‘akkobag. On 20 February 1921 Red Army detach-eats reached Gissar. A battle
ensued. in which the enemy was defeated and fled. By the end of February 1921
tenacious fighting had resulted in the liberation of Dushanbe. Kulyab and Cara,
where the basnachi had long been entrenched. By the end of February the 3d
Border Squadron, under the command of A. Ya. Pankeyev, was the first unit to
reach the Soviet-Afghan border. The shattered basnachi groups scattered and
dissipated in the vicinity of Karategin and in the valley of the Vakhsh.

The rout of the remnants of the enir's forces and the large basaachi bands
brought Seyid Alin-khan's plans to naught. 80 longer hopeful of success and
{caring capture. on 5 March 1921 the forner enir of Bukhara, protected by a
security guard of basnachi, crossed the Afghan border. A heavily-laden
caravan of 300 canels hauled away plundered gold, precious stones and other
valuables. [bragin-bek and Davlyatnan-biy fled across the border with the
formr emir.

The lst Brigade. under the comand of Ya. A. Hel'kumov, was puIneling the bands
of Kurshirnat (who had come over from the Eergana) and Fuzayl Haksum. Unable

to withstand the offensive pressure of the Red Army units and volunteer
deiaclments, Kurshirast retreated to the refuge of the Alay Valley.

80

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
By the end of March the 1st Cavalry Regiment, under the command of D. Ye.
Krasil'nikov, maintaining relentless pursuit of Fuaayl Haksum, delivered
damaging attacks in the Katta Karamyk urochishche. In the course of the fight-
ing the following were seized: approximately 5000 sheep, goods plundered from
the population, and 60 leather trunks filled with valuables. Puzayl Haksum's
main forces (more than 800 men), however, headed for the refuge of the Darvaz.
where the Darvaz bek Ishan Sultan was operating.

The men of the Red Army met sympathy and support on the part of the Bukhara
toilets. In December 1921 a dekhkan uprising, under the leadership of Usman
Nukhamadinov, erupted to the rear of the emir's forces. The insurgents cap-
tured Garm and forced the Karategin bek to flee. In spite of the fact that
this uprising was soon crushed, it attested to the fact that the counter—
revolutionary forces lacked a mass base.

The Cissar Expeditionary Detachment of the Red Army displayed great courage and
heroism in liberating the toilers of the BPSR, a fact which was noted in a
Revvoyensovet order. The 1st and 2d Cavalry regiments, the 8th Rifle Regiment
and the lst Mountain Battery of the 1st Independent Turkestan Cavalry Bségade,
outstanding commanders and political workers were awarded decorations.1

Conducting aggressive actions against the basmachi, the Bukhara Communist Party
and the government of Bukhara continued revolutionary reforms and strengthened

the edifice of government. Measures taken by them consolidated the people's
rule.

At this time an endeavor was made to define the essence and character of the
revolution in Bukhara, in order to be able to take appropriate measures to ac-
complish its further development and deepening. The initiator in this en-
deavor was V. V. Kuybyshev, whose report on this subject was presented in
hovember 1920 at a joint session of the BK? Central Committee, Revolutionary
Committee and the BPSR Council of Nazirs (inspectors, supervisors]. Prominent
Bukhara Republic leaders took part in the discussion of this re.ort, including
Fayzulla Khodzhayev and Sadriddin Ayni. A letter entitled "To the Bukhara Com-
munists" was published on 7 January 1921, in which theTurkbyuro of the
Comintern mapped out a program for mobilization of all the republic's re-

sources to consolidate the achievements of the revolution and for defeating the
basmachi.

The 5th Congress of the Bukhara Communist Party was held in February 1921,
which was of great significance for the republic's progressive development.
The congress resolution on the military question, the principal content of

which was "Everything for the Red Army." played an important role in the suc-
cessful struggle against the basmachi.

A Soviet-Afghan treaty was signed in Moscow on 28 February 1921. Among other
points, the parties to the treaty agreed ”to the genuine independence and
freedom of Bukhara and Khiva. whatever form of overnment shall exist there in
conformity with the wishes of their peoples."19 The treaty struck a blow

against the intrigues of reactionary circles in Afghanistan. which were actively
supporting the basmachi.

81

FOI¢0FFKJALI£HEONLY
A treaty of alliance and an economic agree-eat between the ISPSII end the
BPSR veto signed on 6 March 1921. The Minn Soviet Republic recognized the

independence of the BPSB. pledged to give it eeononic and other assistance and
gave it an outright nonetnry assistance gtant of 500,000 anneal”

82

MWLUSEONLY
EIEHIES 0P PEACEFUL LAIOR

Successes and Achievements of the Toilers of Central Asia

in November 1920 the troops of the Southern Front stormed across the Perekop
Isthmus and liberated the Crimea. pushing into the Black Sea the remnants of
the defeated army of Baron Urangel'. H. V. Prunze, commander of the Southern
Front. sent a telegram to Hoscow. addressed to V. I. Lenin and the party
Central Co-ittee: ”The armies of the front have carried out their duty to the
republic. The final nest of Russian counterrevolution has been smashed...."1

The appeal of the 8th All-Russian Congress of Soviets. which convened in Moscow
in December 1920, rang out across the land: "The toilers of Russia have

earned the right to cowmence peaceful labor, a right earned by these three
years of great deprivations and bloody sacrifices. we shall devote all our
energies to this labor. Let there not be a single person in our Soviet land
who is capable of labor and is not working. Let there not be a single machine
tool standing idle. Let there not remain unplanted a single desyatina of
arable land....

"The victors over Kolchak. Denikin, Yudenich and Hrangel', this country's
highest agency of authority, the All-Russian Congress of Soviets, call upon us
to engage in new struggle and achieve new victories.

"Long live our victory on the labor front!"2

The 10th Congress of the RKP(b), held in March 1921. spelled out a campaign to
rebuild and boost the economy. The congress adopted a resolution in response to
the report of V. I. Lenin, calling for transition to a new economic policy (REP).
The changeover to NE? strengthened the alliance between workers and peasants on
a solid economic foundation and created the requisite preconditions for suc-
cessful reconstruction and development of the nation's economy.

in Central Asia the toilers were faced with great difficulties. The postwar
econonic chaos - which was enormous throughout the enuntry - was particularly
burdensome in Turkestan. By the beginning of 1921 agricultural output had
declined to one third the prewar level. Total head of livestock had also
diminished to one third. Half of the irrigation systems had become unfit for

83

FOI‘OFFIJAJ.US£(NNLY
FOR OONLIAL L3}. 05!)

service during the war years. In 1915 the cotton harvest totaled 20 million
poods. while in 1920 only 650,000 poods were harvested.

Industrial production, which had been modest to begin with. declined to one
fifth its previous level. Transportation was in a disastrous state.

The toilers of Central Asia rolled up their sleeves and proceeded to rebuild
the economy. Initially proceeding more slowly than in Russia's central regions,
rebuilding of Turkestan's economy subsequently assumed an increasingly more

rapid pace. In 1926-1925 gross industrial output reached almost four fifths
the prewar level.

The irrigation network was being restored to working order, and acreage
planted to cotton was increasing. In 1923 7 million ponds of cotton were

harvested. The economy of the Bukhara and Khorezm republics was gradually
reviving.

The government of the 85538 gave comprehensive assistance to the toilets of
Central Asia. Manufactured goods, medicines, and equipment for restoring
irrigation systems to service were sent into the region. The RSPSR provided
the republics of Central Asia with substantial funds. Specialists -- en-
gineers and doctors, scientific workers and teachers -- came to Tashkent,
Samarkand, Ashkhabad, Khodzhent. and Bukhara from Moscow, Leningrad and other
cities of the central region.

of particular significance was the relucation of industrial enterprises to
Central Asia. For example, the Zaraysk weaving and Spinning Hill and equipment
for textile, papermaking,tsnning, and soapmaking enterprises were transferred
free of charge to the Bukhara Republic.

Implementation of socioeconomic reforms in the Turkestan Republic continued.
in 1921-1922 a land and water reform was carried out in Semirechenskaya,
Syrdar‘inskaya, Ferganskaya. and Samarkandskaya oblasts, and revolutionary
transformations in Bukhara and Khorezm were expanded and deepened. Kazakh,
Kara-Kalpak. Kirghiz, Tajik, Turkmen, and Uzbek toilets were becoming in-
creasingly involved in building a new life.

The "Koshchi" union, a mass organization of dekhkan toilers,was growing rapid-
ly. By the end of 1921 its ranks contained approximately 100,000 peasants of

indigenous nationalities thrOughout Turkestan. while by 1924 the union had
grown to a membership of 200,000.

Cultural development was advancing increasingly more broadly: schools were
established with pupils taught in their native language, new cadres were
trained. and enormous cultural-educational work was being done. The great
Uzbek educator Khamza Khakim-zade Niyazi participated actively in organizing
schools. children's homes. musical and dramatic troupes,1ibraries. "red
chaykhanas," and likbez [elimination of illiteracy] circles.

Famed Uzbek film director Kamil' Yarmatov, who was an active participant in the
struggle against the basmachi (in 1922 he served as militia chief and ChON

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[Special ?urpose Unit] commander in lenibadamx recalls that a theater under
the directorship of Khamra cane from loiand to Kenibadam. "themes and his
actors traveled not only among the cities, towns and kishlaks of Perganshaya
Oblast but also along the entire vast Turkestan Pront.... They carried
Bolshevik truth to the masses, exposing and ridiculing the basmachi, Islamists,
autonomists, nationalists, reactionary mullahs, and other counterrevolution-
aries. Their repertoi: consisted of short. single-act plays, sketches, variety
acts. and 'agitation posters.’ The actors could sing and dance. and frequent-
ly they had to go directly into battle right off the stage, still wearing make-
up and costumes."3

The Communist Party devoted great attention to correctly resolving the na-

tionalities question and uniting all the peoples of our country into a unified
fraternal family of builders of socialism.

A most important event was the establishment in December 1922 of a unified
Soviet multinational state -- the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Es-
tablishment of the USSR facilitated to an enormous degree the struggle by all
the peoples of our country to liquidate backuardness, to overcome the
resistance of the exploiter classes. to achieve development of the economy and
culture. and assisted the movement toward socialism.

An event of great historic importance took place in Central Asia in 1924-1925 --
the dclimitathniof national statehood. One of the conditions for accomplishing
this was success in the Fergana, Bukhara, Khoresm and elsewhere.

The peoples of Central Asia had been without nationhood in the past. All three
governmental entities which existed in Central Asia at the beginning of the
1920's -- the Turkestan. Buhhara, and Khoresm republics -- were multinational.
Their administrative boundaries did not coincide with ethnic boundaries.
Uzbeks. Tajiks. Turkmens. Kirghiz, Kasakhs, and Kara-Kalpaks, for example. were
living intheTurkestan Republic, but none of these ethnic groups comprised an
absolute majority. There were Turkmens living in all three republics, but
nowhere did they comprise a majority. Tajiks were living in the Turkestan and
Bukhara republics, and also did not comprise a majority. The Kirghiz resided
primarily in Turkestan. but they represented less than ll percent of the
republic's total population.

in conditions of a Soviet system it became possible to unite the territories
in which Uzbeks. Turk-ens, Tajiks, Kazakhs, Kirghiz. and Kara-Kslpahs were
living. territories which had been split and disconnected in the prerevolu-
tionary past. and to reunify them in ethnically homogeneous Soviet republics
and autonomous oblasts.

This task was placed on the agenda in 1926. By that time all three Central
Asian Soviet republics had achieved notable successes. Rebuilding of the
economy. consolidation of the Soviet system, and growth of indigenous cadres
were creating the requisite conditions for performing demarcation on a na-
tional statehood basis. The Central Asian republics were strengthening rela-
tions among themselves in all areas.

85

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY
'0“ or f It IRA. ear. UAL U

In March 1923 the Turkestan ASSR, the Bukhara and Khorezm republics decided to
unite efforts in carrying out economic plans. Economic unification was of
particular significance for the BPSR and KPSR. since it promoted their move-
ment along the socialist path of development, which was an important condi-
tion for further mobilization of the economic means and resources of all the
peoples of Central Asia for the struggle against the basmachi. At the same
time it was an indicator of the strength and influence in Central Asia of
Lenin's nationalities policy and policy of friendship among peoples. Both
these factors played a primary role in the defeat of the haamachi.

The RKP(b) Central Committee approved the initiative of the local party and
soviet organizations and on 12 June 1926 issued a decree entitled "0n Na- .
tionaliblimdtationof the Republics of Central Asia (Turkestan. Bukhara, and
Khorezm)."

In September 1926 a Special Session of the Central Executive Committee of the
Turkestan Republic, the All-Bukhara and All-Khorezm kurultays declared their
support for the implementation of national-territorial delimitation. The
USSR Central Executive Committee ratified this decision at a meeting in
October.

A special commission of the Central Asia Bureau of the RIP(b) Central Committee
performed the enormous job of studying the ethnic composition of the population.
of establishing ethnic del imitations (which was an “ﬁrmly complex
business in view of the patchwork of settlement by the various nationalities).
of elucidating the economic and cultural relationships of the individual areas,

and on distribution of the property and capital of economic organizations and
establishments.

There arose in place of the Turkestan, Bukhara and Khorezm republics the Uzbek
and Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republics. the Tajik Autonomous Soviet Socialist
Republic. the Kara-Kalpak Autonomous Oblast,‘ and the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous
Oblast.S Kazakh areas of the Turkestan Republic were reunited with the

Kazakh ASSR (at that time it was a component of the RSFSR). In May 1925 the
Uzbek and Turkmen republics joined the USSR.

The Communist parties of Uzbekistan and Turkmenia. as well as oblast party
organizations of Tajikistan. Kirghizia, and Kara-Kalpakia were established
simultaneously with national demarcation.

The creation of national Soviet republics and oblasts was an eminent event in
the history of the peoples of Central Asia. The highly complex task of re-
unification of peoples. establishment of national delimitations, the creation of
national Soviet nationhood was accomplished quite smoothly and painlessly.

This created new opportunities for the further political. economic and cultural
development of the peoples of Central Asia, growth of national cadres. and
strengthening of the Soviet system.

The national dclimiiutioriof Central Asia. a process which reached historical
maturation by the middle of the 1920's. was an expression of objective
development trends of the Central Asian peoples in conditions of Soviet rule.

86

I1JI‘OFFIC1AI.I£SEZ(HNLY
It did away with the artificial entities which had been inherited fro. the
tines of feudal splintering and colonial bondage. and fostered overconing of
ethnic conflicts and interethnic distrust which had carried over fro. the
prerevolutionary past.

Unification of the peoples of Central Asia with the other peoples of Russia,
and particularly with the Russian people, signified strengthening of their
political-economic position and nilitary night. which facilitated acconplish-
nent of the historic task of building socialise while bypassing the capitalist
Stage. a task fornulated by V. I. Lenin.

End of the Fergana Basaschi

The successes and achieve-ants of the toilers of Central Asia were gained in a
tenacious struggle again: the enenies of socialise. The dark forces of reac-
tion refused to yield without a fight. They had the full support of the
imperialist nations and reactionary circles in countries adjacent to Soviet
Central Asia -- Iran, Afghanistan. and China. Domestic counterrevolution and
reactionaries abroad were utilising the basnschi in the anti-Soviet struggle to
an even greater extent than before. The basnachi became the principal
executors of numerous schenes ained at thwarting the peaceful labor of the
peoples of Central Asia.

No real peace cane to Central Asia at the beginning of the 1920's. A February

1923 Tuzkestan Front order stated that Turkestan contained "the republic's last
f ront."

Activation of the basnachi at the beginning of the 1920's involved both in-
ternal factors and, chiefly. new plans on the part of international inverialisn.
which had refused to abandon its intentions to enslave the peoples of Central
Asia and to transforn Turkestan, Bukhara and Khorern into, if not colonies, at
least states dependent on the bourgeois Heat. as well as imperialist in-
trigues in the Near and Middle East.

S. I. Gusev. a conpanion- in-arus of V. l. Lenin and first secretary of the
Sredazbyuro [Central Asian Bureau] of the ma») Central Couittee, noted that
resmption of bassachi activities and recruitaent into their ranks of a cer-
tain segment of toiler elenents was facilitated by the slow ilplenentation of
the new econoaic policy and the only partial elaboration of the question of so-
called 'bolitical concessions" to the local population (kaziy [Muslin judge in
Central Asian khanates] courts. return of vakufs [property willed or
transferred by a person to an Islanic ecclesiastical establishment with the
right of usufruct of the income from said property but without the right of
sale], etc). 8. l. Gusev also wrote about the need for rigorous observance of
the principles of the Con-unist Party's Leninist nationalities policy.7

One of the areas in which the basnachi staged a comeback was the Fergana
Valley. Aided by British instructors and White Guard officers. the basnachi
kurbashi were continuing in their “tents to unite their forces.

87

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Turkestan anti-Soviet underground, utilizing the basmacbi as a striking
force. sent its representatives to the hands. They functioned as the
ideological inspirers and organizers of the basmachi.

0n the territory of Namanganskiy Uyezd this function was performed by Nasyrkhan-
Tyurya Kamalkhan Tyuryayev, a hardened counterrevolutionary and former minister
of education of the "Kokand Autonomy." The basmachi bands in this uyezd con-
tained more than 200 White Guardists. The basmachi demolished mills, factories
and rail lines, poisoned crops. and seized cotton and grain from the toilers.
As of 1 May 1922, only 6 out of 180 cotton ginning mills in Ferganshaya Oblast
were in operation. Not a single one of 18 oil mills was operating.8 Agricul-
tural crop plantings in the Fergana Valley had shrunk by 75 percent by 1923,
while cotton plantings had declined by 90 percent. By 1923 the population of
Fergana rural localities had declined by one third in comparison with the 1917
figure.

Basmachi were terrorizing the population. In February 1921 they seized four
Komsomol members in the kishlak of Tash-Kurgan -- Hirkhamid Mirabidov,
Abduvakhid Uvaysov, Dzhalalitdin Uvaysov. and Salidzhan Umarov. Three of then
were burned alive.

These brutal reprisals taken against the Komsomol members in the kishlak of
Tash-Kurgan increased the public's hatred of the basmachi, and the dekhkans
became more active and organized. Self-defense detachments grew, swelling with
volunteers. By the end of March 1921 three volunteer companies were formed in
Kokand. totaling 550 men, and a detachment of 100 Communists and Komsomol mem-
bers was organized in Kanibadam. Volunteer detachments were also established
in Isfar (62 Communists and 63 Komsomol members). in Harkhamat and Besharyk
(117 Communists and 200 Komsomol members).

The command authorities of the Turkestan Front dispatched to the Fergana Valley
units of the 3d Turkestan Division. By the summer of 1921 the 9th Cavalry

and 8th Rifle brigades, the 15th. 16th, 17th and 19th Cavalry regiments. and
the 25th Aviation Detachment had arrived in the valley.

In the first months of 1921 two operations were successfully prosecuted against
remnants of the Parpi band. A substantial percentage of the basmachi were
killed or captured, but some basmachi and Parpi himself succeeded in escaping.
The 8th and 9th Cavalry Brigades hit the basmachi in Shakhimardanskiy,
Kraurskiy. Kyzyl-Kiinskiy and Perganskiy rayons. 0n 1 April 1921 several
small groups were wiped out in the Bulak-Bashi area.

Many volunteer detachments distinguished themselves in these engagements. A
volunteer detachment from Namanganskiy Uyezd under the command of Yuldash
Bnymatov displayed courage and fortitude. The detachment contained 126
dekhkans. Equipped with small arms, they repeatedly skirmished with the
basmachi of the kurbashi Bayastan.

Red Army national combined units were playing an increasingly more appreciable
role in the struggle again: thebasmachi. By January 1921 representatives of indi-
ﬁvnvuh naiinnniillus constituted one third of the troops of the TurkestanFront.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The years of struggle agath the baseschi tauﬂnt the toiler population of
the Pergana a great deal. Increasingly less frequently were they successful
in enticing dekhkans to join the bands. Replacelaents in the basnachi groups

were for the nest part the sons of bai, representatives of the reactionary
clergy. co-on crininals and de’classé elenents.

Nor did the Soviet authorities reject peaceful neans in conducting the armed
struggle against the banachi.

when the large bands were routed in April 1921, the Perganskaya Oblast Revkon
[Revolutionary Co-ittee] once again offered baa-achi an opportunity to
expiate their offenses by surrendering voluntarily to the authorities within a
nonth's tine. Several kurbashi and rank-snd-file basnachi gave thenselves up.
Even entire groups surrendered. Those who surrendered to the authorities,
however. also included persons who at that nonent sinply saw no other way out
and utilized their "voluntary" surrender as a naneuver. ‘l’he kurbashi
Dzhanybek Katy, for ceramic. voluntarily surrendered to Soviet authorities in
April 1921 and did not engage in hostile activities up to Decenber 1921. Dur-
ing this entire tine, however, he was nalting preparations for an arned up-
rising. which he began in Decewer 1921.

in July 1921 the kurbashi Aliyar entered into surrender negotiations. But his
attenpt to exploit the humans of the Soviet authorities in order to lake
preparations to continue the struggle was a failure. A test of Aliyar's
sincerfty was arranged. It was suggested that he take up arns against
Kurshitnat. expiate his guilt for his crimes, and thus prove the sincerity of
his state-ant of reconciliation with Soviet rule. Aliyar refused. pleading
his personal friendship with Kurshirnat. It was then suggested that he take
up arns against Huetdin's band. lior did the basaachi agree i-ediately to
this proposal. An outright refusal. however, would expose his, and he was
forced to consent. But Aliyar was not about to proceed any further with this
deuble gene. in route to the kishlsk of Naukat. where Huetdin was to be found.
Aliyar linked up with two other bamchi groups and began plundering the
surrounding kishlaks with then. The Red Any co-and authorities were forced
ianediately to surround and disarn Aliyar's hand.

There were cases where the local authorities were too trusting of the "peace-
ful" declarations of basaachi chieftains. for which they paid dearly. At the
end of April 1921 the kurbashi Shir-at Kirgiz voluntarily surrendered. The
Andizhan authorities incorporated the entire band into a nilitia squadron and
sent then out on an operational nission. Upon arrival at the destination, the
basnachi took advantage of the favorable situation and suddenly attacked the
nilitiaen. After killing 12 and wounding 7. they escaped.

The mistake nade by the Andizhan authorities served as a bitter lesson. The
Turkkonissiya and TurkTsIK issued a special decree in which all agencies of
Soviet authority were instructed to disarn surrendered basnachi to a nan and to
keep a strict and constant watch on then. It was forbidden to enlist then into
the Red Artsy and silitia. and to enlist then into participation in any opera-
tions against the basnachi and counterrevolutionary organizations.

89

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Vﬂ VI’I’I\.II\I— LO; \I.‘I.I

in the summer of 1921 Red Army units and people's volunteers were continuing
combat operations against the basmachi, although on a smaller scale than in
1920 and at the beginning of 1921.

The more substantial the successes achieved by the Soviet authorities, the
greater the ferocity of the basmachi became. They would burn alive captured
commanders and Red Armymen as well as local activists. The band of
Rakhmankul. 2000 men strong, acted with particular brutality. in the kiahlak
of Ashava basmachi surrounded a mosque, in which 65 Red Armymen had taken
refuge. Rakhmankul made several attempts to storm the mosque, but each time
he was forced to retreat. The enraged basmachi lit the mosque on fire, and
all its defenders were burned alive.

In connection with unceasing armed attacks by basmachi, in September 1921 the
command authorities of the Turkestan Front decided to resume military opera-
tions against them. A "state of security emergency" was declared in the
Fergana Valley effective 13 September 1921. The party Central Committee, in
a decree dated 16 October 1921 entitled "On Turkestan Hatters," acknowledged
"liquidation of the basmachi to be the most important task of Turkestan party
and soviet agencies."9 0n the basis of this decree, the RKP(b) Central Com-
mittee Politburo and the RKP(b) Central Commitee Turkbyuro. jointly with the
Central Committee of the Turkestan Communist Party, elaborated and implemented
the following measures:

a) all party organizations in Ferganskaya Oblast were placed on a
martial-law status;

b) on 29 November 1921 TurkTle issued a decree entitled ”0n Amnesty
to the Basmachi";

c) 29 November 1921 TurkTsIK issued an enactment calling for organiza-
tion of a volunteer militia to combat the basmachi;

d) in September 1921 the Central Committee of the KPT drew up a statute
on replacing the Soviet people's court with kaziy courts.10

The 6th Congress of the Turkestan Communist Party (1921) devoted considerable
attention to the struggle against the basmachi and adopted a special resolu-
tion entitled "0n the Fergana Question." The struggle against the basmachi
moved to the center of attention of the Turkestan Communist Party. Hobilized
for this struggle, in addition to the troops of the Turkestau Front. was a
volunteer militia established in the Pergana, consisting of Komsomol members,
members of the "Koshchi" union and trade union members. as well as volunteer
dckhknn detachments in the kishhks and auls.

Initially the main forces were concentrated against the forces of Kurshirmat

and Israil. Their bands sustained heavy casualties in the very first clashes,
especially israil's band. Kurshirmat employed his old tactic of escaping from
encirciement by moving in small groups across terrain which was difficult for the
Red Army. He designated the kishlak of Shakhimardan as a gathering point for

the small bands. This choice was not mere happenstance. Rabid nationalist-
counterrevolutionaries were entrenched there.

90

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLV
with the arrival of the kurbashi in the kishlak, the local counterrevolution-
arks did everything they could to enhance his prestige, which had shaken
following his defeat. They named him "khan of the Fergana,” holding a
magnificent ceremony on this occasion. But at the most solemn moment Red
Army and people's volunteer detachments burst into the kishlak. The "khan"
fled to escape capture.

Huetdin, leader of another group of basmachi, was playing a uniting game. He

figured that combat actions between Red Army units and Kurshirmat would weaken
both, and then he. Huetdin. would become the chief kurbashi of the Fergana.

At the same time the basmachi figured that refusal to support kurshirmat would
lull the vigilance of the ﬂed Aray command and local authorities.

But Huetdin had miscalculated. Kurshirmat'a main forces were defeated com-
.dvtulyin September 1921, although this time as well he and a group of body-
guards Succeeded in evading pursuit (he later made his way into Eastern
Bukhara). ‘nnn\the Red Army units and peoples's volunteer detachments con-
centrated against ﬂuetdin's basmachi. In October 1921 they were overtaken in
the vicinity of Iski-Kaukat and soundly defeated. Retreating into the
mountains of Kirghizia, however, Huetdin was able to preserve the nucleus of
his force.

In Sovembcr 1921 units of the 7th Composite Cavalry Brigade conducted a suc-
cessful operation to wipe out Rskhmankul's band. The fighting continued
several days. The basmachi offered stubborn resistance. The local population
came to the aid of the Red Armymen. Uniting their efforts, they mounted an
assault and captured the fortified positions of the basmachi. The band was
almost totally shattered, but the kurbashi himself escaped.

A few groups of basmachi, which had withdrawn into the Alay Valley, continued
mounting raids on kishlaks. In the winter of 1921 they destroyed mail stations
along the Osh-Khorog route and laid siege to the Pamir border post. This

small garrison was cut off from the outside world for more than a month. The
basmachi tried to starve the soldiers into surrendering. But neither hunger,
nor cold. nor the difficult conditions at an elevation in excess of #000 meters
broke the fighting spirit of the border guards. Contact with Khorog and

Vanch could be established only by making one's way past the basmachi road-
blocks. along sheer ice-glazed cliffs and swift-flowing unfrozen mountain
rivers. Soldier Hamedbek Gul'bekov volunteeruito accomplish this mission. He
was familiar with the area and was capable of getting and keeping his hearings
on the mountain terrain.

Constantly in danger of being buried under an avalanche and of losing his foot-
ing on the sheer rock slopes and plunging into a yawning chasm, Hamedbek made
his way for 2 days and nights toward friendly lines. Toward evening on the
third day the Khorog,garrison command was alerted to the situationandsent out
a force to chuve the border post. "hen the reinforcemen: arrived. the siege
of the post was lifted.

In January and February 1922 Red Army units and detachments of people's
volunteers continued combat operations. I. F. Kuts did a fine job of command-
ing a Muslim battalion.

91
FOR(HHHC1AI.USE(NVLY
Hill UPHUAL Lat. emu

The crushing defeat of several bands in Ferganskaya Oblast had a sobering ef-
fect on those bands which had not yet put down their arms. Hithout waiting
for the same fate which had befallen Kurshirmat, Muetdin, and Rakhmankul, the
kurbashi Dzhanybek Kazy sued for peace. The Turkbyuro of the RKP(b) gave its
approval for negotiations, which continued until April 1922 and ended with
Dzhanybek's surrender.

But counterrevolutionary, nationalist eleaeats did not want to accept Soviet
rule and looked for ways to step up basmachi activities. At the end of 1921 a
secret meeting of Turkestan underground bourgeois-nationalist organisations
was held in Tashkent. At this meeting it was decided to continue supporting
the basmachi and simultaneously to step up actions aimed at disorganising
economic and political activities in the region.

In conformity with this decision. Kurshirmat returned to the Fergana Valley.
On 22 March 1922 he was able to gather together surviving kurbashi in the
kishlak of Karabua in Kokandskiy Uyezd. At this basmachi meeting it was
decided to step up terrorisr activities to a maximum degree, in order to im—
prove their situation with a new wave of violence. ”whoever refuses to carry
out the will of Kurshirmat." Stated the proclamation adopted at the meet-
ing, "will have his head chopped off, and his house will be burned to the
grannd together with his property and family."11 The struggle became in-
creasingly more intense from that time on. An RKKA [Horkers' and Peasants'
Red Armyjheadquarters situation report dated 26 March 1922 stated that approx-
imately228,000 basmachi were operating against the troops of the Turkestan
Front.

The basmachi began increasingly more extensively employing a hostage system.
They would force the male population to join their hands, while they would
either herd the members of their fanilies into base camps or leave them

in their kishlaks under armed guard. If a dekhkan fled from the band, his
entire family would be marked for death. Intensification of terrorist activity.
however, could not save the basaachi. These actions merely demonstrated more
vividly their antipopular essence.

An important role in activating the resources of the Red Army and the local
papulation for the struggle against the basmachi in the Fergana Valley was
played hyan RKPG» Central Committee letter dated 11 January 1922 on the
nationalities question and a decision of the RKP(b) Central Committee Politburo
dated 1 February 1922 on the situation in Bukhara. The Politburo acknowledged
the necessity of "consolidating the antibasmachi fronts on the territory of
Bukhara and the Fergana...." Particular attention was focused "both on
political work among the Muslim population and on strengthening supply of Red
Army units."13 In February 1922 questions pertaining to the struggle against
the basmachi were discussed at a special plenary session of the Turkestan
Communist Party Central Comaittee.1‘ A Cheka for the Struggle Against the
tbuntcrrevolution in the Fergana was established on 13 February 1922.15

The arrival of G. K. 0rdzhonikidze in Turkestan in May 1922 was of great
significance for organizing the defeat of the Fergana basmachi. He was
accompanied by Sh. Z. Eliava. member of the VTsIK and former chairman of the

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Turkkomissiya. A Turkestan Communist Party Central Couittee Plenum was held
with their participation on 12 Hay 1922. The plenum examined the current
situation and specified concrete measures to wipe out the basnachi in the
Fergana. C. K. 0rdzhonikidze stated in his address that the basmachi
represented a serious threat to Soviet rule and advanced a number of concrete
proposals pertaining to organizing the struggle against them.16 On 18 Hay 1922
the RKP(b) Central Committee Politburo issued a decree based on G. K.
0rdzhonikidze's report, entitled "0n Turkestan-Bukhara Affairs," which set
forth a program for combating the basmachi. The party Central Committee

placed emphasis on military operations against those basmachi who were refusing
to lay down their arms and continuing to mount armed attacks on kishlaks, party
and soviet agencies, and garrisons. But there were many basmachi who were
ready and willing, as was already noted, voluntarily to return to their hearth
and home and to commence peaceful labor. Therefore,as in the past, military
actions were to be combined with active explanatory work. The Sredazbyuro of
the RKP(b) Central Committee, wi.h the participation of C. K. 0rdrhonikid¢e and
Sh. Z. Eliava, drew up concrete measures to wipe out the basmachi.

Appeals by the governments of the republics of Central Asia entitled ”To the
Toiler Masses of Turkestan, Bukhara. and Khiva" and an appeal to Central Asian
Communists by the Sredazbyuro of the RKP(b) Central Committee were made public
\t the beginning of July 1922. These documents stressed that there could be
no doubts whatsoever over the outcome of the armed conflict. The assistance
of the great Soviet Federation wOuld guarantee victory to the Red units. But
the more extensively a political campaign was conducted among the dekhkans
pertaining to the struggle against the basmachi, and the greater the degree to

which party organizations were strengthened, the faster and more painlessly
could victory be achieved.17

In 1922 the party Central Committee twice returned to the question of the
struggle against the basmachi. On 14 August the RKP(b) Central Commitee
Orgburo, in a decree dealing with party internal organizational development in
Turkestan in response to a report by a commission consisting of V. V. Kuybyshev,
Ya. E. Rudzutak, and Sh. 2. Eliava, drew attention to the necessity of in-
tensifying the struggle against the basmachi, and on 21 August the RKP(b) Cen-
tral Committee ratified directives of the Central Committee Sredazbyuro, the
KPT Central Committee and the Central Committee of the Bukhara Communist Party,
which noted that the British imperialists were conducting subversive activi-
ties inside Turkestan, directing the basmachi, bringing the region to ruin and
increasing economic chaos. The RKP(b) Central Committee instructed the
Sredazbyuro to consolidate military successes in the struggle a ainst the
basmachi with political agitation, and organizational measures. 8 It assigned
to the Communists of Turkestan as one of their most important tasks liquidation
of the basmachi, without which the region's economy could not be rebuilt.

in October 1922 the 7th Regional Conference of the KPT, with the participation
at Ya. E. Rudzutak, who had been dispatched to Central Asia, elaborated
practical measures to implement the directives of the RKP(b) Central Committee.
The conference resolution passed in response to Ya. Rudzutak's report stated:
"...The overall military-political situation in Central Asia remains tense.
British agents are conducting subversive activities, especially in the Fergana

93

IN)R¢0FI1C1AI.USEIMNLY
I'Vle v...~.e.~ svu... a. a...

and Sanarkand. supporting and directing the bamchi, and wrecking the
region‘s economy." 9

In order to inpleeent the instructions of the mm Central Comittee. the
Sredazbyuro adopted concrete measures to step up political work anong the
masses. and in particular local party units were organisationally strengthened.
The party's principal resources were directed into the areas where the
basmachi were active.

Considerable work was also being done in the area of govern-ental and econonic
organizational developeent. 0n 1!. July 1922 a m Central Oo-Iittee plenul
ends the decision to carry out a nutter of econonic measures with the sin of
consolidating successes achieved in the Pergana in the struggle against the
basnschi.20 Particular stress was placed on reviving economic life in the
Fergana Valley and restoring cotton plantings.

Guided by humanitarian considerations and doing everything possible to avoid
further bloodshed, the Commist Party and the govern-eat of the Turkestan
ASSR repeatedly appealed to the baseschi to surrender voluntarily, guarantee-
ing personal and property imity to those who had laid down their ans. Hany
rank and file besnachi and sons kurhashi heeded the voice of reason and gave
thenselves up. As before. however, there were sane anong the leaders who
agreed to voluntary surrender in order to build up their forces and continue
their crininal activities. Such was the case, in particular, with Huetdin. In
March 1922, when things were goinghady for hie, he agreed to talks, but as
soon as the i-ediate danger was past. be advanced macceptable ttm, demand-
ing that negotiations be conducted in the presence of a British representative.
Naturally his densnds were rejected. On 10 June 1922 Red Any units began an
operation against Huetdin's bend and achieved its final defeat on 6 July.
taking its leader prisoner.

Other basaachi groups also suffered defeat. The kurbashi lash-at. ‘rukhtasyn
and Hiraa—Pansat. under offensive pressure for a period of three days by Red
Army units and people's volunteers, laid down their arms.

The setbacks suffered by the basmachi alarmed the foreign organizers of the
anti-Soviet struggle in Soviet Asia. They secretly brought together at a loca-
tion near Kabul representatives of reactionary forces in Afghanistan, kurbashi
fron the Fergana and Eastern Bukhara, and a group of Turkish officers. Con-
siderable attention at this neeting was devoted to drawing up plans for rail-
line sabotage actions, which were to disrupt co-Iunications between such in-
portant centers as Kerki, Bukhara, Sanarkand and Tashkent. At the sane tine
massive raids were to be nounted on garrisons and agencies of Soviet authority
throughout Central Asia. Afghan reactionaries undertook fully to arts and
equip 1200 men and 600 officers.

The plans drawn up at the secret meeting near Kabul becane known to the Red
Arey cos-and authorities, and they, jointly with party and soviet agencies,
took countermeasures in advance. Red Arny units were placed on a high state
of alert, and volunteer units received reinforce-ants. The counterrevolu-
tionaries did not succeed in carrying out their plans.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1n the seantine the struggle against the basnachi becane intensified. As a
result of joint actions by the Red Artsy and volunteer units, 119 (out of 200)
bands, totaling “00 basnachi, were defeated in detail in the Pergana Valley
between February and 11 October 1922. A total of 511 sen were killed, wounded
or captured in December 1922 alone, with 127 voluntarily surrendering to the
Red Arley.”

The Leninist nationalities policy which was being isplenented and the con-
siderable assistance to the population coaing fron Soviet Russia played an
enorIous role in liquidating the quite substantial haunt-hi forces in the
Pergana Valley. In 1921-1922 alone the toilets of the BSPSR allocated fron
their own neager resources 6.5 nillion poods of grain for the Mestan
dekhkans.

Everything being done by the party and goveth to assist the toiling
dekhkans of the Fergans, in coabination with conbat operations, led to the
rapid disintegration of the basaachi. Voluntary surrender of basaachi becane
typical of the final Innths of 1922. Five bands voluntarily laid down their
ares in Andizhanskiy Rayon alone, and a total of approximately 6000 bassachi

in the Pergana Valley by the end of 1922. No sore than 2000 sen rennined in
the bands. -'

of great importance for exposing the basaachi once and for all in the eyes of
the public were show trials of the basaschi leaders. The trial of Rskhunkul
was held in the old part of Roland. Many thousands of people from nearby
kishlaks gathered here. Eyewitness testiaony, painting a blood-chilling
picture of the atrocities perpetrated by the has-achi, evoked a unsniaous
densnd by the toilers to punish the‘bandit harshly.

Public trials, attended by any thousands of dekhkans and urban residents,
were held for Ann-Palvan (in lanangan), the hurbashi Sangin, and others.

Here is an account of the public trial of Hustdin and his ,accosplices, held in
Septesber 1922. '

i
"The enorsous courtyard of the Asret nosque in the town of Osh. A crowd of a
thousand people was present, local residents as well as curious visitors and
delegates who had traveled hundreds of versts; every individual in attendance
sought to sake his way forward and see at least for a mat the prisoner's
dock, which contained Huetdin, princeling of Oshskiy Rayon or, as he called
hinself, hir-lyaahkarbashi Huetdin-katta-bek Ususn Aliyev, which translates
as follows: Suprene Conander in chief, invincible liuetdin, the great lord
Usnan Aliyev.

'hround Huetdin were his closest deputies. Also present are the notorious
butcher Kan-chi ’l‘eairbayev.... ;

"Huetdin had exercised control over the dekhkana of Oshskiy Rayon by nesns of
the cruelest, lost unprecedented terrorist actions. Ilia bloody deeds numbered
in the dozens, and his victinsran into the thousands. It is not surprising that
anthers invokd his na-e to frighten their children, and it is not surprising
that even here, in court, witnesses turned pale and cringed fron his very gaze.

95
MWWONLY
I’Uo \Is‘tstarsa. yen. v.‘hl

The presentation of eyewitness testimony continued for several days. The eye-
witnesses were living pages of the frightful chronicle of bloody deprivations.

Take the testimony of a corpulent arbakesh [draynan]. He had been hauling
goods, with an escort of 45 lied Arlynen.

"'in our group,‘ he related, 'there were about 60 civilians, including wo-en
and children. According to our laws, a pregnant woman is considered sacred.
But for Huetdin there is nothing sacred -- be slaughtered everybody. They slit
open the bellies of pregnant women, renoved and threw down the fetus and
stuffed their bellies with straw. They sushed children's heads against the
wagon wheels or would tear the. linb from linb by stretching than between
horses. They burned the Red Arnynen in a bonfire. .. .'

"New witnesses took the stand, and they all stated the sane thing: if the
authorities did not execute this bandit they would leave their bones and
depart for Mecca. Deming testimny was presented by dozens of citizens.

"A little boy of 11 or 12 years, with tears in his eyes and in a furious rage,
screaned into the butcher's face: 'You slitsy father's throat, I saw y0u do it.‘

"i'hat's a lie,’ the basnachi leader replied. 'lle cut his r-wn throat accidentally
with a knife.’

"Another witness, an elderly lullah, expressively raised his hands toward the
heavens and intoned a prayer to Lilah for a just proletarian sentence. And
as if on cos-land, thousands of voices joined in his prayer, and thousands of
eyes gazed heavenward.

"The prosecutor's smation speech, denanding the uecution of Huetdin and his
retainers, was net with long, continuing applause. Shouts of protest and
threats greeted the attorney for the defense, who was pleading for the mercy of
the court. The defense attorney bees-e flustered.

"There could be only one verdict. Huetdin and seven of his aides were sen-
tenced to death by firing squad."22

Several bands were still active in the frontier areas. The nunerical strength
of the volunteer detachments was reduced to 2108 Ien, and the volunteer nilitia
to 1200 men. But the detachments were beconing organizationally strengthened.
The militia was placed under full support and financing by the state, and was
armed with the latest snall arms of that tile.

Working in coordination with one another and with the active support of the
toilet population of the Fergana, the Red Army, the GPU [State Political Ad-
ministration]. border guards, militia, and volunteer detachments, conducting
conbined actions in midsua-er of 1923, nopped up those basnachi groups which
were st ill active in the Pergana Valley. The largest was Bayastan's band. but
even it totaled only about 200 nan. The nulerical strength of the other
basnachi units did not exceed 50-60 men. They had scattered into the mountain
gorges and iron tine to tine would nount raids on snall garrisons and the
civilian population, robbing and killing old people, wolen and children.

96

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A great my baseachi concentrated in the Alay Valley. At the end of July a
plan was drawn up for wiping out the bands in the Alay Valley as well. Two

special detachnents, led by Abdulla Yer-ulthanedov23 and I. P. Halihov, were
for-ed to execute this mission.

The cot-and authorities intended to eaploy peaceful scans to persuade the
basaachi to surrender, thus avoiding bloodshed. Representatives of the

counterrevolutionsry undergromd and agents of inerialist intelligence ser
vices, however, convinced the hurbashi to hold out for several maths note in
anticipation of assistance fron abroad. The basaachi rejected peace

proposals and weed coebat actions. The has-chi were defeated in engage-
eents with Red Army detect-ants. A total of 1100 basaachi were killed, wounded
or taken prisoner. including 30 hurbashi, 16 of who. surrendered voluntarily,
just between 1 June and 1 July 1923.26 Only insignificant numbers of

basnachi succeeded in escaping across the border. an additional lore than

10 kurbashi laid down their area in July and August. A total of 85 hurbashi
and 1520 rank-and-file basaachi were killed, wounded or c tured in August-

Noveeher 1923; 139 Kutbashi and 1637 bamchi surrendered. 5 A total of
66 kurbashi surrendered in Septedter.

In October 1923 the Fergsna Front Remyensovet planned an operation to accen-
plish the final defeat of the basaachi in the Pergana. This plan specified,
in particular, establishment of per-amt local "Conferences to (Io-bat the
Basnachi," which were to conduct aass political work aieed at disintegrating
the basnachi bands and to find jobs for basaachi who surrendered voluntarily.
Inpleae ntation of this plan produced tangible results. The KPT Ferganskaya
Oblast Conittee plenu- held on 11 October 1923 stated that at the beginning
of the year there had been 203 bands containing 6665 basanchi in the oblast,
while by October there tanned 81 bands with 2021 has-achi.26 Axis Niallo
(Andrey Vladinirovich Staniahevshiy), one of the oldest Soviet writers,
presented a chronicle of the struggle against the counterrevolution. Here are
none facts fron this chronicle, characterizing the death and capture of
leaders of basnachi bands in the ulnar and fall of 1923.

24 Hay. Aaan Palvan, leader of basaachi operating fro. Andishan to the
niddle course of the ham - captured.

12 June. Sabir-Pansat surrendered in Kokandshiy Rayon.

30 June. The band of Seid Bfendi was defeated completely in the vicinity of
Kulyab. Seyid Efendi escaped into Afghanistan.

1 July. The kurbashi Abdu-Hunin and Bay-at surrendered in Perganshaya Oblast.
9 July. The lturbashi Ruzy was captured in Bukhara, near Bahhent.

3 August. The kurbnahi Dadahay surrendered in the hiehlah of Tyurya-Kurgsn,
Naaanganshiy Uyezd. Ahl-at-hhan surrendered in Perganshaya Ohlast.

7 August. The kurbashi Ruryaat surrendered in Andirhanshiy Uyerd. The hur-

bashi Hirza lbur, Kichih-Karabay. Ubaydulla, and Hirso-Ali surrendered in the
kishlak of Yany-Kurgan.

97
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
00K uentuu. use um.-

11 August. The hurbashi Baytv-an surrendered inIhnangsnskiy Uyerd.
15 August. Nurnat-Hinbashi's headquarters in the Alay Valley use captured.

18 August. The kurbashi Hulla-Rustan surrendered in Uestern Bukhara. in the
kishlak of Khaturchi. The kurbashi Manse was killed in the Alay Valley.

19 August. The kurbashi Tokhtan-Pansat surrendered in the Llay Valley.
24 August. The kurbnshi Hulla-Koshty surrendered .in Perganskaya Oblast.
27 August. The hurbashi Ishmat Baybschi surrendered in Kohandskiy Uyezd.
3 Septenber. The kurbashi [turban-Ali surrendered in the Chatkal Valley.
9 September. The hurbashi Atadzhan surrendered in Ilannganskiy Uyezd.

lb Septeﬂaer. The band of Hadumsr surrendered in the Sokh area.

22 Septenber. The kurbashi Bayastan surrendered on the upper reaches of the
Angren.

23 September. The kurbashi Sultan and Dahurahek surrendered in Yangi-Bazar.
3-5 October. The kurbeshi lslamkul, Kichik-Kazalt (the Seth-Lyaylyak areas) and
lsrail (Karyn) surrendered. nus-rakul and Omar-Ali surrendered in the Alay
Valley. The kurhashi Yulchi surrendered in Hyn-‘lyube.

6 October. llurnat Hinbashi surrendered in the Alay Valley.

9 October. The hurbashi nuribay surrendered in hungmshiy Uyezd.

21 October. The kurbashi Khamdaa surrendered in Kohndekiy Oyezd.

22 October. The kurbashi Yunus surrendered in the kishlak of Khorabek.
Andizhanskiy "yard.

20 November. The kurbashi Basarbay was captured in the Pergana Valley.

30 December. The hurbashi nebula-Pans“ surrendered in the kishlak of
Shaarikhan.27

The people of the Fergana celebrated the sixth anniversary of the Great October
Socialist Revolution in conditions of a long-awaited peace.

Subsequent operations were aimed at napping up the last sesll baenschi groups
in the Fergana, and ensures were taken to prevent the forning of new bands.
An RKP(b) Central Oonnittee accountability report stated that in 1923 the
baseschi in Central Asia were finished off as an organized meant.“ This
was also stated in documents of the m(b) Central Oomittee Sredasbyuro and
local party organizations. For mule, Sredashyuro directives sent in 1923

98

MWUSEWLY
to local party and nilitary organizations stated: “The bssuachi have been suc-
cessfully wiped out in the Fergana."29 In 1926 the Pergana Valley was virtual-
ly entirely clear of baaachi bands. The resolution of the First Congress of
the Uzbekistan Co-mist Party (1925) entitled "0n Bork Along the Dekhkans"
stated: "As a result of liquidation of the basnachi, who ravaged dekhkan far-
holdings for nany long years, there has been created the opportunity for

peaceful construction and undisturbed labor by the dehhkan to strengthen his
fans operation."30

The alaost seven years of struggle against the basaachi had left its stark. The
basnachi had destroyed the aajority of enterprises and had inflicted colossal

danage on cotton growing. Iany areas were in a state of total ruin. A large
nu-ber of dekhksns had no scans of subsistence.

In view of the situation, the Soviet Govern-ant tool: erasures to rebuild the
econony of those areas of the Pergana which had suffered fron the basnachi
pogrons. At the beginning of 1923 the USSR Smarts- allocated 125,000 rubles
in gold to the 'l‘urkestan Republic for rebuilding the coal industry. In
Septenber 1923 20,000 head of cattle sent free the Russian Pederation reached

the Fergana. 8 nillion poods of wheat were sent fro: the BSPSR to the grain-
growing areas.”-

Selfless fraternal assistance by the peoples of Soviet Russia enabled the

toilers of the Pergana rapidly to heal the serious wounds which had been in-
flicted by the basnachi.

Bukhara: The Struggle Continues

In spite of strengthening of the people's authority in the Bukhara Republic,
the situation retrained difficult. The existence of feudal-patriarchal rela-
tions, a low cultural and econonic level, difficult conditions of life, and
fidelity to religious belids hindered the toilets fro. correctly perceiving the
significance of the transfornations which were being carried out. Downtrodden
in spirit for centuries, indoctrinated in conditions of absence of political
rights and absolute submission to the clan elite, the bai and the clergy, the
dekhkans were not able inediately to grasp the coupler changes in the socio-
political struggle. In addition, the dehhkan had blind faith in the Islnaic
clergy, while the reactionary segnent of the clergy supported the counter-

revolution, helped the basaachi leaders to gather together bands, and gave then
inspiration.

The enomus influence of religion was conbined in Eastern Bukhara with

the dominance of feudal-patriarchal relations. In a nenorandun entitled "0n
the Basaachi in Eastern Bukhara," written on 20 April 1922, the consul general
of the IISPSR in Dushanbe, lagornyy, noted that ”there uists in the tribes the
institution of clan chiefs. the activities of when are totally independent of
any central authority in Bukhara, be it the authority of the old enirs or, at

the present tine, authority in the person of Soviet agencies of the new
Republic.”

99

WWWMY
The belts had their own armed retinues and autocratically administered justice
and meted cut punishment. "As a consequence of the total ignorance and politi-
cal backwardness of the population. indoctrinated in the spirit of religious
fanaticism," Nagornyy wrote further, "the belts, supported by the mullahs, are
virtually absolute rulers. Judicial proceedings are either entirely lacking or
follow certain traditions, but quite frequently the bet himself acts as judge.
sometimes imposing as punishment for trivial offenses outright confiscation of
the property of the guilty party or even corporal punishment, up to and in-
cluding capital punislusent. I should state that the most characteristic
feature is the fact that the population views this social-legal order as
legitimate and natural and, occasional display of their resentment not-
withstanding, in general and on the whole the people patiently tolerate even
gross violations of the order established by traditions.”2

Utilizing religion, the counterrevolution instilled anti-Sovietism into the
consciousness of religious believers. It attewted to demonstrate that the
socialist revolution and Soviet rule were the works of "kafirs," that is,
"unbelievers," who allegedly intended to destroy Isl. and the religious
believers thenaelves. The basmachi bands were portrayed as defenders of Islam.

Following the success of the Gissar expedition and the emir's flight into
Afghanistan, the counterrevolution focused all its efforts on strengthening
its position within the edifice of the young Bukhara Republic. Taking ad-
vantage of the shortage of trained cadres and the lack of ideological maturity
on the part of many Bukharm Oo-unists, reactionary elements were able to
occupy important posts during the difficult months of establishment of the
8988. Many former beks, emir functionaries and bai held positions in the
republic's government and in local agencies of Soviet authority. They
sabotaged democratic reforms and impeded the building of a Soviet society.
Seeking to cause resentnent toward Soviet rule on the part of the population,
they carried out unwarranted acts of repression in the kishlahs (arrests, con—
f iscation of grain and property).

Some honest soviet and party officials, who were dedicated to Soviet rule but
were ill-prepared in an ideological-political respect. conitted errors and
distorted party policy out of lack of understanding or under the influence of
hostile elements.

It was soon ascertained that many counterrevolutionaries holding inortant

posts had established direct contact with the basmachi and were helping them
reassemble their forces. The basmachi movement was experiencing a rebirth.
Davlyatmen-biy in Bal'dzhuan, Ishan Sultan in Darvaz, Puzyl Haksm in Karategin,
and Ibragim-bek in Lokay were rebuilding and consolidating their detachments.

The principal slogan of the basmschi was "gazavat" -- ”holy war" against the
"infidels." The kurbashi were amassing arms which. as before. were obtained
from abroad, and were stockpiling provisions. Seyid Alia-khan was the supreme
ringleader of the counterrevolution in Eastern Bukhara. lie had a representa-
tive, Akhmed ‘roltsabo, on Soviet territory. Before fleeing into Afghanistan.
the emit had sent his agents around to the kishlaks for the purpose of organis-
ing basmachi detachments.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The growth of basmachi activities in Eastern Bukhara was fostered by the
treacherOus actions of Usman Khodzhi Pulatkhodzhayev, official representative
of the government of the Bukhsra Republic. Upon becoming chairman of the
Central Executive co-ittee of the BPSR, Pulatkhodzhayev sent into Eastern
Bukhara his brother Atakhodzhayev, who continued the anti-Soviet activities of
his predecessor. In August 1921 he entered into negotiations with the basmachi
and handed over to them 12 akaakals [elders] who had actively aided the Red
Army. The basmachi publicly executed six of these. Atakhodzhayev entered into
an official agreement with the kurbashi Davlyatman-biy. The activities of the
basmachi were given the seal of legitimacy, as it were. Many kurbashi were
giVen important posts in soviet establishments. As the "legitimate"
representatives of Soviet power, they proceeded to conduct mobilization and

collect taxes for their own benefit. One and a half million poods of grain
collected for the state ended up in their hands.

In view of the difficult situation, a joint session of the Revkom, Council of
Nazirs and the Executive Bureau of the Central Committee of the Bukhara Com-
munist Party decided to turn to the government of the RSFSR with a request that
Red Army subunits be sent from Soviet Russia to the Bukhara Republic. This
request was met. But at the beginning of 1921 the command authorities of the
Turkestan Front were forced to redeploy to the Pergana Valley Red Army units
from the most endangered area of Eastern Bukhara. Small garrisons remained
only in a few large towns (Dushanbe, Gissar, Corn, and certain others), gar-

risons which were inadequately supplied with weapons, anmunition, provisions,
and clothing.

The lack of a requisite number of military subunits on the territory of the
Bukhara Republic enabled the basmachi kurbashi, who had received weapons and
aanunition from abroad, to step up activities as early as the spring of 1921.

The leaders of the basmachi bands were acting independently, without any unity
among them: each chieftain intended to become a sovereign leader. Davlyatman-
biy, Fuzayl Haksua, and especially Ibragim-bek, on whom the former emir of
Bukhara was continuing to place his hopes, began to stand out, however, among
those who were operating on the territory of the Bukhara Republic, particularly
in its eastern and northern areas. It was not mere happenstance that the
choice fell on Ibragim-bek. It was due not only to his past history but also
the fact that in that period the bulk of the Eastern Bukhara basmschi were
natives of the Lokay, Ibragim-bek's home region.

The Hatcha bands were among the first to resume devastating raids on the
kishlaks. They destroyed and plundered several kiahlaka in Ura-Tyubinakiy
Uyezd and seized from the dekhkans approxinately 500 horses and more than
1000 head of cattle. By the summer of 1921 lbragim-bek, Ishan Sultan, and
Fuzayl Haksum had reached an agreement on joint operations and had begun
mOunting attacks on snail garrisons. Ishan Sultan and Puzayl Haksum, pos-
sessing 1700 men between them. organized an offensive into the Darvaz and
Karategin areas, simultaneously in;tigating an anti-Soviet insurrection there.

From this moment the baamachi movement in the Germ Viloyat assumed a large
scale.

101

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USE(HNLY
The conitment of new Red Army combined units to the struggle against the
basmachi had become an urgent necessity.

In June 1921 the basmachi concentrated their main efforts in the Cars area,
planning to capture the administrative center of the Karategin. On 20 June
the belt Abdu-Khafiz, leader of the Hatcha basmachi, arrived in the area with
a detachment of 2500 men. The band of Abdu-Khafiz encircled Cars. The
basmachi leader demanded the unconditional surrender of the garrison, which
contained only 50 men, most of whom were sick with nalaria. In the fort
together with the Red Armymen were the chairman of the Karategin Revlon,
Umarov; food co-ission chairman Nusratullo Haksua, and several families of
local residents.

Dekhkans lsrail and ﬂamed displayed a high degree of courage and ingenuity.
0n the instructions of the comand, they were sent with reports to the head-
quarters of the cavalry regilents. Israil and named made their way past the
basmachi outposts unobserved. Skirting enemy roadblocks, they floated down
the Surkhab on wineskins for sane time, then, having passed through the danger
area, delivered their messages by the shortest route.

Help arrived in time. The garrison was still holding the fort. Cavalry units
engaged and routed the band of the Hatcha belt. Abdu-Khafiz was taken prisoner.

But the basmachi continued mounting pogroms. In August 1921 the band of the
Darvaz bek Ishan Sultan, approximately 1000 sen strong, invaded the Carm area.
The belt attempted to avenge the defeat of the Hatcha leader, but he himself was
met by the same fate. Ishan Sultan's band was defeated in detail by the forces
of a cavalry regiment (A. Ya. Pankeyev's squadron particularly distinguished
itself) and a rifle battalion. The basaachi chief, concealing his face behind
a paranja, escaped.

The situation in the Kulyab area became critical in August. At that time the
Kulyab garrison totaled approximately 80 men, was poorly armed, and had meager
supplies of food provisions and feed. Garrison strength was increased by the
addition of 12 local activists upon co-encement of conbat actions.

The basnachi, exploiting the small size of the Kulyab garrison, seized a number
of passes and surrounded the fort. For 11 days and nights the garrison
soldiers and local officials, who were manning the fort together with the Red
Armymen, repulsed the enemy's assaults. Arriving Red Army units and detach-
ments of people's volunteers waged stubborn battles with the bassachi bands for
several days.

By the end of August 1921 the basmachi bands were badly battered. Heavy
casualties forced then substantially to cut down on the number of attacks on
the local population. A temporary lull ensued. while the kurbashi of
Eastern Bukhara and the adjacent areas were planning new anti-Soviet actions
and bringing their bands back up to strength, am and munition were being

transported in from abroad.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Local party and soviet agencies were a3so taking advantage of the respite.
They stepped up explanatory work among the population and held meetings of
dekhkans. They devoted particular attention to the clergy. The essence of
Soviet rule, the plans and tasks of the Soviet authorities were discussed at
kurultays, to which members of the clergy were invited. This was producing
positive results. Frequently the clergy would make the decision to support
the Soviet authorities and the Red Army in the struggle against the basmachi.

The struggle for the masses by means of persuasion was one of the principal
forms of the struggle against the baamachi not only in Eastern Eukhara but also
in Central Asia as a whole. This was a course of policy delineated by Lenin.
Specifying the thrust of activities by Central Asian party and soviet agencies,
in 1921 V. I. Lenin demanded that the trust of the toilets of local nationali-
ties be gained and that a tireless campaign be waged against great-power
chauvinism. Attaching enormous importance to a correct resolution of the
nationalities question, Lenin stressed: "He must be extremely strict in this
matter. This will have reverberations in India and in the East. It is an ex-
tremely serious latter; we must be a thousand times cautious here."33

In August and September 1921 important political measures were being carried
out in the Bukhara Republic, connected with preparations for the Second All-
Bukhara Kurultay of People's Representatives. During the period of prepara-
tion for this congress, revolutionary committees, as temporary agencies of
authority, were disbanded on the territory of the BPSR (except in areas of
aggressive basmachi activities). Soviets of people's deputies were established
in their place, which operated under the leadership of aksakals (elders), who
were elected for a term of one year. The kurultay, which ran from 18 through
23 September 1921, adopted a new constitution, in which the main provisions of
the constitution of the Russian Federation and the Turksstan Republic found
expression, elected a Central Executive Committee and its Presidium, and
formed a new government headed by Payzulla Khodzhayev.

Domestic and foreign reactionary elements took advantage of the brief lull to
prepare the bands in Eastern Eukhara and adjacent areas for new actions. At
this time representatives of the former emir of Bukhara came from Afghanistan

to the basmachi. They propagandized the idea of fighting for restoration of
the emirate, attempted to unify the disunited bands, which had begun fighting

among themselves, and tirelessly enphasized the point that Great Britain was
giving all-out assistance to the former emir.

In the first half of September 1921 a clandestine meeting of basmachi leaders
took place in Eastern Bukhara, at which a decision was reached to make common
cause, with the aim of overthrowing popular rule in Eastern Bukhara. This
assemblage proclaimed lbragim-bek chief of the basmachi of Eastern Bukhara.

For all practical purposes even independent bands operating on the territory

of C<an tral and Western Bukhara also came under his influence. Concerned,
however. that in case of success Ibrsgim-bek wOuld seize power, the former emir
took measures, through his agents, to restrict the latter's independence.

The detachments of Ibragim-bek commenced combat operations on 15 September
1921. Their main forces (approximately 6000 basmachi) laid siege to Dushanbe

103
FINICINHCJAI.USE(NVLY
nun vases—adma. ~U~ ~.Oa.s

on 23 September. But they were unable to capture the city. Red Army units
which arrived on 18 October 1921 broke the siege.

The situation in Eastern Bukhara remained critical, however. By mid-October
1921 the Payzabad, Kulyab, Garm, and Kurgan-Tyube districts were in baamachi
hands. Their successes were assisted by pan-Turkists, who had managed to get
into high positions. Ardent nationalist Abdulkhay Arifov held the post of
military commissar. Pormer Turkish colonel Ali-Risa was head of the republic
militia. Usman Khodzha Pulatkhodzhayev, chairman of the Bukhara Tall [Central
Executive Committee], was an impassioned enemy of Soviet power. Holding high
posts in soviet agencies, these people knew about all plans being prepared
against the basmachi. They disclosed them to the enemy and secretly supplied
him with arms, ammunition and food. In the fall of 1921, when the baamachi
stepped up their activities, some pan-Turkists openly went over to their side.
Cheka chairman Huetdin Haksum-Khodzhayev was one of those who went over to the
enemy's camp. Hhile holding this responsible post, he formed a 150-man
detachment. The Sherabad military commissar, Khasan-efendi, a former officer
in the Turkish Army, defected to the basmachi with a detachment of 50 men.

In the meanwhile the counterrevolution was preparing for another large-scale
operation against Soviet Bukhara -- the Saver Pasha venture.

The Enver Pasha Escapade

Enver Pasha, former war minister of the Ottoman Empire and a British stooge,
arrived in Bukhara in the fall of 1921.34 He was assigned the mission of
uniting all the basmachi forces, of creating an anti-Soviet front, and of
ultimately toppling Soviet rule in Central Asia. The British consul general in
Kashgar, Etherton,wrote that ”aner... had plans of creating a great Islamic
state as a buffer against Russia."35 It was planned to include in this state
not only Turkestan, Bukhara and Khorezm, but also adjacent countries.

international imperialism and counterrevolutionary forces in Central Asia
linked with Enver Pasha their plans to strangle Soviet rule in our country's
eastern regions.

The British imperialists were hoping that Enver would unite under his leader-
ship all anti-Soviet elements, particularly the bssmachi. The nationalists
believed that Enver would give them a banner for pan-Islamic and pan-Turkist
agitation and counterrevolutionary activity. The reactionary clergy
portrayed Enver as an emissary of Allah, bearing ”holy credentials written in
burning letters."36

Seyid slim-khan, the former enir of Bukhara, was hoping to restore the Bukhara
emirate with Enver Pasha's help. Alim-khan feared, it is true, that if Enver
was successful he might get rid of Alim-khan, and therefore he made every at-
tempt to hold the Bukhara basmachi under his control. In a letter to Ibragim-
bek, Seyid Alim-khan wrote the following about Enver: "...He is a most eninent
and illustrious person.... Secure his favor. You need him very much. Convey
hin across the Amu Darya River with honors...."37 But in another letter the
former emir stated: "Under no circumstances give him (Raver Pasha - Auth.)

104

FOI:0'1WCJAI.1EHE(NVLY
complete power over the troops of the districts, but only coordinate your ac-
tions with Enver-bek."38

Enver Pasha. consuned by ambitious dreans and seeking to becone "the deputy of
huha-ad" on this sinful earth as quickly as possible, hurried events. In a
letter to the forner stir he boastingly declared that he would topple Soviet
rule within no mre than 2 months.

Upon his arrival in Bukhara, Enver Pasha took up residence in the hone of
Usnan Khochhi Pulatkhodrhayev, chairman of the Euhhara Talk. The first
clandestine meeting of local leaders of counterrevolutionary organisations and
basmachi bands took place here, at which Enver Pasha was proclaimed leader of
the baa-achi. Boastful and .bitious, the first thing Enver did was to order
a large silver seal with the inscription "Supreme Oo-ander in Chief of All
the Forces of Islam, son-in-law of the caliph and deputy of Kuhn-ad." Since
the newly appointed co-snder in chief possessed higher nilitary education
and considerable military experience. he realized that the disunited, poorly
organized basmachi detach-ants were no army. Therefore Enver Pasha attearted

to sake the baa-achi hands into a centralized "arm" according to the European
nodel.

In Novenber 1921, accompanied by six for-er mrkish officers and J0 askers,
he departed for Eastern Eukhare. allegedly on a hunting trip.39 Prior to his
departure he sent to all the kurbashi of Eastern Eukhara a letter demanding
that they submit to his authority and couence Joint operations against Soviet
rule. The local basmachi leaders, however, looked with suspicion on Enver's
arrival in Eastern Bukhars. Only 85 baseschi joined his detachnent in Eastern
Bukhara. Enver headed with then to Dzhalanashkul', where there was to be a
meeting with local chiefs and Afghan representatives. But only two representa-
tives of Ibragin-bek arrived at the designated neeting place, acco-panied by
200 horsemen; these representatives stated to Enver that the bek declined to
join him.

Enver proceeded to seek a face-to-face neeting with Ibragin-bek. The latter
finally consented, but for his own secret purpose. When the neeting took place.
Ibragin-bek disarned and arrested Enver. Seyid slim-khan learned about this.
The actions of the Eastern Eukhara leaders were contrary to the ache-es of the
former enir. Enver was freedat his demand.

Reactionary forces in Afghanistan and British agents undertook urgent steps to
unite the efforts of Ibragin-bek and Enver. They sent one agent after another
to Ibragia, until they obtained his agreemt to a truce.

At a new meeting the kurbashi of Eastern Eukhnra acknowledged Enver as their
leader. The unified detach-eats began to call that-selves the "Any of Islam."
Enver declared that he had no desire for the throne of Eukhara and that as soon

as Soviet authority was toppled. he would st-on Seyid Alia-khan to take the
throne.“

Enver Pasha‘s true intentions gradually becane evident. lie was planning to
seize Eastern Bukhara, to advance on the capital of the Eukhara Republic and to

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘UI WI'ILIAI. \aDI’. \II‘LI

proclaia himself emir. After that he planned to unite with the Pergana
basmachi and initiate joint action against Soviet Turkestan. Concrete plans
were already being drawn up for toppling the power of the people throughout
Central Asia.

aner Pasha's army grew to impressive size - approximately 16,000 men. Sub.
sequently there were as many as 50,000 men under his leadership.

Enver decided to commence military operations with the capture of Dushanbe.
For the conduct of this operation, he massed the main forces of the basmachi
of Eastern Bukhara in the Gissar Valley.

At this time Usman Khodzha Pulatkhodzhayev, chairman of the Dukhara Republic
Tle, arrived in Dushanbe with a detachment of 700 men, under the pretext of
organizing defense of the city. The detachment was comanded by Turkish
colonel Ali-Rica, chief of the Bukhara militia, and Daniyar-belr.

In the first half of December 1921, before co-encing comlpat operations, vaer
Pasha gathered together his kurbashi for a meeting, which was also attended by
the traitors Ali-Rita and Daniyar-bek. Enver Pasha was counting heavily on
them: it was precisely they who were to ensure the capture the capture of
Dushanbe.

0n the evening of 9 December 1921 Pulatkhodzhayev stunned Horozenko, military
commissar of the Dushanbe garrison, Deputy Military Co-issar Hukhin, Nagornyy,
consul general of the RSPSR in Eastern Bukhara, and other high Soviet officials.
As soon as the invitees arrived, Pulatkhodzhayev placed them under arrest.
Threatening then with death, he forced lbrozenko and Hukhin to sign a prepared
text of an order calling for the Red Army garrison to lay down arms and with-
draw fron Dushanbe. Disarming of the garrison was assigned to the detachment
of Ali-Riza and Daniyar.

The traitors, escorted by a mounted detachment, arrived at the garrison and,
brandishing the order, demanded that the men lay down their arms. The order
appeared suspicious to Grintsevich, sci-lander of the 2d Battalion. lie
proceeded to inquire as to the whereabouts of the military comissar. At this
point the traitors attempted to place him under arrest, and thus mosed their
plans. The battalion refused to disarm. The first shots rang out. A skirmish
began between Ali-Riza's detachment and the Red Armymen of the 2d Battalion.
The traitors retreated in confusion. The garrison cox-and was freed from
arrest. They also succeeded in recovering some of the weapons taken from the
3d Battalion. In the meantime Grinteevich contacted Turkestan Front head-
quarters and reported what had transpired.

0n the morning of 10 December 1921 a composite detachment of the 7th Regiment
and subunits of the 9th Regiment were dispatched to the assistance of the
Dushanbe garrison. Learning of the approach of reinforcements, the traitors
fled fron the city during the night of 13 Dace-bar. They took with them an en-
tire supply train containing property looted from the residents of Dushanbe.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mounted troops of Ibragin-bek overtook then at a mountain kisblak and con-
fiscated all theplundered valuable from the unlucky rivals.“

Enver Pasha then decided to take Dushanbe by stern. The small garrison (ap-
proximately 600 soldiers and couanders), however, held out for 72 h0urs

against the continuomfierce assaults by the basnachi detachment, which was
several thousand nen strong.

Failing to accosplish his objective, Saver Pasha regrouped his detacluents and
surrounded the city. The situation of the defenders of Dushanbe was becoeing
increasingly were critical with cach passing day. Food supplies were running
low. Many Red Areynen and co-anders, debilitated by hunger, had fallen ill.
They were almost out of a-unition. During these difficult days the local
population came to the aid of the besieged garrison. Unbeknownst to the
basnachi. feed and provisions were being delivered to the fort. Gaib

Poshev and Aim Ashurov, chair-en of the revolutionary co—ittees of the
Chorbog and Kharangon tymens, organised the collection of provisions, broke
through the encircling forces and delivered them to Dushanbe.

But the situation at the garrison r-ained critical. Therefore the Turkestan
Front co-and authorities ordered a withdrawal. 0n the night of 15-16 Feb-
ruary 1922 the soldiers left Dushanbe erd fought their way toward Daysun, where
they were to link up with units of the Red Arley.

Reactionaries greeted with rejoicing the entry by Enver Pasha and Ibragin-bek
into Dushanbe. Congratulatory messages flooded in from abroad. New insurgents
joined their detscInents. Former bets and functionaries of the eeir, as well
as Bukhare nobility arrived in Dushanbe. ‘ney proceeded to reinstitute the

old enirate order. Enver Pasha was recognized as leader of the basnachi of
Central Asia, fro- the Pergammd Samarkandskaya cblest to and including
Eastern Bukhara.

A regime of terror and violence was established in areas captured by the
beseechi. Mass executions became the order of the day in Eastern Dukhera.
NumerOus taxes and levies were imposed on the toilets. Many co-unities were
totally destroyed."2 Reactionary elenents in Afghanistan, of course not
without the support of British ruling circles, sent to Enver Pasha (under the
guise of a volunteer detach-ant) a SOO-nan subunit of regular troops.‘3
Garrisons were beefed up and roads repaired along the Soviet border. A special
headquarters was set up in Afghanistan to handle the supplying of' arns and

food provisions to the Eastern Dukhare detach-eats.

Following the capture of Dushanbe, the beseechi army grew to 20,000 Ilen.
Buoyed by success, aner launched an offensive toward Western Bukhara along
two eain axes: part of the forces, under the cos-tend of Daniyar, was to
proceed via Shakhrisyabs. The main forces, led by aner hiuelf, were to
advance via Baysun.

Ibragin-bek was virtually excluded fron active operations. aner Pasha as-
signed to him the role of vicegerent in Eastern Bukhara. This ambitious

kurbashi, who had been enviously observi'. g the strengthening of his rival,
took countermeasures. First of all he increased the nunericel strength of the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW WPILIAL var. WL'

detachments directly under his col-and. Although strengthening of the basnachi
bands was in the canon interest of the eounterrevolution. this move caused
Enver Pasha concern, since he realized that Ibragin-bek would not let slip by
an opportunity to wrest power from him. In view of this, Raver Pasha sought

to set against Ibragim-bel: the major kurbashi: Davlyatnaaobiy, Pusayl Maksun,
Ishan Sultan, and others. Enver Pasha sought the removal of kurbashi sup-
porters of Ibragin-bek from such important areas as Darvaz, Karategin, and
Kulyab. By the spring of 1922 relations between the two leaders had deterimated

to such an extﬂt that Ibragim-bek withdrew with his detachment into a remote
mountain area.

In spite of the difference between the leaders, the basmachi, exploiting the
fact that the Soviet troops were few in amber, rapidly advanced deep into
the Bukhara Republic. laying waste to everything in their path. The popula-
tion of Eastern Bulthara had decreased appreciably by the time of establishment
of the Tajik ASSR. In seven tyumens of the Kulyab and Gsrm viloysts the
basmachi, according to far from complete figures, killed 5528, wounded and
maiaed 2912 inhabitants from 1922 through July 1924.."5

During the brief period of military operations initiated by aner Pasha,

acreage under crops in the Bukhara Republic shrank by 72 percent, and the total
number of livestock decreased by two thirds.

Basmschi detachments occupied Karshi Viloyat and thus opened up the way into
Western Bukhara. At this tine, in the spring of 1922, the pan-Turkist Abdulkhay
Arifov, nilitary couissar of the Bukhars Republic, went over to the side of

the hamchi. his deputy, former Turkish officer Talat-sade, defected with bin.
Enver Pasha joyously greeted the traitor Arifov and named his his deputy.

The imperialist press loudly proclaind the inevitable collapse of Soviet rule
in Central Asia. Enver Pasha called himself the head of a nonexistent govern-
ment of the so-called Turkish Central Asian Republic. The flow of arms and
a-unition from abroad increased. A new 300-nn detachsnt formed of Afghan
military personnel arrived and placed itself at Enver's disposal.“

At the end of March and the beginning of April Saver received from his patrons
two caravans laden with am. In addition to rifles and cartridges, the ship-
ments contained six cannon.

The former Bukhara emir was furnishing false information to the basmachi
leaders. In letters to aner and Ibragim-bek, Seyid Alia-khan, making reference
to foreign sources. assured them that Moscow had fallen and that practically no
Co—unists remained in Ashkhabad, Merv and Roland.

Filled with optimistic expectations, aner began making threats even to the
government of Soviet Russia. On 19 Hay 1922 he sent a letter to Moscow in
which he demanded in the form of an ultimatum that Red Army units be recalled
from Khiva, Bukhara and Turhestan, threatening war against the RSPSR in case
of failure to comply. In the letter he officially designated hinself as
con-sander in chief of the armies of Khiva, Bukhars and Turkestan.

108

POROFFICIALUSEONLY
The situation was becoming increasingly more critical. It was essential to

gather together the requisite forces i-ediately in order to deal a decisive
blow against the basmachi on the territory of Eastern Bukhara.

In view of the comlex situation and the fact that goverth agencies and the
military couissariat were filled with alien and even hostile elements, in
January 1922 the Bukhara Cos-unist Party Central Conittee, TsiK and Council
of Rain of the BPSR established by joint decision an Emergency Dictatorial
Commission of the BPSR Talk for Eastern Bukharan Affairs. The conission was
empowered to issue orders and instructions, to be carried out mandatorily and
undeviatingly by all establishments and by all officials. Its main task was to
impose revolutionary order in areas of codat against the basaechi and to
restore Soviet authority in areas liberated from the enemy. Following es-
tablishnent of the Emergency Dictatorial Co-iseion, lasyr Khaki-0v. its
chairman, did considerable work behind enemy lines, chiefly in Dushanbe, while
cormission member Alimzhan Akchurin worked in tactical areas of operations.“7

In addition. a Bukhara Comist Party Bureau for Eastern Bukhara was
established.

On 13 March 1922 the BPSR Council of Nasirs enacted a decree calling for as-
tablishnent of a Bukhara lied Army."8 A central and oblast missions to as-
sist the Red Army were forned. Detachments of volunteers and people's militia
were strengthened. The dekhkans willingly joined the volunteer detachments.
The atrocities, plundering and destruction perpetrated by the bands were con-

vincing them more and more of the necessity of an aggressive struggle against
the basmachi.

The Russian Comlmnist Party was doing everything it could to assist the

toilets of Central Asia, including the people of Bukhara. in their struggle
against the basmachi.

Up to 1922 the Columnist parties of Bukhara and Khorezm were not part of the
RKP(b). Guidance was handled by the Comintern. The (Io-mists of Bukhara and
Khorezm submitted a request to the Central Connittee of the m(b) that they
be accepted into the Russian Col-mist Party (of Bolsheviks).‘9

0n 1 February 1922 the RKP(b) Central Co-ittee Politburo issued a special
decree on Bukhann matters. It was drafted by a oo-ission consisting of

V. V. Kuybyshev, I. V. Stalin, P. Khodshayev. and G. V. Chicherin. The
decree called for solving a broad range of probl-s connected with strengthen-
ing nutual relations between the party organisations of the RSPSR, BPSR, and
KPSR. with consolidation of anti-basmachi fronts, and with intensifying
political work among the indigenous population in order to clear the territory
of Bukhara of counterrevolutionary elements as quickly as possible.50 It was
specified that the Bukhara Col-unist Party would have the same status as
republic Conunist Parties within the RKP(b). One representative each from the
Central Comitteea of the Bukhara and Khorezm Oo-unist parties was added to
the chb) Central Committee Turkbyuro.

109

Ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Uﬂ thklﬂh U“ Ua‘l.‘

The Conunists of the Buhhara Republic, just as of all Central Asia, closed
ranks solidly behind the RKP(b) and worked to strengthen the alliance with

the Russian people. Entry by the Bukhara Co-Iniet Party into the mm was
of enornous significance for the future of the toilers of Bukhara and fostered
organizational and ideological strengthening of the Bukhara Co-unist Party.

In these conditions the functions of the Turkbyuro were essentially expanded
to the functions of the Sredazbyuro of the mo) Central Cos-ittee.51

S. S. Kamenev, contender in chief of the armed forces of the RSPSR, drew up a
concrete plan of nilitary assistance to Eastern Bukhara.

The complexity of the situation in Bukhara, incessant actions by banschi bands,
and econonic chaos dictated that the Politburo and Sredaxbyuro of the party
Central Co-ittee repeatedly and specifically address the situation in the
BPSR. The following enactnents were issued: by the mo») Central Conittee
Orgburo dated 18 January -922 - on measures to assist Bukhara; the BXP(b)
Central Co-ittee Politburo dated 2? February 1922 - on the situation in
Bukhara; dated 1 March 1922 -- "0n Reinforcing Troops and Facilities in Eastern
Bukhara"; dated 13 March 1922 -- "0n bukhara." A number of measures of a
political. econoaic and nilitary nature were adopted pursuant to these enact-
nents. Party-soviet and nilitary officials were sent to Central Asia, and the
population of areas cleared of baamachi were excepted from the foodstuffs tax
in kind. The party Central Conittee Politburo stated that externination of
the basaschi as quickly as possible was an urgent task of local party organiza-
tions.

The military situation becane even more critical at the beginning of Hatch
1922. Basnachi detactnente had reached the approaches to Bukhara and were
beeieging the city fron all sides. The government of the BPSR appealed to the
Turkestan Front hewoyensovet. On 11 March, following 3 days of fighting.
units of the Red Arny and detachments of volunteers pushed the basmachi back
beyond Babkent, Giahduvan, and Ker-inc. But these were only initial suc-
cesses. although important ones. llo turning point had as yet occurred in the
struggle against the basnachi. In sone areas the beseechi were once again
turning to the offensive.

On 20 April 1922 the RKP(b) Central Oo-ittee Politburo examined the question
of the situation on the Turhestan Front and undo the decision to send 6. K.
0rdzhonikidze and Sh. 2. Bliava to become acquainted with matters on the spot;
the Politburo also decided to place Central Asia under nartial law until the
basmachi were totally eradicated.

The armed forces of the Bukhara Republic were at the initial stage of forma-
tion and could not successfully conbat the large, well—sued bands. Therefore
the command authorities of the Turkestan Front detailed some of their own
units to reinforce the Buhhara Front.

Ya. Kh. Peters, an old Conunist and proninent states-an. and consnder in
chief S. S. Kamenev arrived in Bukhsre. By order to the Republic Rewoyensovet,
a Rewoyensovet of the Buhhare Front, headed by Feyaulla Khodshayev. was

110

FOIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
established effective 1 April 1922. on the basis of an arm) Central Com-
mittee Politburo decision. lts nission was "organization of unity of actions
against the baa-achi in Eastern Bukhara."52

0n 4 May 1922 G. K. 0rdzhoniltidre arrived in Bukhara. Assessing the situa-
tion, he reported to the Central Co-ittee that a difficult struggle lay ahead:
"Enver will require a real fight, but I an confident that we shall succeed

in wringing his neck."53 In other reports to the Central Conittee, G. K.
Ordzhonikidze advanced a masher of proposals aimed at strengthening Soviet
authority, at purging the ranks of the Bukhara (Jo-mist Party (it totaled
14,000 seders) and Koneomol against class-alien ale-ants, and at improving the
health of the economy of the Turkestan A881! and the Bukhara Republic. He also

discussed this in his report presented on 12 Hey at a 'mrkestsn (Jo-Innis: Party
Central Co-Iittee Plenus.

On 18 Hay 1922 the mm Central Co-ittee issued the above-mentioned decree
entitled "0n turkestan-Bukharan Affairs." It specified concrete neasures to
strengthen Soviet authority in Central Asia and on nobiliaation of the

toilet nasses. as well as on initiation of an extensive political mign
(political rallies, conferences of the non-party people, meetings) against

the Enver Pasha venture. At the same time the mm Central Conittee
recon-ended that both in ‘l‘urltestan and Bukhars vakuf lands be returned to their
forner owners. that the local national courts be recognised as legal (ksaiy and
biy [head of tribe or union of tribes] courts), etc. This would correct some
of the mistakes ends by local Co-unists in the area of nationalities policy.“
The decree called for a declaration of annesty to Bukhars and microns basnachi
who surrendered. It played an important role in uniting all revolutionary
forces in the republics of Central Asia for wiping out the basmchi.

A plenary session of the BKP(b) Central (Jo-ittee Sredazhyuro, of new makeup
(a plenum executive co-ittee was approved, consisting of members 5. I. Gusev.
N. Tyurakulov, and P. Rhodehayev, and candidates A. A. Sol'ts, A. Rakhisbayev,
and Makl-udov). was held on 19-20 May 1922, with the participation of G. K.
0rdzhonikidze and Sh. z. Bliava. ‘l'he plenun discussed the party Central Com-
mittee decree and examined questions pertaining to econonic develop-cut of all
Central Asian republics. devoting particular attention to bringing the BPSR
and KPSR into the nainstrean of building socialise. inroving the position of
the toiler leases, and consolidating Soviet authority. A resolution entitled
"0n Econonic Unification of the Three Republics" was adopted.55

Pursuant to the decisions of the 300) Central Co-ittee Sredazbyuro Plenun,
on 26 Hay 1922 the Turkestan ‘l‘aIK issued a decree specifying the return of
vakufs to their former owners and reestablish-ant of the hasiy and hiy caurts.
The decree enphasized that the Soviet authorities did not see their task as
cosbsting local custons but called upon everybodz to take part in the
struggle to strengthen the rule of the toilers.s

Decrees by local authorities, adopted pursuant to the instructions of the party

Central Conittee and Sredasbyuro, pronoted the cause of stepping up the can-
psign against the basnechi.

111

FOIOI-‘FIGALUSEONLY
rue Wrsxsns. was. “ALI

A great deal of work was being done to implement the instructions of the
party Central Conittee under the direct guidance of G. K. Ordshonikidze and
the Sredazbyuro. Special attention was devoted to a purge of counter-revolu-
rionary elements from the party, the soviet machinery of govern-eat. the

Red Army, and the nilitia, and to enlistment of the finest representatives of
the people, particularly dekhkans, to high positions in the structure of govern-
aent. Addressing a conference of Bukhara (ha-mist Party officials, G. K.
0rdzhonikidze stated: "He sust take all steps to purge the Bukhsra Government
not only of counter-revolutionary elements but also of nepotism... He further
have the enormous task of extracting free Bukhara, chiefly free the dekhkans
all the very best they have to offer, and involve this best in governnent."5’

Bulthara Group of Forces headquarters was established in April 1922. The group
of forces included the lat and 2d Independent ‘l‘urkestan Cavalry brigades, the
3d Iurkestan Rifle Division, and 2 cavalry squadrons from the Vernenskiys
Cavalry Comnd Courses. Subsequently units free the Hoseow Military District
and from Belorussia were assigned to the group of forces. The Bukhnra Group
of Forces totaled 6500 bayonets, 3039 sabers, and 20 artillery pieces. It was
contended by N. Ye. Kakurin. He was soon replaced by P. A. Pavlov.

At this same tine the Bukhara Cor-mist Party conducted an extensive political
campaign among the population. The task or‘ ﬂat struggle against Raver Pasha
was explained and the essence of his antipopular policy was demonstrated at
neetings and political rallies, in proclamations and appeals directed to the
toilers of indigenous nationalities. Particular attention was focused on ex-
posing Enver's links with British imperialisn.

Intensified preparations for dealing a decisive blow against the basmachi were
in progress throughout the nonth of May. The main forces of the Red Army were
being massed in Samsrhsnd.

Enver Pasha was also preparing for the forthcoming battles. lie held several
aeetings with the leaders of basmachi bands and drew up a plan of action with
the participation of agents of foreip intelligence services. Additional con-
signments of arse and widen arriving from abroad were placed at Enver
Pasha'a disposal. The imperialist reactionariss assured the kurbashi through
their agents that they would provide them with everything they needed, in
whatever quantity.

Enver Pasha undertook an attempt to thwart the operation forwhich the Red Army
comand authorities were preparing. Moving large forces toward Baysun, he
established a solid ring of encirclenent around it. Threatening total an-
nihilation of the garrison and the entire population, mver Pasha demanded the
town's surrender. The co-anders, Red Arnymen and the toilets of Baysun, how-
ever. rejected the ultimatum and courageously defended the city.

Early in June 1922 the Bukhara Group of Forces consented offensive operations
on a broad front, jointly with the Bukhara Red Any, detachnents of volunteers
and people's nilitia.

Initially several large bands were routed, the blockade of Baysun was lifted,
and the kishlak of Kofryun, in which Enver Pasha's headquarters were located,

112

MWLUSEONLY
was liberated. The eneny retreated toward the Surlthan Dam Valley. 0n the
following days units of the Red Arny, people's nilitis and volunteer detach-
nents hit the basnachi with one attack after another. On 22 June the right-

hand colum of advancing troops captured Kabadian and cement“ liberation of
the Vakhsh Valley.

Following the defeat in detail of large basnachi units at Baysun, the Red Arny,
supported by the population, proceeded to advance, liberating one area after
another. On 110 July 1922 Red Arly mite operating on the right flank ap-

proached Dushanbe and, following a fierce battle, liberated the city that sane
day.

mver Pasha's detaclnents were noticeably denoraliaed, and a disintegration of
spirit began anong the basnechi.

Enver Pasha attewted to explain away his setbacks as being due not to of-
fensive actions by Red Any units but rather to disagreenents with Ibrsgin-bek.
Of course differences between the leaders did to acne nessure exert a negative
effect on the fighting efficiency of the bands. In particular, aner Pasha and
Ibragin-bek were unable to achieve coordinated actions. (It is true that at
the beginning of the operation lbragin-bek had dispatched his nain forces,
nunbering 7000 nen, to assist Enver Pasha at the latter'a request. These
detachnents took part in the battles at Bayaun.58 But following the defeat at
Baysun, Ibragin-bek took refuge in the muntains, while aner Pasha retreated
in the direction of Bal'dshuan). But of course the nsin reason for the defeat
of the bssnachi lay in their sntipopular essence. The successes of the Red
Arny were due to active support by the toiling people. The dekhksns saw the
Red Arny as their savior fron the terroriennd mging of the basnachi and
therefore willingly assined it with food and direct participation in arned
conbat against the bands.

The mu.) Central Co-ittee Sredazbyuro. the nukhara Commist Party and

the governnent of the BPSR took steps to provide extensive explanation to the
lopulation of Enver's political sins and to nobilize the asses for his final
defeat. The above-untioned appeal by the mm Central Connittee Sredsabyuro
to the Col-unists of the republics of Central Asia stressed that through the
conon efforts of the "toilere of buhharn, Turkestsn and Khoresn and their

Red troops, there will be fewer bloody victins of Enver's bloody venture. and
peace. desired by the toiling population of all Eastern Soviet Republics. will
be achieved."59 The decisions of the Fourth Session of the All-Bukhsra TsIK
(July 1922) stated that "aner's desire, jointly with the Eastern Bukhara
basnschi, to place Bukhara under the British heel is a crine both fron the
standpoint of the Muslin and fron that of the Bukharsn." The session appealed
to the entire Bultharan people to "gather under the Red Banner and conbst the
basnachi and Enver Pasha with united forces."60 The Presidiu of the All-
Bukhsra 'l'sllt received instructions fron the session to concentrate the
republic's rescurces first and forenost on the struggle against the basnachi
and to grant a pardon to those who would voluntarily surrender and show
repentance to the Soviet authorities.

The toiling population greatly assisted the Red Any and volunteer detachnents
with food provisions and aided then in crossing nomtain rivers. A decisive

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a wee Us a avuea. a.“- J. ee-a

role in mobilizing the nasses to assist the Red Any was played by the local
soviets, which were reestablished i-ediately following expulsion of the
basnachi. In the [okay Valley. which lbragin-bek was endeavoring to turn into
an inpregnable stronghold, the toilets and even the chiefs of sons of the
tribes took the side of the Soviet authorities. Tribal chiefs Abdul-Gash,
Karshi-aksakal, and Dany-aksskal actively aided the Red Any. They exposed to
the people the basnachi and their leaders as eneaiae of the toilers and
appealed to the dekhkans to fight the bands.

vaer Pasha proceeded to fight his way toward the border, in order to escape
abroad. But the Red Any cut off his avenues of retreat.

Patching together tenants of scattered detachaents totaling $000 sen, Saver
Pasha succeeded in surrounding the 16th Cavalry Begiaent near the kisblak of
Sangtud. The first assault aounted by Davlyatnn-biy's cavalry-en was repulsed,
however. The regiaent launched a counterattack. The beseechi, unable to

stand up under the onslaught of the Red Arley-en, tools to their heels. The
fleeing basnachi reached Bal'dchuan before Enver was able to stop then, where he
organized a defense. Stubborn fighting raged in lal'dsbuan for 3 days. Five
hundred of lever Pasha's basaschi went down on the battlefield. he withdrew
with the remaining troops to the. kishlak of Obdar, between Khoveling and
Bal'dzhuan. Saver Pasha's last battle took place in this hishleh on Io August.
his band was encircled, and Devlyatnan-biy sud Inver Pasha were killed in
battle.

Thus endcd one of the asst dangerous international reactionary plots against
the Soviet Central Asian republics The peoples of the Soviet Bast recall the
use of aner Pasha with revulsion. he added a dieaal page to the long history
of Central Asia.

The Well and 1'is of the DPS! awarded ooiaet decorations to the lost
neritorious participants in the struggle against the baslachi and to individual
nilitary units. Payzulls Khodzayev. chairnan of the govern-ant of the BPSR.
was awarded the Order of the Red Bauer. This constituted reconition of the
important role played by the Council of lasirs of the Bukhare Republic in the
struggle against the eair-basaschi bands and in consolidating the people's rule
in this republic.

The Third All-Buhhara Kurultay of People's Representatives (15-18 August 1922)
suaned up the results of the struggle against Enver. It branded the basaachi
as an antipopular nova-ant of the exploiter classes. supported by iqerialist
nations. The kurultsy took particular note of the noble internationalist
aission of the Bed Arty. "The Russian Red Am.” stated the kurultay
resolution. "cane to Bukhere not at its own initiative, for the sake of
achieving soae selfish objective, but on the contrary. at the request of the
Bukhara People's Soviet Republic to liberate its territory and oppressed
people from the persisting beenechi mvensnt."51 In a proclanation to the
public, the kurultay stated: ”The lukhara People's Soviet Republic, faced with
a powerful adversary, fought shoulder to shoulder with the toiling people of
Russia. who through their heroic struggle showed the peoples of the last the
way to revolution and liberation. We have achieved fine results in the fraarnal
alliance of both republics against our enenies."62

116

”WWW?
The Chieftains Refuse to Lay Down Their Arne

0n 6 Septe-ber 1922 the arm») Central Co-ittee Politburo adopted a decree on
measures to give military and economic assistance to the BPSR. It pointed to
the necessity of strengthening the military units of Turkestsn which were
fighting against the hasnachi; the necessity of sending nilitary specialist
cadres to the BPSR to provide military training to the local population and

to form volunteer detach-ants sang the dekhkans and the urban poor; to raise
prices on cotton.63 Following the defeat of aner, the ma) Central Con-
nittee Sredasbyuro specified the following measures to intensify the struggle
against the hasnachi: neutralize the middle peasant fron the hai and nullahs.
and work persistently to involve the middle dekhkans in govern-eat; develop .
state and cooperative trade; organise and expand cooperative activities in the
area of agricultural credit, with the objectiVe of gradually liberating the
peasants fton the power of the bai and usurers.“ People's kurultays were
convened. In Septenber-October 1922, for exanple, five people's kurultays of
several tribes in the Lokay Valley were held; a congress of the Tsjik popula-
tion of the Gissar Viloyat was also held in October. A total of 50 tyuun,

S viloyat, and 7 national kurultays were held in Bastern Bukhara, with the par-
ticipation of approxinately 16,000 persons, and 20 tyunen, 6 viloyat and

1 national (Turk-en) kurultay in Western Bukhara, with the participation of
note than 5000 dekhkans and hardenen, were held prior to the convening of the
Fourth All-Bukhara Kurultay of Soviets.65

In these conditions it was becoming increasingly note difficult for in-
perialist agents to organize basaachi detach-eats. Basnachi tanks were
thinning, and their area of operations was shrinking. The bamchi leaders,
however, were refusing to lay down their arm. Following the defeat of Enver
Pasha the situation in the Bukhata Republic continued to rennin coupler.
Groups operating in Heaters Buhhara (especially in the viloyats of Kashksdatya
and Surkhandarya) and in Eastern Bukhara (in Ksrategin and over the vast ter-
ritory of the Kulyab, Kurgan-Tyuhe. 'Gissar, and Sherebad viloyats) presented a
substantial threat. Inperialist circles (Great Britain in particular) and
reactionary elenents in Afghanistan continued to entertain hopes of toppling
Soviet rule in Central Asia, particularly in Eastern Bukhara, with the as-
sistance of their own nan. This tins the choice fell on an associate of aner
Pasha, for-er Turkish officer and British intelligence agent Selin—pasha
(Khodaha Selin-bey). Be and a group of Turkish officers were instructed to
put together new detachnents on the territory of the Bukhara Republic.

Seyid Alia-khan gave his approval of the nonination of Salin-pasha as new
leader of the Bukharen basnachi, since the Bukharen counterrevolutianriesﬁzﬂing
to possess genuine resources for the struggle against Soviet rule, were
placing their main hopes on assistance fro: the inerialist powers. It is

not surprising that all appeals by the for-er suit of Bukhara to the basnachi
kutbashi were accompanied by promises of aid from foreign powers (primarily
Great Britain). At the sane tine Seyid Alin-khan, fearing loss of the

Bukharan throne in case of success by the basnschi, was continuing to count on
lbragin—hek.

Co-encing preparations for a new anti-Soviet venture, Seyid Alia-khan, with
active participation of British station chiefs, prepared for and held a neeting

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[UR UI'O'ILIAL VOL \II‘I.‘

in Kabul in August 1922. The meeting was attended by Central Asian counter-
revolutionary leaders, including several basaachi kurbashi, as well as
representatives of Afghan reactionaries. As was already noted, good-
neighbor relations were being established between the Soviet md Afghan na-
tions. Pro-British reactionary circles in Afghanistan, however, were at-
tempting to push their own specific policy, which was hostile to the in-
terests of both countries.

A plan for a new coirined offensive against Soviet rule in Central Asia was
hamered out at this conference. A general offensive by the basmachi bands
was to begin in the spring of 1923.

In the fall of 1922 Salim-pasha made his way into Bukhara and established con-
tact with a number of leaders of the Hatcha, Sanarkand, western Bukharan and
Pergana baseschi. Some kurbashi refused to recognise Salim-pasha as their
leader.

The foreign patrons dispatched to Salim-pasha froa India a loo-canal caravan
laden with arms and unmition.

Salia-pasha was relying on the backing of former supporters of Bayer Pasha, and
particularly on the band of Puzayl Hakeum. lie sent Pusayl Haltsum 30 of his own
bodyguards and helped him gain the upper hand over his rivals — Ishan Sultan
and lshan Suleyman. Gaining victory over his opponents with Salim-pasha's help.
Fuzayl Haksum declared hinelf the enir of Darvas and Karategin.

With the appearance of Salin-pasha on the territory of the Bukhara Republic,

the basnachi once again became active, particularly the Hatcha basmachi, who

had established close contacts with Salia-pasha. They reamed their forays
against the kishlaks of Ura—Tyubinsltiy and Dahizaksltiy uyesds. Nor did Ibragim-
belt cease combat operations.

The couand authorities of the Turkestan Front and the Bukhara Group of Forces,
party and soviet agencies closely sonitored the development of events and, in
conformity with the developing situation, took requisite measures to protect the
toilet population.

Following the defeat of Saver-Pasha, the Soviet Government pointed to the
necessity of accelerating the liquidation of remaining bands and invited the
rank-and-file basmachi to surrender voluntarily, with a guarantee of amnesty.

Party and soviet agencies of the Bukhara Republic and Samarkandskaya Oblast
were conducting active political indoctrination work among the population and
giving mateer assistance to the poorest sealants of the population, while
Red Army co-Iand authorities end leaders of volunteer detachments were con-
tinuing military operations against the basnachi.

In the fall of 1922 units of the 13th Corps (the forner Bukhara Group) routed
several basmachi forces. An attenpt by Ibragim-bek to mite with Daniyar-bek
was thwarted. In October 1922 Ibrsgim-bek was dealt several appreciable blows.
but once again he succeeded in fleeing into the mountains.

116

FOIOFIICIALUSEONLY
Putting together several large detect-ants. Salim-pasha decided to mount
a concentrated attack on Kulyab and Dushanbe. to topple Soviet rule in
Eastern Bukhara and then, having established a base, to advance into the
central areas of the Bukhara Republic.

In Deceaber 1922 Salin-pasha, with a 600-man detachaent, redeployed into the
Kulyab area, where several other basaschi groups joined him. In the first
clash with the Kulyab garrison, which contained only 60 men, Salim-pasha
failed to achieve success. The garrison, under the comand of D. K. Gol'tsev,
with the support of the townspeople, withstood furious assaults by the
basnachi for 30 days. Finally on ll January 1923, when their umunition had
run out, the Red Arlymen abandoned the city. But the band did not hold out
long in Gulyab. The 152d Cavalry Regiment soon dislodged it.

Salim-pasha proceeded to the Gissar Valley, where he linked up with Ibragim-
bek. They agreed to conduct subsequent coﬁat operations in two forces.
Salin-pasha advanced toward Eukhara with 6000 basmachi, while Ibragim-bek
remained in the bokay with 2000 men, to cover Salim-pasha's rear and at the
same tine to attempt to capture Dushanbe.66

The situation was clearly not developing in favor of the counterrevolution,
however. The process of political and economic strengthening of the Soviet
republics of Central Asia was becoming increasingly more appreciable.

The resolutions of the 12th Congress of the arms) and the decisions of the

loth Conference of the. m(b) Central Co-ittae with Representatives of the National
Republics and 38810"! were of great significance in mobilizing the people for

the struggle against the basmachi. They armed the party and all toilers with

a program of concrete actions to achieve further strengthening of friendship

and mutual assistance of the peoples of Russia.

Agencies of popular authority were becoming stronger throughout Eastern
Bukhara; a land reform was being carried out in Eastern Bukhars -- land was
being handed over to the dekhkans. A tax reform was being carried out in the
interests of the toilers, and there was taking place a process of further
strengthening of the Bukhara Co-unist Party.

A. I. Kork, com-ending general of the Turkestan Front, sent to the Bukhara
Republic the 3d Cavalry Brigade, consisting of the llth and 12th regiments and
an artillery battery. The brigade took part in defeating the main forces of
Salim-pasha, which had concentrated in the Sherabad area.

The first clash between the brigade and Salim-pasha's detect-ants took place
on 11 March 1923. The fighting continued for about 3 days. Salim-pasha's main
forces were routed. He withdrew to Kelif. But here Md Army units hit his
band once again. After this the basnachi scattered. Some began operating in-

dependently, others withdrew to Hatcha, while still others, led by Salim-pasha,
returned to the Gissar Valley.67

Taking advantage of his rivals' weakness, Ibragin-bek moved into the Surkhan
Darya Valley.6 But he failed to achieve success. Volunteer detachments and

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PW W'ILIAI; var. UIVLI

Red Amy units advanced into the valley and inflicted a defeat on Ibragin-bek,
forcing his to return to the Lokay.

Following the winter and March operations of 1923 which were conducted against
the basnachi on the territory of the Bukhara Republic, the bands divided into
three principal groupings. One grouping was still (now sore in for. than sub-
stance, to be true) under the cement! of Salindpasha. It was based in Hatcha.
The najority of Zeravshan basnachi had concentrated there and were con-
tinuing to threaten the northern part of Tajikistan and Sanarkandakaya Oblast.
A second group was based in Karategin and Darvaz. It was led by Pusayl Hakstn,
who still naintained relations with Salim-pasha but was seeking to be in-
dependent. Taking advantage of the absence of Red Arly units in Karategin and
Darvaz, he established his base in Cara Viloyat and considered hiuelf total
naster of the area. The third group was concentrated in the Gissar Valley.
Ibragin-bek and SaliI-pasha were operating in this area. The basnschi detach-
aents totaled up to 15,000 nan. Salim-pasha received substantial new aanpowar
reinforceaents, arns and unmition fron abroad.

The existence of three fairly large bases of basaacbi operations denanded
vigorous actions to eliminate then. But the Bukhara Republic could not fight
all the basnachi groups with its snall armed forces. Therefore the govern-eat
of the BPSR requested that the government of the USSR send an additional
nilitary contingent to Bukhara. This request was net. A cavalry division
and two cavalry brigades were dispatched to nukhara in March 1923. Local
units were also strengthened. Special oo-ittees for conbating the banachi
were formed. as well as conissiona to nobilize the Isle population into the
Bukharan Red Army.

Salin-pasha was the first to be hit. Bis 2000-nan detath was overwhelmed.
Losing alnost 300 nan, Salim-pasha retreated in the direction of Rurgan-‘i‘yube.

Soon Red Army units began actions against Ibragia. In several engagements the
basaachi lost more than 500 nen.

The army of Ibragin-bek and Salin-pasha had virtually disintegrated. that of
the basaachi (approxinately 12,000 out of 15,000) had returned to their
kishlaks. Ibragin-bek leaving a snell covering force in the Lokay. took a
detachment of 350 ”2.56 and proceeded to the left bank of the Vakhsh.

Salin-pasha and I‘oragin—bek began avoiding encounters with Red Arty units and
volunteer detachments. sending out small groups to attack kishlaks and. oc-
casionally, snall garrisons.

The basnachi base in Hatcha was cleaned out in the spring of 1923.

in the latter half of 1922 the co-and authorities of the Turkestan Front
concentrated substantial forces against the Hatcha bamchi. The enely sus-
tained heavy casualties. Subsequently the situation deteriorated. however.
Basnachi groups from Eastern Bukhara broke through to Hatcha. Kholbuta's
band alone was 800 men strong. Elinination of the "bekstvo" was delayed.
Soviet troops were not able to launch an offensive until the spring of 1923.

118

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
A special detachment under the wand of S. H. Shsvtsov was formed from the
13th Rifle Corps to conduct the operation. Volunteer detach-eats from

Pendahiltent, Ura-‘Uube and other areas fought in coordination with the Red Arny
subunits.

The operation comenced on 18 March 1923. The basmschi offered fierce
resistance. They burned bridges across the gorges and rivers and demolished
roads. The inhabitants of the kishlaks, however, rebuilt the bridges, showed
the Red Armynen alternate routes, carried artillery pieces across the passes on
their shoulders, helped haul aI-mition and food supplies, and evacuated
wounded. Organizing volunteer detect-ants, the local population guarded
liberated hiahlaks, enabling the Red Army units to continue the offensive.

The kishlak of Oburdon, where the bek's palace was situated, was liberated on
2 April. The Mstchs basmachi force had ceased to exist. Only small groups
of basnachi succeeded in uking their way across the nountain passes. Some of
then joined up with Puzayl Haksum, while others went into the Pergana Valley.
Kholbuta, acconpanied by 150 basmachi, took refuge in the mountains of the
ﬁaretegin. Discontent and strife intensified in the bands, which were suf-
fering one defeat after another. Kholbuta was killed by one of his underlings
in the course of this strife.70

Thus the history of the Hatcha basmachi, who had brought much grief and
suffering to the population on the upper reaches of the Zeravahan, ended in-
gloriously.

The lull which ensued in Central Asia by no means signified the establishent
of peace, especially in Eastern Bukhara, where some of the annestied basmachi
would readily join bandit gangs in a favorable situation. The center of
basmschi activities was shifting more and snare abroad, from where reinforce-
nents could arrive at any moment (and in fact were arriving). In connection
with this, in June 1923 the mm Central Conittee Politburo addressed the
Bukhara question and made the decision to nobilize necessary reserves to
crush the rennin“ bands. The Politburo proposed establishment of an Eastern
Bukharan ‘Revkon and that military and civil authority be concentrated in its
hands. Fayzulla Khodzhayev, head of government of the Bukhara Republic, was
appointed Revkon chairman.71 The Politburo also considered it essential to
carry out a amber of neasures to achieve Sovietization and further
democratization of the government of the BPSR. The RKP(b) Central Conittee
Politburo decision nobilized local party and soviet agencies, Red Arny com-
nanders and men, and the entire toiler population to smash the remaining bands.

RKP(b) Central Comittee Secretary Ya. B. Rudzutalt was sent to Bukhara for
practical implementation of the Politburo instructions and to assist the
Bukhara Communist Party. A report by Ya. B. Rudzutak entitled "On the Com-
nunist Party's Nationalities Policy in Light of the Resolutions of the 12th
Congress of the RKP(b)," was presented at a Bukhara Conunist Party Central
Comittee plenum held on 22 July 1923. The participants in the plenum proposed
a number of suggestions for strengthening Soviet rule. The activities of the
Council of Nazirs, the nenbership of which included former nerchants, traders,
and mullahs, but not a single dekhksn, were subjected to sharp criticism.72

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(on vs-ssyues. was. any:

In light of the instructions of the mm Central Comittee Politburo, in-

portant neasures to strengthen Soviet rule were taken in nukhsra, first and

foremost a purge of central party and soviet establishments. A verification
and listing of the BC? neabership was conducted, a uniforn party membership

card was adopted, the ‘ .1oyat party co-Iittees were strengthened, and party

cells [primary party units], which had not previously existed in the Bukhara
Commist Party, were for-ed.

Squsbbling anong the basnachi leaders because aore intense. Barat-bek and
Usnankul-bek intended to settle accounts with Sai‘.in-pasha. This fact hastened
Salim-pasha's flight abroad. .On 15 July 1923, accompanied by Turkish body-
guards, he crossed the Amu Darya and returned tr. Afghanistan.”

Completing the defeat of the main forces of Salim-pubs and lbragia-bek, the
Red Amy con-and authorities proceeded with wiping out the third base area of
the baseschi operating in the Karategin and Darvas. ’l'he basaachi of Fuzayl-
Haksun presented the greatest threat in this area. lie was in Gan: at this tine
with a detachment of 1500 Ian. Rifle and cavalry units were sent to the area.
A small advance guard swept through the baa-achi roadblocks by the kishlak of
Duburss, ensuring that the advancing units closed rapidly on the basaschi main

forces. The Red Amy swiftly negotiated mountain passes. On 29 August 1923
Car- was liberated following a brief but intensive battle. Fusayl Makeu-

fled across the 80viet-Afghan border, pursuers hot on his heels. As in other

operations, detacluents of local volunteers fought together with regular
units against this basnachi force.

As a result of the sesshing defeat of the baseschi main forces in the Eastern
Bukhara, Smarkandskaya Oblast and Matchinskiy Uyezd, sons of the shattered
bands and their kurbashi fled into Afghanistan. Rid of his rivals, Ibragin-
bek now had the opportunity to achieve his long-standing dream: to because
leader of all the basmachi of Bukhara. This held hill on Soviet territory. he
sent a letter to the former eair of bukhsra and to certain Afghan officials, in
which he reported the flight of many diehard groups into Afghanistan. Ibragim-
bek stated that he was incapable of doing battle with his renaining bands,

and requested assistance. If refused, he threatened to leave the country.“

In response to this letter, Seyid Alia-khan designated Ibragin-bek head of the
bssmachi of Eastern Bukhars and his vicegerent. He was promised assistance
and instructed to hold on until it arrived.75

An experienced and cunning tactician, Ibragim-bek avoided engagements with border
guards and Red Army units. concentrating his forces in asuntain and desert
areas.76 His bands engaged chiefly in plunder and sabotage. Ibrsgin-bek was
receiving arms and amnition, as well as personal, froa abroad. Many of the
foreign basnachi, however, did not sake it to lbragin-bek's bands. Many of
then were killed or taken into custody by Soviet border guards while crossing
the border.

The Bukhara Cos-mist Party and the governmt of the Bukhara Republic were
continuing to take measures to conbat the bssmschi, especially in the [okay
area.

120

”MUSEONLY
On 28 July 1923 the Rewoyeneovet of Eastern Bukhara issued a decree on
changing the administrative division and on calling kurultays of tribes, at
which questions pertaining to stepping up the struggle against the basmachi,
strengthening the Soviet rule and assistance to the poor were to be settled.
Haterial assistance to the public was also expanded. On 23 August the city
of Dual Innbe received 95,000 rubles worth of various goods.

The Red Army nomad and local authorities called a nesting of tribal leaders
and influential tribe members, at which it was ordered that all persons in
possession of and carrying weapons surrender them to the authorities. In
order to thwart this measure, Ibragim-bek, who had not completed his prepara-
tions for launching aggressive actions in Eastern Bukhara, attempted to in-
cite the population of bokay to rise up against Soviet rule, but the dekhkans
refused to support him, and Red Army units arriving in the Lokay forced the
small basmachi groups to return to the mountains.

On September 1923 Ibrsgim-bek once again tried to cause the people of the
laoksy to rise up against Soviet rule. he intended to make use of what seemed
to him to be a favorable situation. The fact is that in September those Red
Armymen and junior co-and personnel who had completed their specified tern
of service were discharged into the reserves; they were replaced by green
recruits who had no experience in fighting the basmachi. But the baamachi were
suffering defeats as a result not only of heroic actions on the part of the
comanders and men of the Red Army but also the steadily increasing activeness
of the toilets themselves. Ibragin-belr. was now made aware of this with
particular acuteness: there were no Soviet troops in the Lokay, and yet his
attempt to force even part of the population to join his hands failed.

Preparing for an offensive. the kurbashi gathered together everybody they
could. particularly those basmachi who had previously scattered and dis-
persed. A specific area of operations was assigned each hurbashi. Alla Nazar
was sent to Kulyab. least to Bal'dzhuan, Gairbek to Fayzabad etc. Ibragim-
bek pr oceeded toward Yavan with a detach-eat of 200 men.’7

Instigators of counterrevolution across the border were mobilizing basmachi

who had fled into Afghanistan to assist Ibragim, and were massing them near the
Soviet border.

lbragim-hek was endeavoring to raise the spirits of the baemachi. He felt that
the best means of achieving this would be a victory, even an insignificant
victory. in battle against the Red Army. In order to ensure winning such a
victory, lbragim-bek picked out a smell garrison stationed in the kishlak of
Naryn. He sent to this site a band which was tens of times stronger than the
garrison force. The battle continued for 2 days. The Red Armymen fought
tenaciously. 0n the third day, 23 September 1923, a 22-mn detachment ar-
rived to aid the beleaguered garrison. hear Naryn the detachment encountered
lgamberdy 's group (600 men). which was blocking the approaches to the kishlak.
Some of the basmachi who were assaulting the kishlak rushed to lgamberdy's
assistance. Taking advantage of the confusion, the garrison broke out of

the encirclement and attacked the basmachi from the rear. Thus the operation
conceived by Ibragim-bek ended ingloriously for him.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘0“ V. I lbmh vaa- \c-‘Io.

Red Army units and detacbents of volunteers conducted an offensive against
other bands of Ibragim-hek, concentrating in the Dshitymtau area. A battle
with the basmachi took place here on 25 September.

In order to prevent the basmachi from obtaining reinforcements from abroad,
the Soviet Government took additional measures to secure the border. Border
guards fought the basmachi and protected the local population in the border
areas, displaying a high degree of courage and staunchness.

On 18 December 1923 approximately 250 basmachi attacked the kishlak of Babs-
Sakal, robbed the population and fled into the mountains. A platoon under the
com-and of border guard Klimov was sent out to destroy this band. The search
continued throughout the night. At dawn the basmachi were spotted in a
mountain gorge. The platoon co-ander decided to attach them without a halt
to deploy.

The basmaczhi were thrown into confusion as the battle began. But soon the
kurbashi realized that his force was numerically superior, and he proceeded

to envelop the border troops. Hour by hour, the basmachi tightened the noose
of encircle-ant. Klimov ordered border guards lvanchenho and Krylov to make
their way through to friendly lines and report on the situation. Basmacbi took
off in pursuit. Red Armyman Ivanchenko's horse was killed in an exchange of fire.
lvanchenko injured his leg when going down. He continued to return fire,

thus enabling his comrade to evade pursuit and reach friendly lines. Border
guard Ivanchenko died a hero's death in unequal combat.78 In the su-er and
fall of 1923 party and soviet agencies of the Bukhara People's Republic im-
plemented new political measures to cowat the hasuchi. Of particular
significance was further involvement of the toiler masses in agencies of
authority. National, viloyat and tyumen kurultays were held throughout Eastern
Bukhara. Ninety-eight percent of the participants were dekhhns and handicraft
workers, while only 2 percent of the delegates were representatives of the
exploiter classes and mullahs.

0n 1!. August 1923 a decree on revising the text of the constitution of the
BPSR, which had been in force since September 1921, was adopted at a special
meeting of the Bukhara Tle. The decree stressed that the revision of ar-
ticles of the constitution aimed at creating a powerful, genuinely Soviet
edifice of government, standing truly close to the toiler masses and capable of
protecting the interests of these masses against encroach-eats by the exploiter
classes. The decree broadened toiler oversight over the activities of agencies
of authority. The exploiter classes were deprived of voting rights. A
statute on viloyat executive committees (revolutionary committees) was also
ratified at the meeting. A new administrative-territorial division was per-
formed. Five viloyats were established in Eastern Bukhara -- Dushanbe, Gare,
Kulyab, Kurgan-Tyube, and Sary-Assiy.

Economic reforms were implemented at the same tile.
A land reform in the boltay Valley, carried out in November 1923, played an im-

portant role in the campaign against the basmachi. It undermined the economic
roots of the bai-feudal elite. For the first time, the poor peasant received

122

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
land. The status of the poor and middle peasant improved to an even greater
extent due to s simnltaneously iaplenented tax rsforn. Taxes on the land-
holdings of th niddle peasants were substantially reduced, while the poor
peasants, who needed assistance, were totally ennpted froe taxes. ”Koshchi"
unions, uniting the toiling dekhkans, began to be for-ed in the BPSR, follow-
ing the aodel of Soviet mrkestan. 'rhese and other economic and political
aeasures greatly strengthened Soviet rule in Eastern Bukhara. For the first
tine delegations from this region took pert in the proceedings of the 4th
Congress of Soviets of the BPS]! (October 1923). The congress focused
particular attention on assistance to the population of Eastern Bukhara. The
congress adopted the decision to for. an autonomus mrknenskaya Oblast. The
congress passed a resolution to indict certain nasirs linked with the bamchi.

The 110(1)) Central Co-ittee Sredasbyuro and the bukhara Commist Party were
sccoaplishing a great deal of work in the area of establishment and organiza-
tional structuring of local party organisations in Eastern Bukhera. A BC?
Orgburo was established in Eastern Bukhara. Local party organisations, in
spite of their snall size (there were only 12 Commists for examle, in the
Dushanbe city party organisation as of 1 January 1923) ,7§ becsne genuine or-
ganizers of the defeat of the basmachi. The resolutions of the 8th (loth) A11-
Bukhara Party Congress (January 1926) greatly fostered further ideological-
organisationsl strengthening of the entire Bukharan party organization.

An inportant role in nobilising the people for the struggle against the basnachi
was played by economic and cultural assistance given by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. and particularly by the Turkestan Republic, to People's
Bukhara. Outright gifts of equipnent were made for a textile nill and paper
still. a tannery and soap works, for the Krasnyy Vostok Spinning and "saving
Mill, plus several other enterprises. Engineers, technicians, and skilled
workers cue to bukhara free the country's central region. The finest
representatives of the republic'e youth were sent fron bukhera to study in
Moscow, Tashkent and other cities. Schools, libraries, theaters and museums
were established.

The position of the basnachi had weakened considerably in Eastern Bukhara by
the end of 1923. It was apparent from situation reports of the Red Am com-
nand authorities that 117 kurbsshi and 1565 rank and file baseschi had been
killed or captured in Eastern Bukhare between September and the end of
Deced>er 1923. while 1200 basnachi had voluntarily surrendered. According to
inoculate figures, sonewhet note than 3000 men remained at large in scattered
bands at the end of 1923. Sons of lbragin-bek's active supporters were more
and sore clearly realising the hopelessness of the struggle against popular
rule. Sons of then began to abandon the besmechi and even began trying to
persuade lbragim-bek to cease brigand activities. At the end of October 1923
a group of elders iron the lsankhodshe tribe cane to hi: and requested that
he lay down his eras. lie was still hoping for success, however. and continued
the struggle against Soviet power.

The principal bases of the beseechi were now the high-elevation mountain areas,
the barren sands of Turkmenie and the border areas of neighboring countries,
to which the bai. beks, reactionary segnent of the clergy, the clan nobility.

123

POI omcm. USE ONLY
and other elements hostile to Soviet authority had fled. Considerable nunbers
of basnachi oounterrevolutionaries had saved abroad.

The forner Bukhars enir, who had taken up residence abroad, made every effort
to encourage stepped-up counterrevolutionary activities. as generously doled
out titles and ranks. Ibragin-bek received s particularly large nuaber of
titles.

At the beginning of 1924 the foreign and donestic oounterrevolution succeeded
once again in reviving the basnachi on the territory of Eastern Buhhsra.

At this tine Ibragin-belt was on the left bank of the Vakhsh. Conparatively
snsll bssnachi groups reneined in the Lokay and were occasionally asking their
presence known. More and more new bands, however, were nounting forays fron
across the border. In December 1923 three large basnschi groups crossed the
border into Eastern Bukhara. Several other bands were preparing to cross.

All were well arned. Reliance on hands for-ed on the territory of neighboring
countries was vivid evidence of the radical social changes which had taken
place in Eastern Bukhara, where the counterrevolution had lost all support
anong the toiler population.

Local Soviet authorities and the Red Arny co-and were taking effective
neasures against the basnachi.

An important role in disintegration of the basnachi canp was played by the
All-Lokay Conference held on 25 Decenber 1923, attended by all the nullahs of
Lokay tribes. They unanimously acknowledged that Soviet rule was not in con-
flict with the Muslin religion, and consequently basnachi opposing Soviet
authority could not link their actions with defense of lslsn. The decision by
the religious authorities exerted anoreous influence on religious believers in
Eastern bukhara. Of particular significance was the fact that the conference
bound all nullahs to conduct agitation against the basaschi. It is not sur-
prising that Ibrgin-bek assessed the decision of the conference as betrayal of
Islam. He realized that tine was working against his.

Toward the end of December 1923 and at the beginning of 1926 Ibragin-bek under-
took a new attenpt to unite the basnachi of all Eastern Bukhare, particularly
Glaser and Daisy. In actual fact the obtained structure of subordination was
relative: the kurbashi coordinated with Ibragin-bek only general matters pertain-
ing to the anti-Soviet struggle. Nevertheless the numerical strength of the
bssnachi, under the chieftsinship of Ibragin-bek, grew to 2500 ran in the
winter nonths of l92é. M special detachments and a composite bukharan
border detach-eat were forned for the purpose of wiping the. out. with the
active participation of the local population, the majority of the snsll groups
had been slashed by the end of January 1926. Many basnachi voluntarily
surrendered to the Soviet authorities. Ibrsgin-bek once again withdrew into
the Gissar Valley.

An isportant role in crushing the bands in the winter and spring of 1924 was
played by the flexible policy conducted by local party and soviet agencies
along the clergy and influential tribes-en. Actions sinilar to the All-bony

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conference were arranged in other areas of Eastern Bukhara in the winter of
1925. Appeals to the basaachi to return to peaceful labor were adopted at
these conferences. These appeals would usually be ratified by the signatures
of ecclesiastics. "The people are tired, the people have been ravaged by the
basnchi and duand that they lay done: their arns forthwith, for which the
Soviet authorities will pardon all dshigits and kurbashi." stated one of the
appeals. An even nnre serious warning to the bunchi was an appeal to
religious believers signed by 113 ecclesiastics on behalf of ell the ulena of
the Bukhara Republic. lt stated, in particular: "Our appeal expresses a
single wish -- to free the people free the anxiety and calanities caused by

the basnachi. If the basaachi reject this appeal, if they continue harning the
civilian population, then it will be necessary to take the nest resolute
neasures against the baauchi; the entire population lust assist in this latter,
pointing out where baseschi are hiding and where their weapons are, and this
will lead to an early end to the bassechi and to the establish-cot of peace.
order and an upright life.”30

Of course not the entire clergy and not all influential tribesnen actively sup-
ported the cawaign against the bamchi. Nevertheless statement of opposition
to the basnachi by a portion of the clergy and prestigious representatives of
the tribes attested to the fact that the counterrevolution, including the
chiefs of the bands, had lost support anong the tribes.

lbragin-bek and his nasters abroad still did not wish to lay down their am,
although they were conpelled teqorarily to suspend the fighting. Once again
they altered their tactics, entering into negotiations with the Soviet

authorities, as had happened on nunerous occasions in the past. But the talks
did not produce results. Delaying tactics were evident at the very first seet-

ings, at which Ibragin-beh presented unwarranted denands. lie wuld denand a
year's postponesent of the surrender, or would have an objection to the con-
position of the delegation. etc. Hilitery operationr again resuaed.

On 11 February 192’. conposite detach-eats dealt Ibragin-bek another blow. The
basnachi lost 80 men in this battle. 0n the following days some of the
beseechi voluntarily laid down their arns.

Ibragin-bek took refuge in the mtains. he would send out snall groups on
aarauding raids on kishlaka, and he continued terrorizing the population.

In April 1921. several thousand basnechi were active in Central Asia.81 by the
sinner of 1926 Ibragin-bek had again ease-bled a detachment of 600 nen free
the bokay, Dushanbe, and babatag.82 The detacbent's nain forces were based in
the vicinity of the kishlak of Aul-Kiik. The beseechi burned crops in the
field, confiscated grain and livestock fron the dekhkans, punished the
"disobedient." but avoided confrontations with Red Arly units and people's
volunteer detach-eats. They were not always able to evade pursuit. however.
lbragin-bek's band lost 30 dead and 50 wOunded in a clash with a squadron of
the 10th Cavalry Reginent. After this. Ibragin-bek changed his base to Aral-
‘l‘ugay. A composite battalion of the 66th Reginent ands sqadron of the 65th
Cavalry Reginent. in which new recruits doninated, set out for this area.
Hoping to exploit this fact, Ibragin-bek decided to engage. The inex-
perienced Red Arlynen, however, fought courageously. The hes-achi were unable

125

FOROFFICIALIBBONLY
run vernal“. U“ uzvur

to withstand the cavalry charge and took to their heels. This battle cost
Ibragin-bek 50 dead. The co-snder of his personal bodyguard was along these
casualties.

The nain forces of the basnachi were nassing at this tine in the lulysb area.
Haneuvering in the rugged nountain conditions, the baslachi avoided frontal
encomters and rensined elusive. The co-and authorities dispatched the con-
bat- faaed 6th Independent Altay Cavalr; Brigade, under the co-and of civil
war hero N. D. Tonia, to wipe then out.
Kulyab in nounted for-nation. Tonin dis-nunted short of town and ordered all of
his sea to dis-cunt. "Re are not conquerors, but liberators," he told thee.
"Therefore we should enter town on foot. This is a sign of respect for the

people . "3’0

In June 1926 300 basnachi of the kurbashi Ahbartugsaho attacked the brigade’s
headquarters in Kulyah. The headquarters security guard boldly engaged the

attackers and staunchly defended the fort. in which the headquarters subunits
were quartered. The baanachi lost 170 dead and wounded in the fierce battle,

and withdrew.

In the answer of 1926 the basnachi nain forces in Kulyab Viloyat were soundly
defeated. The renaining snall groups continued to attack caravans and snail

garrisons and to raid kistdaks.

The successes in the canpaign against the basnachi provided the Bdrhara Con-
nunist Party and sukhara Tle a basis for ispleeenting a nunber of neasures to
strengthen Soviet rule in Eastern bukhara. In Hay 1926 the Bukhars mist
Party decided to abolish the Revises and establish agencies of Soviet

authority throughout Eastern Bukhara. On 28 May 192‘ the sum“ Tel! issued a
decree entitled "0n Sovietisation of Eastern Bukhara.” on the basis of which
the Energency Dictatorial Co-ission ceased existence. It was replaced by a
Provisional antral kecutive Co-ittee of Soviets of People's Deputies of
Eastern Bukhara. An election cupaign was held in the sr-er of 1921., in
preparation for elections to dshanagat [village-level administrative unit], tent
Isettlenent, town]. tyunen, and viloyat congresses of people's representatives.
A congress of Soviets of Eastern Bukhara was held at the beginning of Septenber
1921.. following elections to local agencies of Soviet authority.

The month of Septesber 1926 was of significance for the entire Bukhsra People's
Soviet Republic. In this nonth the 5th All-Bukhara Congress of Soviets issued
an enact-ant transforming the Bukhara People's Soviet Republic into the
Bukhara Soviet Socialist Republic. The congress enactnent enhssized that the
nsin task of the peoples of hukhsrs — Usbeks. Tajiks, Turknens. Kirghiz. and
Kazakhs. anong when there was full equality, was ”achievesent of a transition
to socialism by carrying out socialist reforns and crushing all counterrevolu-
tionary actions against the proletariat and its dictatorship."35 The Bukhsra
Soviet Socialist Republic declared its fraternal unity with all socialist
republics and with the Great Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

The transition by the BPSR to the path of building socialise bees-e possible as
a result of the considerable success which had been achieved by the toilets of
Bukhara in 1920-1926, the consolidation of Soviet rule, and nobilization of

all unpower and resources for the struggle against the bitterest enenies of
the people - the bee-achi.

Central. republic, and oblast perment conferences to conbet the basnachi

were established in Septenher 192‘ to organize the struggle against the
beseechi bands in Central Asia. The ne‘ership of each conference included

a representative of the executive co-ittse (as head), party agency secretary,
the co-ander and co-issar of the lilitary codwined unit stationed on the
territory of the republic or ohlaet, CPU chief, chief of finance agencies,
worker-peasant inspectorate chief , and the procurator. The Central Conference
to Conhet the Bassechi was headquartered in Tashkent. It was headed by the
chairmen of the mm Central Co-ittee Srsdeshyuro, and the chair-an of the

Uzbekistan Sovnarkoe served as his deputy. Later the conferences were renaned
co-issione to codat the baseschi.

A policy of coordinating all nanpower and resources to coebat the baenachi was
adopted. An increasingly extensive effort was conducted to break up the
beseechi groups and to persuade then to surrender voluntarily.

In response to the neasurea taken by the Soviet authorities. the instigators
and organizers of counterrevolutionary activities, seeking to galvanize the
baseschi. beginning in Decssber 1926 proceeded to nova in large groups fro-

ahroad. The border guards at the Kui-Kara-Koeer border post twice engaged
basnachi who were attemting to penetrate Soviet territory.

Between 15 and 23 Decenber 19210 350 baseschi penetrated into Karshinskiy Rayon.
where they proceeded to engage in terrorist activities against activists,
party and soviet officials. and delthkans who were smathetic to Soviet rule.

At the end of Decenher 1925 lhragin-bek returned to the Lokay. Once again he
succeeded in gathering under his co-end alnat all the hasnechi of Eastern
Bukhara. They totaled as neny as a thousand nen.

The groups were found in a unique nanner. Dietrusting the dehhkane, the
leaders divided the basnachi into volunteers consisting of well-to-do elenente
which were clearly hostile to Sv-viet rule (forning the basic nucleus of these
groups). and esters, who were nobilized by coercion.“

Anong the esters there my who not only had no desire to join the bar eachi but
who endeavored to utilize their forced presence in the band to denoralise it
and, when opportunity arose, would desert the beenechi encanpnents.

Ibragin-hek endeavored to inrove organisation and discipline anong the
basnachi. All hasnechi suspected of insufficient ferocity or guilty of sons
offense would he sent to a special (”punisbent") detect-ant. Records were
kept on the rolls of basnechi. forces, weapons. a-unition, and equip-cut. A
systen of subordination of snell to larger hurbashi was established. An in-

telligence gathering systen through infor-ers was eetablishe ', for which they
enlisted for-er functionaries of the lukhere enirste and the reactionary
clergy.

127

FOR 05110“. USE ONLY
f“ “CAIRO. M Us‘h‘

Special groups were assigned to rob the population (under the guise of col-
lecting various aseessnents and taxes). If the population refused to pay
taxes, force would he used. The “tax collectors" were directly subordinate
to Ihragin-beh. This syste- enabled hi- to keep the plundered booty under his
control and use it for purposes of personal enrichsnt, as well as for sup-
porting the for-er Bukhara enir and his retainers.

As a result of the activities of these hands, a return to actual life in the
fertile Gissar and Vahheh valleys was proving difficult.

Letters seized fro. Ihragin-heh attest to the continuous direction froa abroad
of the hasnechi on the territory of Soviet Central Asia. These letters con-
tained general instructions on how to operate, reported appointments, prono-
tions, etc.87 The baseschi in turn sent back over the border intelligence of
espionage interest which they had collected.

This correspondence, which dates to 1925, contains any facts indicating that
some tribes and clans were in their entirety opposing the has-echi. nehhhans,
forced to join the hands, were undertaking nass escapes. In a letter to
lbragirheh the kurbashi Tenir reported that he was unable to deliver food
supplies, because in the Kafirnigan River area all the ba-echi had dispersed
and gone hone, while the ”population has becone unreliable; they will capture
end tie up ashers."88

Hullahs across the border would write to Ibragin-beh and his hurbashi: "...Sone
persons have joined you and then again left your hands. Please inforn us who
these persons are, and in conforsity with the shariat these persons will he
declared unbelievers on the basis of the shariat. and will be condemed to
death by that sane sharia t."39

lbragin-bek took desperate neasures to save the baenechi hands free defeat.

he sought to exert psychological pressure on the population, to conpel the
people to believe in the strength of the basaachi. Toward this end he in-
structed the kurhashi to step up sabotage activities, "to destroy telegraph
lines. to put goods storage facilities to the torch. etc."90 At the ease tine
lbragin-bek organized special groups which were sent to the auls and kishlaks
to conduct anti-Soviet propaganda and to perpetrate terrorist actions against
the recalcitrants. Early in January 1925 Ihragin-beh conducted a raid into the
Surkhan Valley. into the Sherabad and Baysun areas, chiefly a reconnaissance
foray. The hasnechi leaders once again saw clearly that the toiling popula-
tion was hostile to than. The dehhhans quickly for-ed volunteer detach-eats.
In only 5 days four volunteer detachments totaling 600 nen were for-ed just in
the Giasar Valley. nehhkans of the Isankhodshe trihe forned a detect-ant of
100 men.

In the winter of 1925 has-achi were surrendering to Soviet authorities, es-
pecially in the Kashka Darya and Surhhan Darya areas. Land and water refor-
neasures being carried out by the Soviet Governnent for the benefit of the
dekhhans, which evoked among the hasnechi the strong desire for peaceful labor,
fostered disintegration of the has-echi. Ashore denuded that they be allowed
to go hone and work in the fields. Fearing a final collapse of the bands. sole
kurhashi were forced tenporarily to allow their baseschi to return to their
kishlaks.

128

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As before, however, voluntary surrender did not always signify sincere
repentance. Taking advantage of the meaty and the humane laws of the Soviet
Govern-cot, a portion of the basaschi gave up their outlaw status in order to
gain tine. to end clan and tribal hostility. and then, choosing a suitable
aoeent, to reco-nence the struggle against Soviet rule.

Many baa-achi who surrendered to Soviet authorities continued to keep their
weapons, including nachineguns, in a nuIber of localities continued collecting
various taxes from the population for their own benefit. and naintained con-
tacts with the kurbashi hiding in the nountains. The kurbashi nerdy-Dotkho,
for example, utilised negotiations about surrenderiu to the Soviet authori-
ties in order to stock up on food supplies and prepare the basnschi for new
raids. This once again attested to the perfidy of the baseschi leaders and
de-anded constant vigilance and a high degree of cadet readiness on the part
of the toilet nasses, party and soviet agencies, co-anders and Red Arnynen.

The basnachi inflicted i-ense dnsge on the econowy of Tajikistan. This is
eloquently indicated by the following figures: between 1919 and 1925 the total
number of sheep declined free 5 nillion to 120,000, and goats - 2.5 nillion
to 300,000. Constant devastating bassachi raids forced the population of a
number of areas in which bands were concentrated to abandon settled localities.
During this sane tine population nubers in areas of active operations of
basnachi bands declined substantially, while in soae areas the population
dwindled practically to zero: everybody went to where the Soviet authorities
were in fire control. In Kurgan-lyubinskiy Rayon. for easeple, only 5 out of
36 kishlaks retained. The population in Gissarshiy Rayon declined
catastrophically.

The RKP(b) Central Co-ittee continued closely nonitoring the class struggle

in Central Asia. On 27 January 1925 the mom Central Co-ittee Politburo
once again emined the baseschi question and rrtified nessures drafted by the
Sredasbyuro to wipe out the bands. At the seas tine it pointed to the neces-
sity of more resolute actions against the basaschi in Eastern Bukhara. Con-
ditions were sore favorable for this than in previous years. The nunerical
strength of the bands had dininished considerably. Rational-state delinitation
and establisheent of the Tajik Assn. with its capital at Dushanbe, ensured the
resolution of any socioeconoeic and political problens taking the specific
features of the region into accomt.

neasures taken to beef up security along the border were haqering the
baseschi forces. In those years. however. there were no scans of solidly
sealing the border in the difficult conditions of uountsin terrain. The

basnschi found way to get through and sent lbregin-bek eras, a-uunition, and
men.

Receiving reinforcements in nnpower and eras. in the spring of 1925 Ibragir
bek resumed cosbat operations. On 18 April 1925 the Tajik ASSR Revkon placed
the republic under sartial in.”

Of great significance in subsequent nobilisation of the indigenous population
of Uzbekistan to coebat the eneny was the resolution of the lst Congress of

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘m WON-III. I130. UA‘LI

the Conunist Party of Uzbekistan (February 1925), attended by H. I. Kalinin,
entitled "On Rational Military Units."92 which were intended primarily for
fighting the basaachi. Comaunists and non-party rollers were as-

signed to the national units. The Independent Uzbek Rifle Battalion, the In-
dependent Uzbek Cavalry Battalion, the Independent Uzbek Rifle Company, the
Independent Uzbek Packhorse Battery, the Independent Tajik Cavalry Battalion,
the Independent Turk-en Cavalry Battalion, the Independent Kirghiz Cavalry
Squadron, and the Kazakh Cavalry Reginent were tor-ea in 19245-1927.93

An important event for the entire ‘Durkestan Front was ward to the 13th Rifle

Corps, which was operating against the basmachi (civil war hero I. P. Ped'kn,

corps counnder), of the banner of the Cot-mist Party of Great Britain at the
let All-Uzbek Congress of Soviets, held in February 1925.

In the spring of 1925 a coordinated shock campaign was conducted to combat the
basmachi in Tajikistan, a campaign wh-t; combined economic, political, ad-
ministrative. and ailitary methods. As always. such a campaign was accompanied
by intensification of political work among the masses.

Public trials of band chiefs were held, for example. They exposed the true
countenance of the basmachi and unmasked the views hostile to the people which
were being propagandized by the organizers of the basnachi bands.

Once again mass volunteer detect-ants were formed, which played an important
role, together with the volunteer militia detachments, in defeating the
basmachi. They fought staunchly and courageously. There were 16 volunteer
detachnents, containing a total of 327 active fighting nnbers, just in
Cissarskiy, Kulyabski}, and Kurgan-‘lyubinskiy rayons in August 1925.94 A num-
ber of men of the volunteer detachments were awarded the Order of the Red
Banner, and H. Sultanorv was named People‘s hero of Tajikistan.” The
volunteer detachment from the kishlak of Hingachar, Gissarskiy Rayon, contain-
ing 50 nen and operating under the and of Yu. Sahhibnasarov, gained ex-
tensive fame. The bandits feared it. while escorting a caravan carrying
food supplies, the detachment engaged several groups of basmachi which were
attempting to seize the people's property. The caravan advanced step by step
for 3 days, fighting off continuous enemy attacks. The goods, fully intact,
were delivered to their destination.

As a result of the spring campaign of 1925, the number of bands operating on
the territory of Tajikistan had decreased to 31 by the end of May, totaling
slightly more than 600 men. Basaachi were retreating into the muntains and
into the sands of the desert. Intertribal and interclan hostility between
the kurbashi and the rank-and-file besmechi was becoming increasingly more
marked. As a result, the bands continued to break up into smaller ones.

In connection with the crop failure in 1926, party and soviet agencies took
measures to aid the dekhkans. Taxes were reduced, and in those areas where
the situation was particularly calamitous, the population was totally

exempted from taxes and given the requisite material support: seed loans were
made, special co-issions were formed to assist the spring planting, aryks were
repaired. and kishlaks were provided with services and amenities. An enornous

130

FOIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
job was done to assist starving people in Lokay. Kulyab, and Gare viloyats,
which had suffered the nost fro. the drought and has-achi pillaging.

Local party and soviet agencies resettled a portion of the dekhkans in an or-
ganized nanner to fertile areas, on the Lands of for-er bai. There was no
abate-eat of lass-political work. Political rallies were held in the kishlaks,
and reports were presented on the tasks and achieve-ants of the Soviet
authorities. on the sins of the baa-achi bands and their foreign leaders and
inatigators. The USSR Sovnarkon allocated large subsidies for Tajikistan and
forgave the republic its total arrears in agriculture.

The status of the struggle against the hasuchi was once again examined on

2 June 1925 at an mm Central (Jo-ittee Sredezbyuro plenu. The plenu-
specified additional neasures to coeplete the defeat of the baseachi and
pointed to the necessity of working anong the clergy with the sin of detach-
ing it fro. the basaachi.

Individual basuchi and mll groups were voluntarily surrendering alnost
daily.96 During the first 10 days in June 1925 alone 152 persons, including
10 kurbashi, voluntarily surrendered to the Soviet authorities.

The toilers frequently sent delegates to the bands demanding that they sur-
render to the Soviet authorities, and took into custody basaschi who appeared
in the kishlaks. Ties between the dekhkans, the Red Amy and the border
guards were growing stronger. The Bed Anynen and the border guards were not
only protecting the population against pillaging. terroris. and violence but
were also helping then provide kiahlaks with services and amenities, helping
out in far- work. and taking part in political work.

By the end of May 1925 in any areas of Central Asia there were practically
no large basnachi groups. In Sanerkandskaya Oblast, for ample, only small
groups reasined (2-6 nen each). which would take refuge in the kishlaks,
only occasionally asking their presence known by isolated terrorist acts and
depredations.

The situation in Tajikistan's border areas renained nore serious. but
baaeachi were continuing to surrender voluntarily to Soviet authorities in
these areas as well. Individual kurbashi even publicly repented their evil
deeds before the people. The kurbashi Khalar-bek, for maple, addressed a
crowded political rally and asked forgiveness and nercy of the dekhkans.
swearing a solenn oath to expiate his guilt by actively assisting the Bed Any.
In June 1925 the kurbashi Abdraie, with 12 bssnchi, voluntarily surrendered
to Soviet authorities in the kishlak of Nory.97 Soon Hulls-Tardy, an side

of Ibragia-bek. Hulla-kendzha, a eschinegunner for Ibragin, and many others
followed his exampleﬂ8

By the end of June 1.925 Dushanbinskiy, Kafirniganskiy, Paysabadskiy and a
nunber of other rayons were cleetely cleared of basaachi bands. A report on
the situation in Tajikistan by the Turkestan Front co-Isnd dated 7 July 1925
stated: "...The campaign against the bands is proceeding successfully in all
areas of Tajikistan. The nen are in good spirits.... The dekhkans are

131

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
Ivts «scents... -~- he...

beconing increasingly more actively involved in the struggle against the
baanchi. by organizing volunteer Huslin detach-ants - palochniki [lightly
art-:d rearguard units] -- which are doing the iQortant job of ferreting out
the bands and affecting their mrale.... Ihe nilitary pressure as well as

econonic and political ensures have denraliaed the basnachi bands.... ‘lhe
surrender of basnschi and individml kurbashi is condmnns."99

Clashes with basnechi took place elaost exclusively in frontier areas. In
certain instances battles on the border were of an extended nature, lasting
fron 5 to ll heurs.1°°

But the sore hopeless the position of the counterrevolution becane, the sore
intensified became the terrorist activities of the last baa-achi bends against
the toilets, who were actively supporting Soviet rule. In Hay 1925 beenechi
shot to death several local residents in the Kafirnigsn area, and hacked to
death two dekhkans and three akaakals in the Yavan area. On Ibragin-bek's
orders, akaakals and kurbashi who had decided to give up the fight against
the Soviet authorities were enecuted.”1

Ibrsgin-bek forned special groups consisting of «non criminals for the
perpetration of terrorist acts. In June 1925 he ordered the establishent of
aabushes and roadblocks in order to prevent basnschi fron leaving the bench.

The bamchi brutally abused captured Bed Arlyun. In July 1925 a group of
border guards, numbering 15 sen, under the co-and of Sitnikov, engaged a
band of 100 basaachi. The surrounded border guards fought to the last
cartridge. Sense of then were killed in the unequal battle, and sons were
wounded. A border guard squadron which cane to their assistance found ll.
nutilated bodies on the battlefield. The basaschi had lutilated the dead and
tortured the wounded.102

Instances of crop burnings becane nore frequent in the sun-er nonths of 1925.
Basnachi burned nore than 600 hectares of grain crops in the Karaulinskays
Valley alone. They destroyed large acreages of grain crops in the Lokay.

Terrorist acts were applied not only to those who actively supported the
Soviet authorities but to the entire population. Hen. wean, and children
were shot and hacked to death. In one kishlak the bssnachi of Berdy-Dotkho
burned 250 dwellings and slaughtered 238 villagers, including 56 wonen and
106 adolescents. The pretext for the asssacre was the people's refusal to
allow the basaachi into the village and to give then food.103

In the Shakhrisyabz area the neabers of a village were herded into the

village nosque on the orders of that sane lerdy-Dotkho. There the basaachi
slaughtered 8 persons in front of all the villagers.105 In the kishlak of
Besh-Bulak basaschi burned 30 dwellings. destroyed stocks of grain. hacked

to death three dekhkans, and threw two nen and two infants into a blazing
bonfire.1°5

This faced the Red Arny co-snd authorities with the necessity of arranging
security for the kishlaks in areas where the bands were operating nest ag-
gressively.

132

mammals”
The RKP(b) Central Oomittee Sredazbyuro Comission to Cuba the Basmachi
stated in a decision dated 30 July 1925 that the principfl task for the fall-
winter period was ensuring uintenance of public order and protecting the
personal safety of citizens, as well as pursuit and annihilation of basnchi
bands. Particular attention was focused on consolidation of achieved suc-
cesses in the Dushanbe area and in the Lokay, stepping up the campaign against
bandit units in Tajikistan's border areas. as well as in the Surkhan Darya and
Kashlta Darya areas of Uzbekistan.

Dekhkan self-protection detachments were forsed, alongside volunteer fighting
detachments. At the ease time militia bodies, which were participating sc-
tively in the campaign against the basnachi, were beefed up.

Soviet authorities intensified oversight over the collection of taxes, thus
depriving the basnachi leaders of the opportunity to engage in illegal col-
lecting of taxes from the population. Worker-peasant inspectorates and con-
missions to assist the. were established in all localities in order actively
to involve the toilers in monitoring the activities of local authorities.

The party and soviet structure in the localities, Red Army and border troops
political agencies continuously conducted lass-political work among the
population. The dekhkans were extensively encouraged and rewarded for active
support of measures being carried out by the Soviet authorities and for par-
ticipation in the struggle against the basmachi.

Increased quantities of foodstuffs were hauled into areas where there were
shortages, and seed was made available for planting crops. Measures were taken
to develop cottage industry, and couaunications and transportation were in-
proved. Hays were sought to speed up construction of the rail line between
Termez and Dushanbe.

In the meantime Ibragim-bek had received new reinforcements from abroad and,
in part, froe domestic counterrevolutionary forces. By the fall of 1925 ap-
proximately 12 groups totaling approximately 600 men were under his comnd.

Red Army units. border troops, and volunteer detachents conducted a suc-
cessful search-and-destroy operation against basaschi bands. During this opera-
tion they thoroughly nauled the forces of Ibragim-bek and Khuram-bek in the
mountainous Babatag and Surkhan Darya area.

within the span of several days three groups of basnschi (53 men) voluntarily
surrendered together with their hurbashi in Surkhandar'inskiy Rayon.”6

A number of hands were wiped out on the territory of Uzbekistan, including the
bands of Said-Mrat and Turdy-bay. who had been hiding in the Karstau Moantains
for quite some time. After this, there was a sharp decline in basaachi ter-
rorist activities on the territory of Uzbekistan.

New defeats inflicted on the basnachi units promoted their further disintegra-
tion not only on Soviet territory but, in part, abroad as well. According to

133

PO! 05110“. USE ONLY
figures as of 22 October 1925. in the Central Asian sector approximately
6000 persons (basaachi and their families) had crossed the border and
voluntarily surrendered to Soviet authorities.

1

But Ibragin-bek was continuing to receive arns. ammunition and clothing

fron abroad. At the end of 1925, for ems-ple, the brother of the forner enir
of Bukhara sent hin a large ahipnent of equip-ant and ammition. Ibragim-bek's
canp was frequently visited by British intelligence agents. who conducted train-
ing, brought money, and worked out ways of delivering am and equip-ant. Four
British intelligence officers visited gas-achi camps at the end of September

and beginning of October 1925 alone. 0

Border guards and the local population displayed heroisn in the struggle

against the basaachi. 0n 8 January 1926 a well-armed band of 60 non crossed
the border. It was spotted by a five-nan group of border guards. Group

leader Red Armynan Pryshchenko i-ediately sent a report with one of his men
to the border guard post. ‘No additional groups of seven men each arrived in
response to the prompt alert. The border post deputy co-ander for political
affairs, Safonov, assmed conand of the combined groups. The banachi were

unable to withstand the attack and fled into the aountains, leaving behind aore
den 20 dead.

At the beginning of 1926 there were even fewer basmachi in Central Asia

than in the fall of 1925. As of l Septuber 1925. according to inconplete
figures, there were slightly aore than 1000 basnachi in Central Asia (70 in
Turknenia, more than 500 in Uzbekistan, and 650 in Tajikistan).103 By

22 February 1926 there were slightly Dre than 430 (70 in Turk-enia. less

than 60 in Uzbekistan, and are than 300 in Taj ikistan).109 As was noted at a
aeeting of the Co-ission to Count the Basnachi, however, held on 20 January
1926, the renaining bands still represented a definite threat. They eight in-
crease in nunber 8, since the basnachi continued to retain their social base -
the exploiter strata of the population.

In Tajikistan the majority of the basmachi, headed by lbragin-bek, had con-
centrated on the left bank of the Surkhan Darya. Berdy-Dotkho, leader of the
Kashka Darya basnachi, had loved into the same area. At the beginning of 1926
runors began to spread along the population about an i-inent neting of all
leaders for the purpose of consolidating the remaining banachi groups under

the command of Salin-pasha. At the sane tine Ibraginr-bek issued instructions to
fawning supporters among the reactionary clergy and the clan-tribal nobility

to step up anti-Soviet agitation.

The VKP(b) [All-Union Conuniet Party (of Bolsheviks” Central Co-Iittee
Sredazbyuro. the Central Couittee of the Cor-uni“ Party of Uzbekistan. and
the party organization of Tajikistan acknowledged the necessity of wiping out
remants of bands on the territory of Soviet Central Asia. Toward this end
preparations were ends in Eastern Tajikistan in the spring and summer of 1926
for a coabined operation against the basnachi. It was preceded by considerable
preparatory work. By decision of party and soviet agencies, additional ltd
Arny national units and volunteer detachments were foraed, and border security
was beefed up, especially along river sectors. Party and soviet workers were

136

FOROI’FICIALUSEONLY
added to military units operating against the bamchi, to conduct political

work among the population and to take aeasures to strengthen local authorities
in areas where bessacbi were still active.

The main striking forces included the 8th Independent Turkestan Cavalry Brigade,
consisting of the 82d and 86th Cavalry regiments, the 3d Turkestan Rifle Divi-
sion, and the 7th Cavalry Brigade. The 7th Red-Banner Turkestan Rifle Regi-
ment (the former 208th Regiment of the 210th Simbirsk Iron Rifle Division) of
the 3d Turkestan Rifle Division distinguished itself in combat in 1925-1926.
Operating on the left bank of the Vakhsh, it covered an assigned area of more
than 1000 square kilometers. A total of 950 operational detachments of this
regiment took part in defeating the basmachi. Border guards, a Tajik cavalry
battalion, and an Uzbek rifle battalion took active part in the fighting.

The operation was directed by famed field coy-sander and civil war hero

5. M. Budennyy, member of the USSR Revvoyensovet, who arrived in Central Asia
in the spring of 1926. and K. A. Avksent'yevskiy, comsnder of the Turkestan
Front.110 In recognition of his special nerits in the struggle on the Central

Asian Front, S. M. Budennyy was awarded the Order of the Red Banner of Labor
of the Uzbek 3311.111

The operation was conducted on a wide front, in order to contain the bssnachi

hands, to prevent then from escaping across the border, and to defeat them
rumpletcly.

in the course of the fighting Ibragin-bek, pressed on all sides, succeeded in
fleeing into Afghanistan during the night of 21 June 1926, accompanied by a
snail protective force. Khuran-bek also took refuge across the border.

The nain forces of the basmachi were virtually eliminated as a result of this
victory. At the beginning of the operation there were 73 small bands operat-
ing in Central Asia, while by 1 September 1926 there remained only 6.

In the Sands of the Kara Kum

Basnschi activities continued without cease in Khoresln in the period 1921-1927.
Dzhunaid-khan was particularly active.

At the end of 1920 a proposal was made to Dahunaid that he lay down his arms
and expiate his guilt for his crimes against the people. This basnachi

leader. however. rejected the proposal. Drhunaid-khan's bands continued to
perpetrate marauder raids on kishlaks. The Red Army command authorities
resolved to achieve total defea: of the bands remaining in Khoreza. Opera-
tions were conducted by two Red Army groups consisting of 5 coapanies and

3 squadrons. The cavalry squadron under the tenant! of Mirkanil‘ Mirsharapov,
one of the first outstanding Uzbek military col-anders. who in 1921 became
chairman of the Khorezm Republic Rewoyensovet. distinguished itself in combat.

In the spring of 1921 the basnachi concentrated at the well of Adzhi-Kul'.
Subunits of the Red Arny caught up with them here. The opposing forces

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK WHLIAL use URL!

engaged in battle, in the course of which the hasnschi Iain forces were
destroyed or captured. The resaining basnschi fled into the desert with
Dzhuneid-khan and remained inactive for some time.

In the meanwhile the toiling people of [horses were consolidating the Soviet
systes. The toilet nasses, led by Commists, opposed the Jadids, whose
rightist leaders had ties with the baa-achi.

In April 1921 a special emission of the “lurkkomissiya of the V'l'st and
RSI-‘33 SNK and (Io-intern. headed by Eastern studies specialist D. Yu. Gopner,
which had devoted special attention to the Turk-en areas of the IGSR, headed

for Khorezm. The RSPSR and Turkestan stepped up econonic assistance to
Khorezm.

The Second All-Khorezm Kurultsy of Soviets was held in May 1921, with a number
of vitally isportant items on the agenda: land-water. finances, armed forces,
education, etc.

The hurultay devoted considerable attention to the nationalities question,
which was of great importance in ethnically diverse Khorezm. Guided by Lenin's
teaching, the kurultay spoke out in favor of equal rights for the citizens of
the republic. regardless of clan, tribe, race and ethnic affiliation. Gon-
crete measures were specified for strengthening friendship along peoples --
Uzbeka, Kazakhs, and Kara-Kalpaks - who had been shedding one another's blood
for centuries in internecine strife. No departmts were formed under the
'1‘le of the KPSR to find a practical resolution of the nationalities question:
a Kazakh-Kara-Kalpak. and a Turk-en departunt.

Local agencies of Soviet authority were reorganized. The exploiter classes
no longer participated in their election, although the clan principle of
their organization continued to exist; sksakal'stvo, that is, subordination to
the clan elder, remained.

On the basis of the resolutions of the Second Kurultsy of Sovietapa 5000 nan
Red Army was formed in the more" Republic; courts. people's nilitia and
Cheka agencies were organized.

The process of establishing a Soviet State in Khorezn was taking place in con-
ditions of an intense class struggle. Exploiting the fact of tenacity of old
prejudices and with the aid of various machinations and devices, representa-
tives of the exploiter classes and nationalist ale-ants continued to preserve
their positions in soviet agencies and in the party. They were making prepara-
tions to overthrow Soviet rule in Khorezm At the end of 1921 an anti-Soviet
plot was exposed, a conspiracy headed by Ata-Hakaunov, chairman of the KPSR
1'le. Working in league with him were People's Cos-issar of Foreign Affairs
Hulla-Niyaz and several other officials. In the course of the investigation
Ata-Haksunov, Mulla-Niyaz and their retainers fled to the basnachi.

In 1922 the Khorezn Col-unist Party became a component part of the m(b).
This event played an enormous role in the life of the Khorezn toilers, in
strengthening and development of the popular regime, and in accelerating the

136

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
transition to socialist transfornstions. As a conponent of the arm), the
[GP [mores- (Jo-mist Party] rigorously iqlsnented heninist principles of
nationalities policy. Another purge of the KCP took place in April-June 1923.
A total of 709 persons renained in the party’s ranks of the 1157 full and
probationary party aeabers.112 The city and rayon co-ittees were also en-
larged. The Khoreu Co-unist Party devoted considerable attention to bring-
ing toilers into party newership. By the fall of 1923 the class conposition
of the party had changed sharply: dekhkans coqrised 77 percent of the

total nenbership of the Khoreu Co-Inist Party.n3

Transfornation of the KPSR into a socialist republic becane an eninent event
in the history of the [bores- People's Soviet Republic. ibis took place in
October 1923 at the Fourth All-Khoresa lnrultay of Soviets. A new Constitution
was adopted, which declared that "Ihorean is a republic of soviets of workers'.
Red Array and dekhkan deputies.... The principal task of the Ihorern Governnent
is creation of conditions whereby it will he inpossible for one group to
oppress others."n‘ The Constitution, while giving voting rights to all
toilers, denied the voting right to exploiters, ninisters of religious cults,
and all persons who consciously and deliberately opposed Soviet rule.

The Fourth All-Khoresn Kurultay of Soviets reaoved basaschi accomplices fron
official posts (in particular, Khodsha-lobp, chair-an of the All-Khoresn Ten)
and specified neasures for enlisting toilers into agencies of authority.

The Turkestsn Pront Revvoyensovet. on the instructions of the 1mm Central
Comittee Sredasbyuro. took nessures to step up the consign against the
basnachi in Khorera. ll. K. hevandovskiy, co-ander of the Turkestan Front,
redeployed units fro. the Pergana to more“; Khoresn's national nilitary
units were strengthened with co-and personnel, instructors. and weapons. A
Rewoyeneovet of the Khoresn Group of Forces was for-ed (consisting of three
representatives fro- the K553 and two fro. the Revvoyeneovet of the Wheaten
Front). which was charged with directing nilitary operations against the
besnachi. I. c. Kutyakov, a civil war hero and associate of V. I. Chapayev,
was naned cos-sander of the Khoreze Group of Forces.

Political and military neasures to coebat the basuachi were conducted in con-
ditions where counterrevolutionary activities in mores- had revived by the
end of 1923. he heenachi had launched an anti-Soviet struggle throughout the

republic and had stepped up terrorist activities against party and soviet
activists.

The new baseschi upsurge was a result of an aggravation of class conflicts at
that stage in the history of the peoples of Khorezn when they were proceeding
to build a socialist society. There was a clear delineation of the can of
the revolution and socialise, represented by the toiler nssses, and the canp
of the counterrevolution -- the exploiter classes in the person of feudal

lords, the khsn's functionaries, the clergy, and spokes-en for their in-
terests - bourgeois nationalists.

The leader of the Khorem beenechi was able to exploit for his own purposes the
canpaign which was in progress at that tine to strip the clergy of landholdings

137

FORWUSIONLY
and political rights. Naturally the neasures being carried out by the Soviet
authorities caused resent-eat .ong the clergy and vacillations on the part of
acne religious believers. Playing on religious feelings and supported by as-
sistance fron the reactionary clergy and bai, and exploiting the dissatisfac-
tion of a portion of the dekhkans caused by certain nietabes nade by the
Khorezn (Jo-mists in inplenenting socialist reforms, humid-khan increased
the numerical strength of his detach-eats to 9000 nen. .

An anti-Soviet insurrection flared up in January 1925 in a nuwer of areas of
the [$83. Dzhunaid-khan, who was hiding in the desert, played an active role
in preparing for this insurrection.

Dzhunaid-khan captured Tashaus, Pitnyak, Gurlen, Gaeabad, and other co-nities.
On 10 January 1921. savage fighting erupted around am. On 19 January
Dzhunaid-hhan laid siege to naive and Novo-Urgench.

The toilet: rose up in defense of the republic's capital. A Revkon was foraed.
which drew up a plan of defense of the city. (lo-mists and Konsoml nders
stood in the vanguard of the defenders. Uithin just a few days they had es-
tablished a volunteer detachment of 500 nan and. together with 90 soldiers of
the 6th Turhestan Cavalry Reginent and 200 Red Any-en of the 3d Rifle Bat-
talion, staunchly defended [hive against the bamchi. Battle-toughened units
of the Khoreen Group of Forces were approaching the city.

Large-scale operations were conducted in the sands of the Rare Km. Units of
the Turkestan Front, which had hurried to the assistance of the toilets of

Khorezn, acco liehed a desert crossing for the first tine in the history of
the Red Any. 5

Dzhunaid was attespting to exert a psychological effect on the city's defenders.
In front of the walls of alive the basnachi brutally tortured captured
soldiers. party and soviet officials, and activists. They put out the eyes and
hacked off the eras of the gravely wounded co-ander of the 2d Cavalry
Squadron, Anzhello. They then beheaded bin, inaled his head on a pole. and
displayed it by the gates of the fort. lbre than 200 soviet ewloyeee were
slaughtered in Pitnyak, Tashauz, and Takhty. The atrocities perpetrated by the
basmchi, however, failed to break the fighting spirit of the Red Any-en and
volunteers, but aerely intensified their hatred toward the eneny and their
desire to avenge the deaths of their conrades.

‘l'he le-nan Turtkul' Conpany. for-ed of volunteers fron Anudar'inshaya Oblast,
the Shurkhan Volunteer Platoon. and a cowosite detachnent totaling 130 sabers
and 45 bayonets fron Nova-Urgench cans to the aid of the besieged city.

There was savage fighting with Dehunaid'e forces on 28 and 29 January. The

basnachi sustained heavy casualties in fierce clashes. The fighting began to

abate on the following days. The siege of the capital was lifted on 6 Feb-
ruary 1926.

138

MOFHCIALIISSONLY
‘l'he pilots of the 2d and 6th Independent Reconnaissance detach-ants, under the
cons“ of P. Kh. Hezheraup, co—ender of the air force of the Turkeatan Front,
greatly assisted ground nits in defeating the bands c: Dahnmaid-khan.116

During the siege of Khiva baseschi captured pert of the town of lhazarasp.
The remainder of the town was in the hands of a stall garrison. A detach-ant
of Kara-Kalpak volunteers, 300 nan strong, case to the assistance of the Red
Arlynen. 0n the night of 28 January 1926. the detacbent attacked the one-y
without a halt to deploy. A drew-out battle ensued. the bsuachi withdrew
by evening on 2 February. Reuunts of the band fled into the desert. For
courage and valor displayed in battle against the basnachi, several units

of the Turkestan Front were awarded the Honorary Revolutionary Bed Banner of
the USSR 1‘le and the Honorary Revolutionary Red Banner of Khoresn. I. s.
Kutyakov. cot-sander of the more:- Group of Forces, was awarded a third Order
of the Red Banner. All large baseschi conbined units on the territory of the
Khorezn Republic had been wiped out by the and of spring 1921.. Peacetine
building of socialise reamed, and accelerated restoration of agriculture was
begun. In this situation the mm Central Co-ittse Sredasbyuro decided in
March 1921. to send to Khorean a special mission to give direct assistance
to the republic's Co-unists. (h the basis of the co-ission's report. the

Sredazbyuro pointed to the danger of isolation of the KC? from the leases and
therefore reco-ended that particular circmpection be shown in regard to the
niddle strata of the population (the niddle peasant. local intelligentsia,
artisans and handicraft workers). In order to strengthen the social base of
revolutionary referee and to correct nistakes which had been node, the
Sredazbyuro suggested broadening the group of persons granted suffrage and
more boldly enlisting aiddle dehhkans and citizens at large to participation
in Soviet rule. Sons reco-sndations dealt with taxation policy. dekhkan
credit, etc. Gold. hard rubles and other assistance were sent to Khoresn.117
An RKHb) Central Co-ittee co-ission headed by G. I. lroydo cans to the
republic. and did a great deal of work on strengthening local party organiza-
tions and correcting their niatskes and deficiencies in practical work.

In March 19214 the Khoreta Republic ‘1'le adopted a law which substantially
reduced taxes on dekhkans and seall handicraft workers. which had a beneficent

influence on development of the econony and forning political consciousness in
the toilers.

The toiler population of the Khoresn Republic was given assistance fron funds
of the USSR (500,000 rubles) and the RSFSR (125,000 rubles). Hater transport
and connunications were being restored.

Certain success was also achieved in the area of nationalities policy. In
May 1924 the Khoresn Tent decided to establish Turk-en end Kazakh autononous
oblasts as elements of the Khoreza Soviet Socialist Republic.

All the seasures enumerated above strengthened Soviet rule in ﬂuoresn and
undernined the foundations of the beseechi. But execution of these Ieasures
was not proceeding easily. Clan and tribe leaders did not wish to give up
age-old privileges. The Soviet authorities. gradually depriving the leaders
of their power. sought to avoid aggravating relations with then, for land and

139

MOFFICMLUSEONLY
livestock were still in their hands, which gave the: the capability to raise up
ares against the toiling people again in the future.

Raving suffered a crushing defeat in 1926, Dshmaid-hhan took refuge in the
desert. Having lost the njority of his nukers [ea-hers of a nilitary coe-
nander's personal bodyguard] and kurbashi, who had returned to peaceful labor,

it see-ed that Dshunaid eupmhended the hopelessness of continued struggle. he
entered negotiations with the Soviet authorities and voluntarily surrendered.

The First All-Turban Congress of Soviets (February 1925). noved by the desire
to end nilitary operations as quickly as possible and to concentrate all
resources on rebuilding and inroving the econony, ameetied Dshunaid-khan.

But it was soon ascertained that Dshunaid-khan had not laid down his ares.
This vicious predator. the recent ruler of Khiva, could not accept defeat and
the new life which had powerfully invaded the nest remote corners of Turk-enia.
Dzhunaid continued to naintain contacts with British intelligence and with the
counterrevolutionary eeigre' co-mity, organised new baa-schi detach-eats. and
spread rulers that the capitalist nations would attack the USSR any day now.

In the su-er and fall of 1927 several caravans laden with arm and a-unition
reached Dzhunaid fron abroad. Couriers bearing instructions fro. foreign
intelligence services would arrive now and then fro. Kabul and Hashhsd. 18

On 19 Septeﬂer 1927 Dzhunaid stirred up an insurrection against Soviet rule.
Continuous raids began to he Iounted on the kishlaka located in the vicinity
of the town of Kunya-Urgench. Baa-achi bands once again appeared in the
Tashaus District. Bakhardenshiy, mandshikskiy. and other rayons of
Turk-enia.n9

It becaale obvious at the very outset that the people of Turhnenia not only

did not support nzhmaid but had actively enlisted in the struggle against the
basnachi. Collection of the agricultural tax was successfully continuing. The
population was voluntarily providing Bed Any units with fodder and food
supplies. Volunteer detach-ants were for-ed in nany auls (Ihodsha-tu-bet in
Takhtinskiy Rayon. No 3 in Kunys-Urgenchskiy Rayon, etc), which directly
participated in the struggle against Dshunaid's hands. The Tall and Sovnarhoe
of Turk-enia declared Drhmaid-khan an outlaw.

The Revvoyenaovet of the Central Asian Military District received an order

fro. the Soviet Governnent to wipe out nshunaid‘s bands. No groups of forces
were forned -- the Southern, and the Northern. A lengthy pursuit of
Dzhunaid-khan by several Turkestan cavalry reginents began on 27 October 1927.
The ener was spotted by aircraft in the vicinity of Orta-Kuyu well. following
aerial bombard-eat. cavalry squadrons under the comet! of A. A. Luchinskiy
(later to rise to the rank of arey general and to hecone an outstanding aili-
tsry conander in the Great Patriotic War) and c. s. Harkovich. a Serb. put
Drhunaid-khan to rout. G. S. Harkovich was awarded the Order of the Red Banner
for this battle. It was his third coahat decoration. All were received on

the Turkestan Front. A. A. Luchinskiy and any other 30141;" "(a awarded the
Order of the Red Banner.120

160

MWWONLY
Soldiers Annmrad Saryyev, Oraznaned Tact-sledov, Sergey Shcherbahov, G.

Nazarov. Kara Bay-uradov. and others distinguished ths-selves in the fighting
agaimt mnwaJZI

The outcone of the struggle was as could be expected. Drhmaid's detach-eats
were defeated.122 mama-ma bid for several nonths deep in the Kara run.
and in June 1928 nade his escape to Iran.123 There he continued his anti-
popular activities, nking preparations for new escapades.

Other basuchi leaders were also operating in Turhenia in 1924-1927. These
ninor "d:hmaids"and"dzhunaidiks" would nomt raids, killing and looting. and
then flee across the border. here are several samples.

On 23 August 1925 young people free Ihoresn auls set out in two kayaks [oar-
sail river cargo vessel] along the Ann Darya to various towns to enroll in
school. The basaachi of Ourdy-Klych set up an mush in clups of rushes near
Khodzheyli. As soon as the first ksyuk, carrying 30 students. drew she. of
the spot where the band waited in .bush, the basnachi opened fire on the un-
arned passengers. Sone of the students fled into the rushes. The basnachi
captured 16 young boys who were actively participating in the establish-ant of
Soviet rule. After taunting and torturing than, they bound then with rope and
pushed then into the water. On 26 August banachi seized 8 nore students and
brutally tortured 7 of then -- only 1 succeeded in escaping. The bssnschi

tortured the students in the presence of their wives and children, who were
traveling with then.

when they learned of the band's actions true the student who had succeeded in
escaping. the Konsoaol neabers and young people of Tashauz i-ediately for-ed
a volunteer detachent and proceeded toward Khodrheyli. In a brief skirnish
they soundly defeated the mm and rescued the surviving students, wonen
and children. Durdy-Klych escaped into the sands of the Kara Kun.

Alana: a year later. on lb August 1925. the lat Squadron of the 83d Cavalry
Reginent of the 8th Cavalry Brigade conducted a search operation to locate

Durdy-Klych's group. which was asking narauding raids on auls fro. the Kara
Kun.

In the course of the operation the squadron captured several bsuachi. Anong
the prisoners was Durdy-uych's brother. Tagsn-Durdy. he had personally
participated in the brutal torture of the Khoreu students. Tagan-Durdy
received deserved pun‘ shaent along with the other besnschi. who had per-
petrated nany crines against Soviet rule and peaceful citisens.

The activities of the hands had practically ceased on the territory of
Turknenia by October 1925. Only infrequently did snail bands rob the
population or perpetrate isolated terrorist acts. But soon the situation on
the Soviet-Iranian border deteriorated in connection with an insurrection by
several Turin-en tribes residing in Iran. Iranian troops, which had frequently

crossed the border in groups of up to 200 nan, concentrated in the vicinity of
Atrek to fight the insurgentst‘

161

POIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
CUR VICML DOI- VI‘LI

Seeking to avoid potential border incidents betveen the USSR and Iran. Soviet
and Iranian representatives held a nesting in Decenber 1925, at which they
agreed to the appointnent of border odsebnels to settle disputes. The
beenachi attupted to exploit the disquieting situation which had arisen.

On 11 Hay 1926 a basnachi band attacked a border post in the [are In. Post
consnder Nesterov and his 13 nen engaged in an unequal contest. Hechinegunner
Barannik displayed particular heroisn. Delivering accurate fire. he forced the
basaachi tine and again to withdraw with heavy casualties. border post con-
nander Uesterov and Red Aruynan Barannik were carded the Order of the Red
Banner for courage and valor displayed in this battle.125

Liberation of the territory of Soviet Central Asia fron hasnachi bands did not
yet signify total elinination of the basaachi. Counterrevolutionary forces,
concentrated in the border areas of Afghanistan and Iran, as well as basnachi
who had fled across the border could for- nev bands. Sons of the bands in the
Central Asian republics had gone underground and under certain conditions
could once again beco- active.

In October 1926, that is. after Soviet territory had been cleared of the
principal banachi bands, isolated groups still retained, especially in the
Khorem, Mary and Tashauz areas. These bands engaged chiefly in and robbery.
They were snall in embers but were nobile, and naintained close contactswith
the basnachi abroad. Therefore party and soviet agencies and the mad
authorities of the Red Arey and border troops kept the volunteer detach-ants
and nilitary mite at a requisite state of coehat readiness and devoted con-
siderable attention to instilling vigilance both anong nilitary personnel and
the local population. Local executive minus and border guards continued
combating the renaining groups. OGPU [Unified State Political Directorate]
proposed to the USSR Labor and Defense Council that border security be
strengthened. especially in lightly populated areas. At the end of 1926 the
Soviet Government allocated funds to beef up border security in Central Asia.

A nunber of agreesents and treaties ads with Afghanistan and Iran in 1926 and
1927 helped inprove things on the Central Asian border. 0n 1 October 1927

G. V. Chicherin, USSR people's cousisear of foreign affairs, and Iranian
sinister Ali Cali-khan Ansari affixed their signatures to a treaty of security
and neutrality. The treaty of 1 October 1927 rsaffirned the Soviet-Iranian
treaty of 1921, and at the seas tine expanded opportmitiea for further
development of good-neighbor relations on a basis of equality.

Soviet-Afghan relations were also developing favorably. On 31 August 1926 the
USSR and Afghanistan concluded a neutrality and nutual nonaggression treaty.

In connection with the fact that a great my comterrevolutionary saing were
residing on Afghan territory, the Soviet-Afghan treaty stated that the parties
to the treaty would refrain free any interference in the internal affairs of
the other party, and also would not per-nit on their territory any activity
directed against the other country.

But with all its fidelity toward the Soviet Union, during those years
Afghanistan was unable to establish a situation in its border zone which

192

POIOFI'ICIALIBIMY
haspered bes-achi raids onto Soviet territory, since Afghanistan did not
possess the requisite silitary forces. The oounterrevolutionary esigres con-
tinued to utilize Afghan territory as a base for anti-Soviet activities.

Pron 3 Septedaer 1926 through 7 January 1927 alone baseschi groups for-ed
abroad invaded Soviet territory on 21 occasions. 0n 3 September 25 basnachi
robbed the residents of lavnina Station. On 25 Septeder 59 basaachi at-
tacked a topographic party, killed a geologist, seized property and fled
back across the border. 0n 5 October a 70-.an bend fron across the border
sacked the kishlak of Chepek-Yab. On 19 October 100 horse-en crossed the
border and robbed the people of the kishlak of Lyanbe end looted a cotton
purchasing station. 0n lo Deceaber 200 mm raided Iolotsnakiy Rayon.

The Soviet Union could not ignore the pillaging and violence perpetrated by
basnachi fron across the border. In Nova-her 1926 the USSR people's con-
nissar of foreign affairs ends a for-a1 request to the Afghan minister of
foreign affairs that requisite seasures be taken to stop incursions by these
bands against the republics of Central Asia fron Afghan territory. The
Afghan Cavement took steps to conply with these and other requests. but
they were insufficiently effective due to the difficult situation within
Afghanistan. Actions by bends fron abroad directed against the Soviet
republic; of Central Asia would cease tesporarily. subsequently to be resuned.

In Decenber 1927 a 20-nan party of border guards. under the col-and of
Antonov. encountered a band of 70 bee-achi who were attespting to escape back
across the border. The border guards fought an unequal battle for several
hours. Possessing a substantial nunerical superiority. the baslaschi st-
tacked Antonov's force tine and again. But not one of these attacks was suc-
cessful. Border guards Antonov. Zheltenkov, Grivas and hepikhov were awarded
the Order of the Red Banner for selfleasness displayed in conbatJ»26

In January 1928 12 border guards engaged 60 bassechi. On this occasion as well
the staunchnsss, courage and high degree of proficiency of the border guards
ensured then victory in cosbet. Only a few has-chi succeeded in returning
across the border into lran.127

In July 1928 a group of bassechi led by Otsn-bek attenpted to invade Soviet
territory near a border post. The band lost half of its sen in the ensuing
exchange of fire. Utan-bek retreated with the surviving remnants of the
band.1 3 A few days later he once again crossed over into Soviet territory.
A cavalry detachment led by mobile group co-ander Haslennikov was sent out on
31 August to pursue and destroy the band. The detaclnent located the band in
a sountsin gorge beyond the Kafirnigsn River. They joined battle. with the
engagesent lasting more than 48 hours, with one break in the fighting. The
basnachi sustained heavy casualties and fled across the border.

Raids into Soviet territory ceased temporarily. but anti-Soviet forces con-
tinued to utilize beseechi based abroad. The surviving basnachi leaders
refused to lay down their am.

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CW Vl‘tl‘r‘ﬂl- Wt- “I‘D.

ammmlsmsous

Incursion by lbragin—Bek

A last flareup of baseschi activities began in 1979. th did basaachi ac-
tivities resune precisely in this year? It is due to aeny factors. In the
broad historical overview, 1929 was aarked by intensification of anti-Soviet
activities on the part of international inperisliss. Various interventionist
schemes were carried out in 1929-1930.

Successful progress in building socialise was evoking growing concern on the
part of the captains of the capitalist world. Their calculations that the
Soviet people would be unable with their own resources to overcone the
devastation and develop industry and agriculture proved erroneous. This

country was eoving forward. boosting the econoay. picking up speed. new
factories. industrial plants and electric power stations were caning on-etren—
the process of socialist industrialisation was advancing on n increasingly
broader front.

Our eneaies' expectations of a bourgeois regeneration of the Soviet State also
failed to pan cut. expectations which appeared following the transition to
m. The party set a course toward building socialise. toward squeezing out
capitalist elenents in the city and village. and toward ending nan's exploita-
tion of nan. And this Leninist course of policy was being inleaented.

World iaperialiat reactionary forces sought to strangle the USSR - the bulwark
of peace and socialise - before it could build a powerful industry and
transforn the village according to socialist principles, and if they could not
strangle it, they sought at least to inpede the building of socialisn and once
again to cast the country into the abyss of destruction. Considerable hopes
were placed on internal counterrevolutionsry forces. The inevitable aggrava-
tion of the class struggle caused by a course of policy ained at liquidating
capitalist eleeants in the city and village presented the opportunity to
utilise romance of the doaestic counterrevolution in the anti-Soviet struggle.

The forning of deliberate wrecking organizations in industry ("Shakhtintsy").
the activities of tenants of the Socialist levelutionary-henshevih mderground,
attths to utilize the arsed forces of the White Guard eaigre co-unity,

I“

summon“
diplonatic pressure brought to bear by the European imperialist nations,
threatening a new intervention, and organisation of acts of arned provocation
in the Far East (Chinese ailitariata attacked Soviet territory in 1929) were
all ale-ants of a unified anti-Soviet front at the end of the 1920's.

They were unable to carry out these plans on a full-scale basis. The wise and
flexible policy of the Soviet State knocked links out of this chain one after
the other. Undergromd anti-Soviet organisations were neutralized. The
swift defeat of the Chinese nilitarists in the Par last denonstrated the
growing night of the Soviet Araed Forces. -

Nevertheless the international situation at the end of the 1920's and begin-
ning of the 1930's renained tense. The world econonic crisis which began at
the end of 1929 intensified the inparialists' desire to resolve their dif-
ficulties at the expense of the USSR. Once again atte-pts were undertaken to
blockade the USSR politically and econonically, anti-Soviet intervention
ache-es were hatched, the propaganda ensign intensified, and appeals to
organize a "crusade" against the Soviet Union, an idea conceived by the
reactionary Catholic elite, were constantly carried by the newspapers.

An inortant role in the overall pln of anti-Soviet struggle was assigned to
the baa-achi of Central Asia. Bxerting considerable effort to step up basnachi
activities, inperialist agents were counting on beseechi actions paralyzing
econonic life in the young republics of the last, on generating chaos and
thwarting the iqlenentation of socialist reforas. If successful. the
basnachi could prepare the soil, create a bridgehead for the invasion of large
interventionist forces, with the objective of detaching Central Asia fron the
Soviet Union and transforming it into a colony of the Western powers.

A nuaber of circuastances nade these anti-Soviet plans especially dangerous.
The proxinity of the border and its great length nde it possible for in-
perialist agents to give neaningful assistance to the basaachi detachnents.
Considerable enigre forces were concentrated in the border areas of
neighboring countries. Defeated in preceding years. counterrevolutionary
groups which had fled iron the Soviet Republic were anxious to continue the
fight.

In any areas of Central Asia (in contrast to Central Russia, the Ukraine, and
belorussis), the revolution and civil war had not led to a cardinal change in
socioecononic relations. In the 1920's the feudal-bai strata retained their
econonic positions in sons nsasure: they possessed a large part of the land.
water. and livestock, thus retaining control of inportant levers of influence
on the delthkans.

As long as exploiter strata continued to exist. the class foundation of the
basnachi also continued to exist. it the sane tins nessurea to restrict.
squeeze out and liquidate feudal-bai elenente inevitably would cause
resistance on their part and lead to aggravation of the class struggle. But
resistance by feudal-bai elenents in conditions of Central Asia signified
strengthening of the basaachi. for the activities of the baseschi constituted
a specific for. of the class struggle.

165
[’0' OFFICIAL 182 MIX
I van V". 05.0... era).— Jn‘lwl

Haas socioeconoeic eeasuree were carried out in Central Asia and Kazakhstan
in the latter half of the 1920's.

Land-water and livestock refores were carried out during these years in
Southern Kirghiais, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkeenistan. Landholdings
of the feudal service tenant type were eliminated, excessive acreage was
reeoved froe large landholdings, and land was distributed nong the landless
peasants and those with insufficient land. Ibre than 123,000 poor and
eiddle peasants received land in the republics of Central Asia. In
Kazakhstan the first Ieessl redivision of land took place in 1926-1928, with
arable land and haylsnd acreage taken away free the feudal lords-bai. Follow-
ing this. in 1928 livestock and equipaent were confiscated free the bai (they
coeprised 6 percent of landholding units but owned 33.8 percent of the live-
stock).

All these eeasures inroved the situation of the toilar essses and created con-
ditions for proceeding along the road of building socialise. At the sane tine
the class struggle was becoeing eore aggravated.

It reached an even greater degree of acutaness with the beginning of ease
collectivization. Since the objective vas now the total liquidation of
exploiter eleeents. their resistance becaes particularly fierce. Supported

by the assistance of reactionaries abroad, ranked solidly with the anti-

Soviet enigré co-unity. and exploiting the not yet eradicated ignorance and
backwardness of the dekhkans, clan-tribal tenants and the influence of the
reactionary clergy, feudal-bai aleesnts engaged in a tenacious struggle against
Soviet rule. These eleeents coeprised a nutrient eediu for baseachi ac-
tivities. and the baseschi becaee their shock-force detach-ants, the eain force
in the anti-Soviet, counterrevolutionary struggle.

Our eneeies also utilised for their own ends the fact that in the course of
collectivization the pace of collectiviaation was umvarrsntedly accelerated
and Leninist principles of voluntary participation were violated in a nuder
of areas. The Commist Party corrected mistakes in a proept and tieely
nanner and elininated cases of going too far. On 20 February 1930 the VKP(b)
Central Co-ittee issued a decree entitled "0n Collectivization and the
Struggle Against Kulaks in Economically nackward Ethnic Areas.” This decree
leveled sharp criticise at distortions of the party line which had occurred
locally. The Central Co-Iittee deeanded that in econoeically backward areas
the focus be shifted to [preparations] for total collectivisation and to
creation of the organizational-political and econonic preconditions for its
accoeplishesnt. On 25 February the Central Co-ittee again leveled criticise
against those netth of collectivisation which were being practiced in cer-
tain areas of Uzbekistan and in the Northern Caucasus. The Central Co-ittee
stressed the necessity of carrying out collectivization at a slower pace in
these areas.1

The kolkhoz eovenent. overcoeing difficulties, and taking position on a fire,
healthy foundation, was growing and expanding. By the fall of 1931 66.1 per-
cent of all peasant households in Kazakhstan had joined into kolkhoses. In

166

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1931 kolkhoree produced 52.1 percent of Uzbekistan'e total agricultural output.
In Kirghizia the percentage of collectivisation reached 53.5 by the end of 1931,
and 62.2 percent in Turhsnia. Collectivisation was proceeding aore slowly in
Tajikistan - in 1932 approxinately ‘2 percent of all dekhksn households had

joimdkolkhozee (although this percentage was substantially higher in the
republic’e cotton growing areas).

The building of a new life was proceeding successfully in all the republics of
Central Asia, and eocialisn was advancing on all fronts.

Deep in the steppe construction workers were ee1fleesly laying the steel rails
of the Turksib -- the Turkestan-Siberia Mainline. In July 1929 the tracks
reached Alas-Ate. and the southern and northern sections were joined on 25 April
1930. The Turksib was opened to through traffic 17 aonthe ahead of schedule.

In the fall of 1928 the Karsakpay Copper Shelting (cabins cane on-etreaa.

New coal nines were being constructed in braganda — it was becoming the
country's third largest coal producing base -- and large enterprises were

being built in udder, Aktyubinek, Chident. and Dzhezkazgan. Heavy-industry
enterprises, cotton processing nills and canneries, textile nills and food
processing combines were going up in Uzbekistan and Kirghizis, in Tajikistan and
Turkmenistan. The power industry was growing rapidly - new electric power
stations were appearing everwhere. In Uzbekistan groee industrial output in-

creased by 130 percent and generation of electric power by 270 percent in
the first five-year plan.

Soviet national statehood of the peoples of the East was consolidating suc-
cessfully. As already stated. in 1926 the Kirghiz Automaoue Oblast becaae the
Kirghiz Assn. At the end of 1929 Tajikistan, which had previously been an
autonoaoue republic within the Uzbek 88!, was transforaed into a union
republic.

The rapid advance of socialise was spreading across Central Asia, powerfully
asking its way into lush oases and distant aountain hishlake. In the asantine,
however, new basaachi detachments were being for-ed along the borders of the

Soviet Central Asian republics. eras were being brought in. and forces were
regrouping. . . .

Beginning in the first weeks of 1929, increased activenese was noted on the
part of basaachi bands from across the border. On 24 January 1929 more than
20 basaachi appeared on the road leading fro- Kuehka to Merv. Spotting a
border guard detail, the basaschi attacked it. After a brief exchange of fire

they turned back in the direction from which they had cons and took refuge in
thickets of rushes.

In February 1929 two basnachi bands invaded Soviet territory in the vicinity

of the kishlak of Nizhnyaya Chaaga. Isolated euall bands also crossed or
attenpted to cross the border in other areas.

This was aerely reconnaissance in force. The Iain basaachi organizers were
making preparations for a large-scale venture.

167

FOIOII'II'ICIALUSEONLY
IV. Us see-arena saw.— an...

In Hatch 1929 British intelligence officers, the former emir of Bukhara,
leaders of the Uzbek and Tajik eming co-xnities, and basmachi leaders held a
secret conference, at which they ha-ered out an agreement on the invasion

of Tajikistan. Ibragim-bek was to cos-land the united Tajik and Uzbek emigre
armed forces. Soon another secret meeting was held under the direction of
British agents.

At both meetings representatives of British intelligence sought to unite all
emigre forces for joint operations against Soviet rule in Central Asia.
Nationalistic conflicts within the counterrevolutionary emigre oo-unity, how-
ever, and personal animosity between leaders hindered accomplishment of this
effort. They did succeed, however, in concentrating counterrevolutionary forces
in two important sectors. One force. led by ibragim-bek, was to operate
against Soviet Tajikistan, while another force, led by Dzlnmaid-khas, was
targeted at Soviet Turhenia. The bands of Puzayl Mahatma. Abdugeorar, Davliya
Sardar, Utan-belt. and several others were sent into the areas of forthcoming
combat operations as an advance guard.

At the beginning of March 1929 Utan-bek crossed the border with 50 horsemen and
attacked the supply train of a cavalry regiment escorted by three Bed Army-en
under the col-sand of platoon leader Artemov. The unequal battle lasted about
an hour. The handful of Red Anymen succuded in fighting off all basmachi
attacks and reached base safely.

Three parties of border guards, totaling 35 men, under the contend of
Haslennikov. Ryuin, and Daultsh. were sent out to destroy the band. The
basmachi, avoiding engagement, fled into Afghanistan.

That sane day approximately 100 basmachi led by Karin Berda twice attempted to
cross the border. Both attespts to invade Soviet territory, however, were
thwarted by resolute actions on the part of border guards.

In the first half of March 1929 unusual activity was observed on the other side
of the border. Armed horsemen were galloping along the border, and parties of
mounted men were arriving in the Itiahlaks. At night large canires were ob-
served. Soon the answer came: foreign-based basmachi kurbashi began arriving
in the border zone.

By the middle of Hatch 1929 approximately 600 well-armed basmachi, led by
Ibragim-bek, had massed by the Soviet border.

in addition to direct military preparations, Ibragim-bek and the former emir of
Bukhara, with the active participation of the reactionary clergy, conducted
ant i-Soviet agitation among the emigres, calling for "liberation of noble
Bukhara from the infidels." The spiritual mentors promised to absolve all
the sins of those who would take part in an anti-Soviet campaign and that
those who fell in battle would be ranked sung the holy. The organizers of
this counterrevolutionary plot did not restrict themselves to exerting moral
influence on emigrés. Those who joined the bands were given a monthly salary:
foot soldiers received 63 rupees and cavalrynen were paid 106 rupees. Special
compensation was specified for kurbashi who organized bands numbering 100
basmachi or more.

168

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
By the end of March large new basnach'l detachnents had been for-ed in various
locations in Afghanistan: a 300-basnachi detachnent in Inanseyid, and s I400-

nan unit in Khanabad. Large forces were for-ed in Rustak. Talikan, Faizabad,
and in several other localities.

The rapid organization of counterrevolutionary forces on the territory of
Afghanistan was fostered by political events which were taking place there, a
change of regime in power. a situation which the reactionaries utilized.
Reactionary circles in Afghanistan were exerting pressure on the new Afghan
Government of Nadir-khan. attenpting, in concert with agents of western

powers. to give its policies an anti-Soviet thrust. They conducted anti-Soviet
propaganda and denanded that open assistance be given to the basnachi. In
spite of the official position of the Afﬂun Goverment, nany clan-tribal
leaders and feudal rulers gave practical assistance to the basnachi leaders in
gathering forces and mounting provocational forays on the Soviet border.

In view of the prevailing situation, the Soviet Govern-eat took steps to beef
up security along the border. Border troop strength was increased, and
volunteer detachments and nilitia bodies were also strengthened. This

enabled the border troops to suppress the increased numbers of border viola-
tion attenpts.

In March it was learned that the basnachi of Davliya Sardar were about to
launch an attack on Soviet territory. The co-and authorities took the
requisite neasures. Teans of border guards arsed with light nachineguns were
sent out to the possible border crossing points. One 7-nan party was led by
border post deputy couander Kirsanov, while the other was led by deputy

platoon commander Ronashevskiy. An additional two teams of border guards were
placed on ready status.

On 17 March Roushevskiy's party discovered that approxinately 70 basnachi had
crossed over onto Soviet territory. Sending a neaeenger back with a report,
Ronashevskiy and the S renaining nen engaged the intruders. The basnachi,
avoiding combat, set off into the desert at a canter. Six border guards took
up pursuit. They were soon joined by reserve parties under the comand of
deputy couandant Kolesnikov and G. Sokolov. The pursuit continued for alnost
21. hours, an exhausting 100 kilo-eter trek across the sands of the Kara Kun.
Finally a patrol sent out from Kolesnikov‘s group overtook the may, but the
basnachi hastily broke canp and once again attempted to escape. The groups
led by Sokolov and Koleenikov resuned pursuit. It took an additional 36 hours
to catch up with the basnachi.

‘No snail parties of border guards under the canned of Kirsanov and Yudin
arrived in time to assist then. Sokolov led his men in an attack, without
pausing to deploy. Bursting into a valley and overwhelning the enemy's
security outposts, Sokolov's nen galloped up to the foot of a hill. Here the
border guards dismounted, left two net: with the horses, and proceeded to ad-
vance up the slope toward the hilltop.

The courageous troopers advanced under a hail of eneny bullets. They closed to
not more than 200 paces free the basnachi. At this nonent Sokolov was wounded

1’09

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Vlh vs layout. was. yuan

for a second tine. Yudin took over cot-and. Attacking aggressively. they
dislodged the haenschi from the hilltop. The border guards now held the high
ground. By this time Kolesnikov's party had captured another hilltop and was
successfully advancing across the valley, pushing the has-achi hack free
their second defensive line. Squeezed on two sides. the hamchi could not
withstand the onslaught. Only a few ale-hers of Davhya Sardar's hand succeeded
in escaping.

On 12 April 1929 former Karategin hek Fuzayl Haksu crossed the border with a
fairly large force. Sweeping into the kishlak of Kalai-Khu-b, the has-achi
settled accomts with activist dekhkans. The sane story was repeated on the
following day in the border hishlsk of Vanch, which was captured by the hand «i
Kurshirsat, former leader of the Pergana has-achi. Soon 12 note hands in-
filtrated to the left bank of the Vakhsh. They were shall in nunbers hut.
utilizing the eleeent of surprise and possessing good faailiarity with the ter—
rain, the basnachi captured a few kishlalts and carried out pogrons.

Fuzayl Maksun was showing the greatest aggressiveness. his hasnachi munted
a bloody foray through the kishlaks of the Darvaz and Karategin. Bai,
reactionary nullahs, and former hasnachi joined forces with his. As a result
the hand swelled to 200 teen. By 20 April Fuzayl Mahat- had captured Kalai—
Labi-ob and Tavil'-Dara and was advancing on Can. There were no Iilitary
units stationed in Can. On 22 April slall detachments of volunteers. led by
F. A. Hakritsltiy and P. F. Gutovskiy. engaged the hasaachi, a force exceeding
600 aen. Gutovskiy's detachment was surrounded in the kishlalt of Ninich,

35 kt: northeast of Cars. All 18 volunteers were killed. In addition to
Cutovskiy and several Soviet officials. there were 12 teachers in the detach—
ment —- Karindzhan Khuseynov, Yakh'ya Oli-ov, Alikhar Baasanw, Sayfullo
Aliyev, Abduzhabhar Hukhanedov. Nasyr lharov, Ahdullo Kasimv, Ahdulakhad
Rakhiaov, Khiknat Gani, Abdusalos Isles-0v. Uhaydullo Gaynuddinov, and
Humodzha Saideuradov. The people honor the aesory of these fallen heroes.
Streets and schools in Care have been nased after then. and a nonunent was
erected in their honor.

The basnachi detach-eat sustained heavy casualties. but nevertheless pushed in-
to Cam and seized part of the town. Volunteers under the cornsnd of A. I.
Kravchuk defended the other part of the town in a night battle.

The success of the hassachi was short-lived. No aircraft arrived fro-
Dushanbe and disgorged a small assault force led by brigade comnder T. T.
Shapkin and comissar A. 'r. Fedin. The band withdrew following a lS-linute
exchange of fire. The Red Amynen. accompanied by the volunteer detach-eat,
pursued close on the heels of the hasnschi. After losing more than 100 sen.
Haksun nade his way to and fled across the border.

Thus the first basaachi raids were unsuccessful. A certain portion of the
population, however -- representatives of the exploiter strata and reactionary
clergy - continued to support the hasaachi. In addition. the savage acts of
terrorisa and bloody reprisala perpetrated by the hasnschi exerted considerable
influence on nany peasants. They were afraid that if they case out in sup-
port of the Soviet authorities the banachi would take savage revenge on the.

150

MOFHCIALIISEONLY
and their families on their next raid. Creation of an atmosphere of uncertain-

ty and fear was one of the sins of the March-April baanachi raid into Soviet
territory.

The situation in the frontier sone renained tense. At the end of April and in
May, when the nomtain passes began to open up, the baa-achi nade a new at-
tenpt to infiltrate into Soviet territory in snail groups. The basnachi main
forces. concentrated in Afghanistan close to the Soviet border. had not yet
been put into action. All this demanded naxiaan vigilance and constant cowat
readiness. Bamchi captured in May told of feverish preparations to invade
Soviet territory with large units. According to their testimny, by lid-Hay
lore than 30 detachments, totaling 2000 In, were organized across the border.
In June Ibragin-bek held in K':anabad a nesting with enigr‘ leaders and basnachi
kurbashi. he ordered reliable protective bases established on Soviet territory.
Kore than 100 hasnachi were covertly infiltrated into Tajikistan for this pur-

pose. Scattering among their native kishlaks, they were to nake contact with
their supporters and ready then for joint actions.

Execution of the plans to invade Soviet territory was conplicated, however,

as a consequence of the position taken by official Afghan authorities. Pur-
suant to the terns of the Soviet-Afghan treaties, the Afghan Government forbade
the basnachi froa carrying out anti-Soviet raids fron Afghan territory.

In connection with this, Ibragin-bek held another neeting. with the participa-
tion of 200 basnachi kurbashi, at which he instructed then henceforth not to
cross the border without explicit instructions, while continuing secret
preparations for operations on Soviet territory. Letters bearing the
signature of Ibragim-bek began to be sent to “influential persons" in
Uzbekistan, containing an appeal for aid and assistance to the basmachi.

In the aeanwhile the British, unbeknomst to the Afghan authorities, were con-
tinuing to supply arms and widen to the basnachi. At 0300 hours on

20 June five trucks, flying Iranian flags and carrying area and ammition for
the hasnachi, departed from the British consulate in Mashhad with a destination
in Afghanistan and accompanied by two people fro. the consulate.

Early on the norning of 6 October, 60 bssmachi of Utah-belt crossed over into
Soviet territory. This small group contained several hirbashi. This un~
usual makeup of the party indicated plans to fern new bands. But the plans
cane to naught. Encountering a hostile attitude on the part of the population
and pursued by a Red Army detachment, Uta-bet limited his activities to
reconnaissance and hastily took refuge across the border in Afghanistan.

the Panirs. It was inediately spotted by a detachment under the conand of
Comunist M. T. Haslov. In the very first engagement the basaachi lost 19
dead and wounded. Thirty-two hasnachi, led a by s kurbashi, surrendered. The
surviving bandits attempted to take refuge in the mountains. But Haslov's
detachment again spotted the. on 28 October. The enemy was snashed in a

brief but fierce engagement. After several days of continuous pursuit,
remnants of the banachi group were captured.

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.V" VI'CIWI‘ was. Us‘h.

The swift and resolute resistance offered the invading forces prevented
lbragin-bek and his lofty patrons fron putting their nain forces into action.
Once more they saw that the bulk of the population did not support the. and
that hopes for a popular uprising were entirely without foundation.

In the neanwhile conflicts between the bassechi and the Afghan authorities
were beconing more frequent. Things were going as far as arned clashes.

All this prevented the basnachi fron carrying out their plans of invading
Soviet territory in 1929. “or were they able to do so in 1930. But con-
paratively large. well arned basnachi detach-eats continued to be based on
Afghan territory. The nore successfully the building of socialise progressed
in the Soviet republics of Central Asia, the nore illusory the hopes of the
counterrevolutionaries beca-e, the are adventuristic the plans of the
basnschi becane and the greater their anger and bitterness.

In the spring of 1931 they undertook a decisive invasion atteqt. This tine
the basnachi Iain forces, under the coaund of Ibragin-bek hiuelf, went into

act ion. On 30 March 1931 several hundred horse-en (600-800 nan) invaded the
territory of Soviet Tajikistan.

Fran the very outset the basnachi resorted to uses terrorism. sabotage, and in-
discriminate pillaging. They sought to preventing the planting of crops.

to disrupt the flow of goods, to destroy kolkhozes and sovkhoses, and to
disable rail lines and enterprises.

The enigré and basnachi leaders, conducting aggressive anti-Soviet actions on
the territory of Tajikistan. were counting on broad support on the part of
counterrevolutionary elenents as well as that segment of the population ad-
dicted by the opiate of religion. As soon as he had set foot on Soviet ter-
ritory. Ibragin-bek dispatched his kurbashi to their kindred tribes to en-
list the people into basnachi detach-ents and to organize an anti-Soviet up-
rising.

The hopes of the baa-achi to gain the support of the population, however. once
again proved erroneOus. The years of peaceful labor had nade their nark.
Socialist transfornstions had strengthened the prestige of the Soviet authori-
ties and had enabled then to indoctrinate a large and dedicated body of ac-
tivists. They took the wind out of the sails of exploiter groups and
strengthened the social foundation of the Soviet system.

The population took active part in the struggle against the humid. The
public inforned Soviet authorities and consnd authorities of the Red Arny and
border troops when basnachi bands appeared. The dekhkans theuelves took part
in pursuit and capture of basnachi. in the Rogetinskiy Soviet. for mle,
kolkhoz farmers iron the various kishlaks, arned with fowling pieces. pursued
a band for more than 20 hours and captured three banachi. Elsewhere dekhkans
organized self-protection and thwarted repeated basnachi sttenpts to

pillage kishlsks.

152

FOIOl-‘I‘ICIALUSEONLY
when ibragin-hek called a political rally in one of the captured kishlalrs and
explained tho. purpose of the invasion — return of the slit to power - one

of the dekhkan women said: "He renedyer the enir's tyranny with ahhorrence and
revulsion; we shall not forget the atrocities and pillaging nor the violence
done to women and even childrai.” At that sane political rally as old basnachi.
who had once been Ibragin-bek's teacher, also condoned the has-achi, who had
brought people nothing but tears. grief. and death.

At nass political rallies kolkhos tasters pledged the following oath: "He shall
either kill the basaachi or die ourselves, but we shall not allow the kolkho:
to be plundered." Dekhkans stated at a seating in the kiahlak of Shuts that
the basmchi sought to take power away tron the people and restore the hated
rule of the wealthy. "The hai owned a great nany sheep. while we had nothing
and he gave us nothing. Bu: Soviet rule gives us bread, tea. sugar. and
cloth. He are provided for on the kolkhos; we have everything, while on our
own we live in poverty." In Deharhashinskiy nah-agat the kolkhoz neebers,
discussing the struggle against the bamchi, unanimusly resolved: Wherever
the Soviet authorities send us. we shall go, and whatever the Soviet
authorities call upon us to do. we shall do.”

lhragia-bek hinself subsequently stated at his trial: "During the Rentgantau
caapaign I endeavored to enlist all the people of the [okay into the struggle
against Soviet rule. but the population would not go along. I hecane convinced
that the people of the Lokay had becone atheists."

At the same tine there were cases where individual dekhkans joined hands or
supported then. The bai and reactionary clergy called upon the population to
join the bands and carry out terrorist actions against party and soviet ac-
tivists. with their participation the basaschi succeeded in capturing sons
kishlaks and taking fodder and food supplies iron the population.

A Central Political Connission and local troikas consisting of party rayon
comittee secretaries, executive co-ittee chair-en, and 00?!) officials were
formed in Tajikistan to coordinate the struggle against the has-schi. Sixteen
special-purpose conpanies nunbering 3000 nan were for-ed of (Jo-amine and
Konsonol nenbers on a volunteer basis. Local party and soviet agencies for-ed

detachaents of "krasnopalochnikov" ["redstavers"], in addition to volunteer
detachments.2

In my kishlaks all adult Isles sought to enlist in "krasnopalochniki"
detachments. Since it was iqosaihle to accept all volunteers, the lost ac-
tive were accepted. The people of any kishlaks delegated representatives to
be sent to the bands to persuade the basaachi to surrender.

Participation by the toiler population of Tajikistan in the struggle against
the hasnachi was fostered by considerable explanatory work conducted by party
and soviet agencies, as well as the perennel of military units. Political
workers just of the 83d OGPU battalion held 20 talks in April 1931. which were
attended by more than 10000 persons.

153

MOFl-‘ICIALUSEONLY
eves veaesesea. .-—.. deﬁne

The bssnachi who invaded Soviet territory were net with fire by border
guard details, after which they were relentlessly pursued by Red Any units,
border guards. and volunteer detach-eats with the active assistance of the
general population. The basaachi bands suffered one defeat after the other.

An Uzbek cavalry brigade (1. Ye. Petrov, co-anding), as well as a Tajik and
Kirghiz cavalry squadrons distinguished the-selves in the fighting. 1n the
vicinity of Dangers the bulk of lbragin-bek'a arly (sore than 600 basaachi)
attached a squadron of the 79th Cavalry Beginent on 8 April. The baseschi
surrounded the Red Arnynen on all sides. But they were unable to overrun
their position. The soldiers held on until help arrived fro. the 7th 1n-

dependent Cavalry Brignde. Joint efforts succeeded in inflicting heavy
casualties on the band, and it withdrew.

By aid-April lbragin-bek's detachnents began disintegrating. Soae of the
basnchi voluntarily surrendered to the Soviet authorities. The situation is-
proved in those areas where the activities of local authorities had tenorarily
been paralyzed. On 19 April lbrsgie-bek nsrched into the Lokay Valley. hoping to
find support there. The dekhkans of the inlay. however. fought the baa-achi.
Ibragin-bek crossed over onto the left back of the Vakhsh. into Babatag.

Toward the end of April 1931 the foreign patrons of the baseschi sent in
reinforcenents to aid Ibragin-bek -- a 250m detach-ant led by liter-belt.
But Utah-belt. did not get beyond the Soviet-Afghan border. He was est there
by border guards. The band was routed in a battle while crossing the

Pyandzh River. "tan-bet rsturnei hto Afghanistan with the tenants of his
detachment.

The situation of lbragia-bek's arly was catastrophic. beseechi were voluntari-
ly surrendering to the Soviet authorities, both singly and in groups.
Tashakul', lbragin-beh's uncle. surrendered on 16 Hay. By 20 Hay 1931 12
kurbashi and 653 rank-and-file basnachi had turned thenselves in. Ibragin-

bek was down to not more than 250 sen. Pursuers close on his heels. he

barely made ttpthe Surkhan Darya, fron where he intended to escape into
Afghanistan.

It was essential to take into custody this basnachi leader and dangerous
criminal at all costs, to prevent his free escaping the just verdict of the
people.

A special group led by Abdulla Valishev was for-ed to capture Ibragil-bek.

On 21 June 1931 Valishev's party set out in the direction of the kishlalt of
Isanbny. where Ibragin-bek had repeatedly crossed the border. En route to
Isnnbay. they were joined by the volunteer detaclnent of Hukun Sultanov. lie
was assigned the nission of occupying all crossing points on the Kafirnigan
River and of conducting reconnaissance, with the assistance of the population
and "krasnopalochniki" fron kishlaks in the area.

On the norning of 23 June kolkhor nenbers Yuldash Iganberdyyev and Karin Alia
Ali-ardanov reported that they had spotted Ibtagin-bek on the right bank of the

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kafirnigan River near the kishlak of lul'bulon. Ibragin-bek denanded that he be
transported across to the opposite bank. Kolkhos nsnher Gyul'-lhodsha llasar was
sent out to the basnachi as ferrynn. Be succeeded in disarning Ibragin-bek. his
secretary must-Ali. and the kurbashi Saib, requesting that they secure their
weapons to the gupsars (special ferry equip-est) during the crossing. As soon as
the raft reached shore. the basnachi were arrested. Thanks to the leadership of
the Co-aunist Party. the extensive participation of the local population, the
courage and herois- of the led Arnynen and dekhkans, and the bold actions of
local party and soviet officials, the basnachi gangs were rapidly elininated and
cleared out of Tajikistan.

Final liquidation of the basnachi enabled the Soviet authorities to concentrate
their nain efforts in Tajikistan on the peaceful building of socialist. As a
result of inpleasntation of the uninist nationalities policy, constant solicitude
by the Coal-mist Party and the assistance of the entire Soviet people, Tajikistan
achieved substantial success. Agriculture was developing successfully, rapid
growth of industry was continuing, and the people’s living standards had risen.
The dekhkan had fir-1y taken the path of building socialists. The high degree of
class consciousness on the part of the toilers of Tajikistan and their solidarity
behind the Co-unist Party was attested by the high degree of organisation and
activeness in the struggle against the baseschi. More than 50,000 dekhkans joined

volunteer detachnents and detachaents of "krasnopalochniki" just in the spring of
1931.

The leaders of the basnachi were forced to acknowledge the strength of Soviet
rule and the socialist systen in Tajikistan. Ibragin-bek testified in court:
”When I left for Northern Afghanistan in order to cross over into Soviet ter-
ritory... I was given assurances by Yusufbay Huludmyev, the for-er enir‘s
representative at the League of nations. that the League of Nations had resolved
to return Bukhara to the for-er enir. For ne this neant that foreign countries
would give arned support in ny struggle against Soviet rule. I was also counting
on receiving extensive support by the population. I found the opposite to be

the case, however. I received no support fron the population in Tajikistan
proper. and I have cone to that end which is inescapable for those who fail to

understand the basis of Soviet power — which rests on the solid support of the
toilet population. . . ."3

One of Ibragin-bek's assistants, Suleynan Salakhutdinov, stated: "Out of any
ignorance I failed to grasp the strength of Soviet rule. While engaged in the
struggle I because convinced that our venture. that is, our struggle against
powerful Soviet rule, was foolish.“ Ishan lsakhan Hsnsurkhanov. another as-
sistant of Ibragin. also acknowledged the strength of Soviet rule: ”Our plans were
not carried out," he stated. "because we had no idea of the strength of Soviet

rule. II; the course of the struggle I becsne convinced that our undertakings were
absurd."

The struggle against the basnachi cans to an end in Tajikistan with the defeat of
Ibragin-bek. Isolated groups led by Utan-bek, which had fled across the border,
were pursued by detachnents of Afghan troops. A few snall hands were continuing
to undertake attenpts to invade Soviet territory, but each tine they were fitting-
ly repulsed by Soviet border guards. Utan-bek was roving about the nountains and

15$

[’08 OMCIAI. USE ONLY
av" vasavuea- —~- s.e~s

deserts of Northern Afghanistan with a couple of dosan basnechi. Early in
Deceder he and a stall band fled into Iran to the protection of the leader of
the lurknen enigr‘ why.

The situation on the Soviet-Afghan border becane tranquil in the latter half of
1931. Massive basaachi raids had ended. The nain struggle now was being
conducted against smugglers.

The defeat of the basnachi in Tajikistan strengthmd Soviet rule to u even
greater degree and increased the political activeneas of the toilers in the
struggle for socialist transfomtions in this republic.

Bout of the "Predators of the Desert"

At the end of the 1920's and beginning of the 1930's the toilets of Turkneniawere
conpelled once again to fight the baa-achi. who had again becone active.
Developnent of basinschi activities in this republic at the beginning of the 1930s
was pronoted by a nunber of factors. Socialist refer-s in ‘Durknenia were taking
place in the presence of sore substantial elenants of precapitalist societal
relations than in the other republics of Central Asia. In addition. in the
agricultural districts of the Turben Republic -- alardxhou, Tashaue, and

Kerki -- there had not been carried out a land reforn. which in the other
republics of Central Asia had played an inportant role in preparing for col-
lectivization. Feudal-patriarchal relations had in large neasure been preserved
in the nonadic and eeai-nonadic areas of Turknenia at the co-encenent of col-
lectivization. The bai continued to represent a great econonic force. The bulk
of the livestock (60 percent) and sources of water supply, which were of ex-
ceptional inportant for the econony of the Turk-ea, were in the possession of
the hai-clan elite; private ownership of wells had been preserved. In 1929 only
2.1. percent of dekhkan households were unified in kolkhoses in the Turk-en
Republic. In 1929 bai conprised 6.9 percent of the total dekhkan population.
but they owned 27 percent of the seans of production, 12.5 percent of the
acreage under crops, and 52.7 percent of snail livestock. Representatives of
the exploiter elite in Turk-enia included feudal lords and clan leaders. There-
fore they exerted great influence on the toiler nasses of Turk-enia.

The soviet and cooperative edifice was heavily contaminated by class-hostile
elaents. and in sons localities consisted alnost entirely of the feudal-clan
nobility and their henchmen. The worker class was snall in nubers. Rural
party and soviet agencies lacked work experience. The situation was aggravated
by a low level of cultural-political develop-ant of the poor hired laborer assess
and active resistance to Soviet authority on the part of the clergy. This is
why baenachi bands were joined not only by nanifestly counterrevolutionsry
elesents but also by a certain segnsnt of the toilet population, especially in
the Kara Kun Desert. Counterrevolutionary elenents skillfully utilized toward
their own end isolated extrenes to which local agencies of Soviet authority went
in carrying out party policy pertaining to socialist transfer-anon of the aul.
In Turknenia these extrenes were for the nest part those which occurred
throughout the country during collectivitation: violation of the principles of
voluntary participation. skipping over the artel to the come. failure to ob-
serve a correct pace of collectiwiaation. etc. In spite of this, the process of

156

momcuLuseonu
building kolkhoses was accelerating in teqo. By 1930 28.9 percent of poor and
aiddle-peassnt landholdings in “mi-beau had been collectiviud.‘

The building of socialis- in ‘l'urknenistnn was proceeding in a situation of
fierce class struggle. V. l. Lenin wrote with full justification. on the basis
of experience of the first two years of dictatorship of the proletariat, that
the class struggle. following overthrow of the power of capital. "/does not dis-

appeal... but asrely changes its form, becoming even fiercer in my
respects."7

The sale center of leadership of the baa-schi in ‘l'urknenia was located across the
border, and was closely linked with British intelligence via its permanent

representative Shukisbayev. It is not surprising that the struggle against the
basnachi was particularly intense on the border and in border areas.

beseachi grOups across the border as well as local groups were headed by bai and
reactionary clergy. They were actively supported by bourgeois nationalists, who

preached the idea of bringing Central Asia into the cysts. of British doninion
countries.8

Groups across the border co-enced aggressive anti-Soviet actions in the aiddle
of June 1929. On 15 June a band 700 nan strong, led by lshik-khan, son of
Drhunaid, crossed the border into Turk-min. At dawn of the following day.
basaachi attacked the Alt-Rabat border post, which was defended by only 11 nan.
Border post col-lander Kondratenko and his deputy lostenko skillfully organized
defense. The baa-achi, sustaining substantial losses. fled across the border.9

Sone of the basnachi who had previously fled across the border with Dehunaid-khan
returned to the Tashsuz district in October of 1929. At the end of the year a
tattle was fought in the vicinity of Charyehly well with the band of Shaltay-
Satyr -- one of Dzhunaid's underlings. Defeated. Shaltay-Satyr fled into the
desert. In January 1930 Shaltay-latyr's band attacked Gsoklen in Il'yalinskiy
Rayon. The basnachi wanted a barbaric cri-e - they slaughtered approxinately
200 peaceful dekhkans gathered for a wedding toy [celebration]. Shaltsy was
killed in an exchange of fire with self-defense dated-ant ushers.)-0

At the end of 1929, proceeding on a unified plan drawn up abroad, feudal-bai
elenents in 'l'urknenia proceeded to fore beenschi dead-eats. At the sac tine
forays by basnachi across the border against Soviet border guards and the local
population increased in frequency. In February and Harch 1930, for exasple, two
large basaschi groups invaded Soviet territory fron across the border. Border
guards overtook and totally annihilated than. 1

But arned bssnachi forays onto the territory of Turk-enia continued. Anti-Soviet
elenents abroad continued to support and encourage than. British intelligence
allocated 30.000 rupees. for exenple, for training a bssaschi group forned in the
fall of 1930. British intelligence established on Iranian soil a nunber of
special points for organizing crossing of the Soviet border.12

In Septenber 1930 Kerin-khan, one of the clan leaders, organised a large band and
plundered several cooperatives and ‘l'urknentorg warehouses in lolotanskiy Rayon.

157

POIOFFICIALUSEONLY
a-.. _...-..-- ..... ...~a

On 10 October a Soviet aerial observer spotted a long ribbon extending across the
desert. It was a caravan of 400 canals - Karin-khan us proceeding toward the
border with plundered loot. ‘No border guard squads led by Bondarenko and lorp
were the first to engage Kerin-kban's band. Platoon co-ander ‘rsyplahov and
several soldiers arrived as the battle was in full swing. the basaschi lost

90 nen killed and wounded. The survivors fled, abandoning their stolen spoils
and approxintely 10,000 head of livestock.

Davlisa Sardar's force, nuhering nore than 90 sen, attewted to break through
and cone to the assistance of Karin-khan. It was net by a detachnent of border
guards led by Kotel'nikov and a Red Aray squadron under the co-and of Ayrapetov.
Following a 12-hour battle the basnachi. having sustained heavy casualties. fled
across the border.

On 29 Decenber 1930 another group. 100 nan strong. crossed the border near
Kushka. m: by heavy fire delivered by border guards, it fled back across the
border.

Raids by bands fron across the border into Soviet ‘l'urhsnistm signaled activa-
tion of donestic counterrevolutionary forces. A total of 11 basnachi group!
were liquidated within Soviet Iurlusenistan in the first half of 1930 alone. 3

Many bands, having co-itted criainal offenses, subsequently sought to flee
abroad. On 30 October border guards wiped out a group of 12 sen attenpting to
flee across the border after plundering villages. In low-her 1930 a band of
40 baa-schi robbed a lumber of cooperatives and sought to flee into Iran. Their
path was blocked by squads of cavalry and a snail party of border guards led

by platoon commander Krasnoshchekov. The gang left lore than half of its
basaachhaenbers and all the plundered property and livestock on the field of
battle.

In the fall of 1930 and the spring of 1931 Ishik-khan. who Iaintained close
contacts with bai stocknen, was particularly active in forning local bands. lle
promised generous assistance to donestic counterrevolutionaries and, in case of
failure, a secure refuge across the border.15

The notorious Ora: Gel'dy kvndzhik was the principal coordinator of baslachi
forces in Turknenia. In April 1931 he asseﬁled a band of 60 basaachi and
carried out a umber of pillagings. pogrou and aurders of soviet officials.

Gathering together representatives of the bai. he declared hisself than and even
for-ed a "government?“

Ishik-khan sent several kurbashi across the border to assist Ores Gel'dy.
Hurad-Ali. one of the hurbashi taken into custody, told why they had cone to
Soviet Turkestan: "Kara Hukht. froa Persia. crossed the border onto Soviet ter-
ritory, into Geok-‘l'epinskiy Rayon.... A few days later Kara wt... cane to
see use at the Ak-Kuyu well. He told as that under no circumstances should I
accept Soviet rule and I should fight it to the end... that he, Kara Hukht. had

cone {£17m Persia for the purpose of joint aggressive actions against Soviet
rule."

158

“WWW!”
by June 1931 Oras Gel'dy had ‘00 sen under his M.18 nis nain force eomted
several raids on anall garrisone and villages. after which it owed on to
Tedzhenskiy Rayon. Their it succeeded, carrying out ease terrorist actions, in
thwarting the procurenent of grain and in looting collection stations.

At the sane tine a large group of Kazakh herds-en nade its way to Krasnovodskiy
Rayon. Following the con-encenent of collectivisation, these herds-en had suc-
cumbed to hei agitation and were proceeding across Turknenia in order to escape
abroad.19 The bai organized several arsed detach-ants of these lerdsaen. which
joined together with local basaschi gangs.

Resistance by bai-kulak eleaents in Soviet Turhenia to the building of social-
ise had by the beginning of April 1931 seemed the fore of an extensive steed
baseschi insurrection agath Soviet rule. The hasnachi established their base
camp in the Kara Km Desert. Tron there they carried the attack to other areas.

In 1931 the Kara K:- becne the center of beseechi activities not only due to

the geographic features of this desert region but also by virtue of a nuber of
socioecononic conditions: preservation of feudal-clan relations, and little class
differentiation; doniname of clan chiefs, bai and eullaln in the soviets.

In addition, several for-er basnechi leaders had found refuge in this area, and
all those who were hiding fro. the Soviet authorities had fled to this area.

At the couencenent of coordinated action by doaestic and external eomterrevolu-
tionary forces. three types of bamchi hands were operating on the territory of
Soviet Turknenistan: foreign, Turk-en. and consolidated Turk-en-Kazakh, or
lewd-Kazakh. The bands were divided into five principal groupings on the

basis of geographic. ethnic-clan, and to acne extent economic criteria: Ionud-
Kazakh. led by Byli Akhun and operating in Kasandshihakiy and Krasnovodskiy
rayons: a Teltin grouping formed of hasnachi fron Bahhardenskiy and Geot-Tepinshiy
rayons. led by hurad Ali; a Tekin grouping led by Ores Gel'dy Kandshik, operat-
ing in Tedzheno-Hervsltiy Rayon; the Dargan-Ata grouping - led by Karadsha
Alrsakal; the Tashauz grouping.

Each of these groups had its own specific features, but they were linked by a
con-on objective - overthrow of Soviet rule in Turbenia. They also eqloyed
coal-on nethods of struggle: sass terrorism, especially against party and soviet
of ficials, sushing of legitinate agencies of authority and goveth es-
tablishnents. and plundering of the population.

The bssnachi swung into action in Turksenia in the latter half of March 1931.
The arrival of Khak hured's group fron across the border served as a signal to

go into action. As they proceeded, the bee-achi snashed Soviet establishnents,
terrorized and robbed the population.

A snail detach-eat (52 sen) free the 85th battalion of 06!!! forces under the
comand of Tseytlin was dispatched to Krasnovodskiy Rayon to prevent further
depredations by this group. The arrival of this detach-ent and the arrest of
several bai evoked elarn among the counterrevolutionaries. At a clandestine
neeting of beseechi leaders, it was decided to destroy the detachnent and flee

159

I'OIOI'TICIALUSEONLY
across the border. This decision was reported to Dshunaid-lthan, leader of the
basnachi abroad.

On 19 April 600 basnachi attacked nenhers of the Cheka. The detach-ant was fired
on from anbush at a range of 30-40 netere. The M! and two of his nen were
killed, while the renainder established a perineter defense. The battle con-
tinued for 72 hours. Fifteen wounded soldiers fell into the hands of the
basnacbi and were brutally nurdered. One of the baseschi who had taken part in
this atrocity acknowledged during interrogation following his capture in 1931:
”Nut one of then begged for nercy."2°

The attack on the Cheka detachment served to activate all the baa-chi. At the
end of April snall bands plundered several cooperatives. seized grain caravans,
and in none kishlaks nurdered party and soviet officials.

The counterrevolution also raised its head in the Khive oasis. Hith the aid of
baanachi who had arrived fron abroad. local counterrewolutionarise were able to
put together a force of 175 sen. But the nain events took place on the territory
of Turksenia. where the principal bai-kulak and bassechi forces had concentrated.
A hand up to 200 men in strength was operating in the lisyl-Arvat area. nzhunaid
sent lehik-khan's detach-eat to this area.

Krasnovodskiy and Kasandzhikskiy reyons becane a center of baseschi activities.
The Tommi-Kazakh force. which totaled approxinately 1500 sen, was concentrated
there. Mass pogrons and terrorist actions began. On 22 April the has-achi
destroyed buildings and looted warehouses in Khodzha-Sufi, inflicting comider-
able financial loss. On 27 April they plundered the sulfate lining operation
of the Kara-Bugs: Sul'fat Trust.

the hai were able to swell the ranks of the hasnachi as a result of anti-Soviet
agitation. black-ail, threas and outright coercion. By the beginning of June

1931 three large groups totaling 1960 teen were operating in Krasnovodskiy Rayon
alone. A 60-nan band fron across the border nsde its way into this sane area.“-

The comterrevolutionary elite consolidated all its detach-ants into a striking
force. By June 1931 a unified central body had been established, which con-
tained. in particular, mli-Akhun and Anna Durdy, notorious for their brutality.
The base canp of besnachi headquarters was at the well of Chagyl.

with establishment of the heseachi headquarters, each group was assigned a
specific area. within which it was to carry out acts of sabotage and terrorisn,
break up kolkhoses and sovkhozes, and destroy the soviet nachinery of government.

In July alone the baseachi conducted 17 raids, perpetrated 1.1 acts of terrorisn.
and a great nany pillagings and acts of violence. On 30 July. during a raid on
Kazandzhik, they demolished a stretch of railbed, causing two nail trains to
wreck.“ Malachi actions paralyzed econosic life in certain areas. The
operations of industrial enterprises ground to a halt in the Krasnovodsk area.

while in acne kishlahs life case to a stop for a period of three nonths. In
carrying out sass acts of terroriss, the basnachi leaders explained their actions

in a sinple fashion: a teacher had to he killed for turning children into

160

l-‘OIOFFICIALUSEONLY
atheists, dekhhans for syspathising with the Soviet detach-ants, and wosen for
wanting to learn to read and write.”

Special detacbents of border guards, can troops, led my troops and
volunteers were forsed to codat the basachi.

On 20 Hay units of the 0cm 26th Cavalry Regissnt under the co-and of I. I.
Lasanov were sent into Krasnovodsltiy layon. No other groups were sent to
fight bassachi bands in Kisyl-Arvatsltiy, Kaundahikskiy, Dahebelskiy, and
Tashaussltiy rayons.

The detach-ants in the Krasnovodsk sector co-enced col-hat operations on the
night of 27 Hay. By 10 June they had cleared hassachi fros a vast territory in
the western part of Turksenia. Bndeavoring to preserve their forces and gain
tise to regroup, the bassschi would agree to negotiations for voluntary sur-
render. And if such a saneuver succeeded, they would once again resuse arsed
actions after strengthening their detach-ants.

In view of the situation, the man Central Omittee Sredaabyuro and the
Turknen (Io-unist Party (of Bolsheviks) Central Co-ittee sade the decision to
mobilize the population, particularly Co-Inists, lossosol ssshers and soviet
activists, for the struggle against the bassechi. All silitary and volunteer
subunits were brought to a state of cosbat readiness. A specially forsed field
headquarters staff drew up a plan for attacking the principal bases of the
basaachi around Orta-Kuyu, Geoklen-Kuyusy, and Kaynt wells.

Prior to co-encing the operation, the governssnt of the mrlnaen Republic
carried out a nusber of seasurcs of a sociopolitical nature, which undersined
the influence of the counterrevolutionary forces on the toilet population:
decrees were issued announcing nationalisation of wells and confiscation of
livestock and other property free the bai elite who had joined the bassachi
bands, and appeals were issued to herdsssn to return to peaceful labor.

Special groups sade up of party and soviet activists were forsed to conduct
explanatory work, for practical isplesentation of governsnt decrees, and to
reestablish agencies of authority in kishlaka which had been targets of
bassachi pogross. ”Krasnopalochniki" detaclnents were organized in the
kishlaks to protect the population against baa-chi raids. By the fall of 1931
these detach-eats exceeded 12, 000 sen.2

Preparatory seasures sade it possible to comes the operation in an organized
manner and to execute it rapidly. Close coordination between party and

soviet agencies and the col-and of silitary units, active assistance by the
toilers, and the excellent sorale and fighting qualities of the soldiers and
their contenders guaranteed success. In Krasnovodskiy Rayon operations were

back to none]. in soviet agencies, at enterprises and sining operations by
23 June.

The Red Arnynen and volunteers staunchly endured all difficulties. They
acconplished sarches across the waterless desert lasting sany days, and they
displayed courage and valor in conbat against the bassachi.

161

MWWONLY
eves vesayuns. v.1... .0»...

The detachsent led by Kobisskiy fought a battle at Tereskay well for 96 hours.
This 90-nan detach-eat defeated a well-armed hasmachi band of 200 men.

The successes of the operation were overestimated, however, by field headquarters
Top headquarters officials viewed the defeat of large banachi units as liquida-
tion of the base proper of the counterrevolutionary forces and halted further
conduct of the operation on 23 June 1931. And yet the situation renained serious.

By the end of June 14 bands, totaling sore than 2000 bassschi. were operating in
Turkmenia. Approximately 1000 basnachi were in the loud-Kazakh force, which
presented the greatest threat. It is true that there was a lack of unity anong
the basnachi. Enlisted into the bands by deception or threat, the poor dekhkans
had no desire to oppose the Soviet authorities. More and sore frequently they
were openly expressing their resentnent. But the leaders were taking drastic
neasures to preserve the hands, insisting on continuing the armed struggle, and
severely punishing the "insubordinate." Under their pressure groups which had
agreed to turn thenaelves is conducted only partial disarm-eat. In addition,
the kurhashi who were conducting surrender negotiations began insisting on
postponing the disbanding of their detachments.

In the meantime the 08?!) contend authorities were rashly hastening to deactivate
the Krasnovodsk combat sector. Sector couander I. I. Lananov sent a report in
which he stated that these actions were premature. and requested that the aili-
tary units deployed in the sector be left in place. But headquarters ignored
this report.

Taking advantage of the breathing space. the basmschi leaders reorganized their
remaining forces. They again went into action in the latter half of July.25

The basnachi terrorized the population and piliaged. As before, basmachi from
across the border hastened to their assistance.

0n 3 August a loo—man group crossed over onto Soviet territory. On 27 August

the Kara Hukht hand attempted to raid a village near the Kul'-Takir well. The
basnachi raid was repulsed by a Col-unist detachment.

Sosewhat earlier, at the beginning of August, the Kakabay band. totaling 350 men,
laid siege to the Brbent well, which was defended by a detachent of nilitia and
a subunit of the 2d Turkmen Regiment. The fighting went on for 6 days. Sustain-
ing heavy casualties. the basnachi fled into the desert.

The 600 basnachi of Ora: Gel'dy were operating in Geok-Tepinsltiy Rayon. They
were robbing grain caravans. killing soviet and party officials and activists,
and even besieged a number of kishlaks. In Tashauskiy Rayon snail basnachi
groups were systematically terrorizing the population. By the beginning of
September 1921 the basnachi had wanted 86 forays. Peaceful hishlaks, 3‘
kolkhozes and sovkhozes had been pillaged. Thirty-four party and soviet of-
ficials were killed during these raids.

In spite of some successes in the struggle against the basmachi, as of 1 Sep-
tember there were as sany as 3000 armed basnachi in Turk-enia. The Iosud-
Kazakh grouping was still the largest. It was operating in the northern part

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of Krasnovodskiy and Kazandshihsltiy rayons. Its central base was located in the
vicinity of Chagyl well. The Bakharden grouping, together with the basmchi of
Murad Ali, totaled more than 1.00 Den. The Ashkhabad force, led by Kakabay and
Akdyr-khan. totaled as many as 150 men. The Tedzhen force was a consolidation of
remants of the defeated bands of Ora: Geldy (who was killed on 28 August) -

37S basmachi. The Bayran-Ali force contained up to 160 men, the Dargan-Ata
force -- 120, and the Tashauz force -- as many as 260 see.

The basmachi controlled practically the entire Kara Km. This new haemachi

f lare-up was in the final analysis caused by aggravation of the class struggle
in connection with the offensive mounted by the Soviet authorities against
remnants of capitalist elements in the city and village, as well as by attempts
on the part of basmachi-emigre’ circles to regain their lost economic and
political positions. In these conditions the party Central Comittee, Walk and
USSR Sovnarkom instructed the Central Asian Military District to clear bandit
gangs from the Kara Rum as quickly as possible.26

Party-soviet agencies of Central Asia and Turkmenia and the comnd authorities
of the Central Asian Military District decided to conduct in Turkmenia and
Khorezm a new, more powerful conhined operation to wipe out the bands and
protect the population. The main objective of the operation was to destroy large
basmachi detachments, return the dekhkans to peaceful labor. given then requisite

assistance, improve their cultural and living conditions, and strengthen Soviet
authorities in those areas stricken by banditry.

Initially four composite detachments were formed to execute this plan. The
western (main) Force was to nount a drive in the direction f the Dzhurkul'-Chapan
and Kyuy-Kun frontier area; the Southern Force was to launch a secondary attack
in the direction of Busag well and the Az-Kum frontier area; the Eastern Force
was to perform a blocking function in the vicinity of Kin-Tychke spring and was
simultaneously to mount short thrusts in the Osmantay-Mntay area; the Northern
Force was to perform corbined missions of destroying basmechi. Just as during
the first operation, activists, Comnists and Komsonol members were to take
part in the fighting. A group of party and soviet officials was assigned to
conduct mass political work among the population in each of the four sectors.
The operation was scheduled to museum on 9 September 1931. In view of

heightened basaachi activities, however, the operation began ahead of schedule.
on S September.

Overall direction of the operation was assigned to the comande: of the Central
Asim Military District (CAMD), P. Ye. Dybenko, c. G. Yastrebov, member of the
front Rewoyensovet, and C. G. Yevdokimov. official representative of 0690. They
set up an 0690 central comand group and CAMD field headquarters, located at
Kizyl-Arvat station. Assigned to field headquarters were representatives of the
VKP(b) Central Comittee Sredazbyuro (Zaytsev), the Turkmenistan Conunist Party
(of Bolsheviks) Central Con-ittee (Ye. A. Popok, Central Comittee first secretary,
and Central Comittee Secretary Ch. Vellekov), and the Turknen SSR Sowarkon
(Sovnarkom Chairman K. S. Atabayev).

Larger Red Army forces and volunteer detachments proceeded to take up their
attack positions. In Krasnovodsk cadets from the Tashkent Military School imeni

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(‘1‘ 0' I evens. hum. 9- ‘hl

V. I. Lenin. led by A. K. Halyshev. prepared for the operation. Also in
Krasnovodsk was a mechanized detachment under the comand of I. I. Lamanov,
chief of border and internal security troops of the Central Asian Directorate
of OGPU; N. Aytakov and S. Ungalbayev served as representatives of the K?!
Central Connittee in the detachment. A cavalry brigade under the command of Ya.
A. Hel'kumov moved out from Kazandzhik Station; A. Huradov was the m Central
Committee representative. The Uzbek Cavalry Regiment. under the comd of
Mirkamil' Mirsharapov. proceeded from Kizyl-Arvat; m Central Conittee
representative -- Annamukhaucdov. Another Uzbek cavalry regiment. under the
command of I. P. Bikzhanov, proceeded from Bakharden; B. Atayev and 0.
Tachmamedov were representatives of the KPT Central Comittee in this regiment.
A detachment of border troops. with H. S. Kadzharov representing the RP? Central
Committee. moved out from Artyk Station. he Thrice Red-Banner 82d Aktyuhinsk
Cavalry Regiment, under the sound of A. I. Batsltalevich, with the KEPT Central
Committee represented by A. Kurdov, advanced from Tedzhen. The 83d Baglinskiy
Cavalry Regiment. under the command of h. V. Samokrutov. proceeded from Merv.
The sloth Red-Banner Cavalry Regiment. under the command of I. I. Khryukin. and
a regiment of OGPU troops under the command of Konstantinov proceeded from
Ithiva and Tashauz. The lat Con-mist Colpany. under the couand of T. Chaykazin,
was forming in Ashlnthabad.27

The operation was conducted in two stages. At the first stage. which ran to
19 September 1931. an attack was mounted on the principal basmachi base cans.

The first clash between the mechanized detachment under the conand of I. I.
Lamanov and the outposts of the loud-Kazakh force took place on 12 September.
On 13 September the 2d Turkmen Regiment and Lamanov's detachment attacked the
main forces of the Ionud-Kazakh group. Occupying well-fortified positions

(the fortifications ran 3 km in frontage and lo km in depth) and with aconsiderable
superiority in manpower, the band offered fierce resistance. The battle went

on for 14 hours. The basmachi were unable to withstand the offensive pressure of
our units. A total of 198 bandits were killed or wOunded; the kurbashi Khak
Hurad, who had been acting as liaison with representatives of British intel-
ligence. was killed. I. I. Lamanov and Chairs member Chery Huradov died the death
of the brave in battle at Chagyl well. At the most critical moment in the
battle. both led attacking lines of Red Armymen. ensuring penetration of the
enemy's defense. heroism was displayed by cadet N. G. Lyashchenko.

Remnants of the loud-Kazakh force fought their way northeastward. On 17 Sep-
tember they were overtaken at the Dakhly well by a composite cavalry battalion
under the couand of Nalyshev. Battle was engaged -- the fiercest and bloodiest
of the entire operation. For a period of 10 hours the bandits resisted with
the fury of the doomed. Soon a detachment of cadets under the contend of

Yakub Kuliyev arrived on the scene. The basmachi were totally routed. Only a
few made good their escape.

On 17 September Red Army units encountered the Tashauz force. which was at-
tempting to link up with the bands operating in the Kara Inn. of the 250
basmachi. 90 were killed. wounded, or captured.

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In this phase of the operation six basaachi forces were defeated in detail,

1037 enemy were killed or captured, and the major hase camps of the bands were
seized. "Defeat in detail of the basmachi forces and capture of their bases at
these centers (at the Charyshly, Dakhly, Tuar, and Chagyl wells)," stated the
report of the field political directorate of the Central Asian Military District.
"ended the first phase of the operation against the basmachi bands."28

The Red Armynen. commanders and fighting men of the volunteer detachments had
withstood a severe test. Acting in a united front and inspired by a common
cause, Communists, Komsomol members and non-party people. Russians and
Ukrainians, Belorussians, Turkmens, Kazakhs, and representatives of other of our
cauntry's nationalities fought heroically. shoulder to shoulder. Self-defense and
"krasnopalochniki" detach-eats were formed of representatives of indigenous
nationalities. This had become a mass aovement by the end of 1931.

The mission in the second phase of the operation was to wipe out the remaining
basmachi groups, to prevent them from escaping across the border, and to dis-
ara them.

This phase began on 22 September 1931. The situation was as follows at that time.
In a number of areas snail groups of basmachi, posing as peaceful inhabitants,
were hiding among nomads in remote encampments. In Bakhardenskiy, Yerbentskiy,
Hervsko-Tedzhenskiy, and certain other rayons in which military operations had
not previously been conducted, the basmachi had maintained their forces. Groups
which had cone across the border had also not yet been wiped out.

The second phase of the operation contained a nunber of specific features. First
of all, there was increased participation by the general population in the
struggle against the basmachi. Secondly. after the largest forces had been
wiped out, the basnachi no longer offered such stiff resistance as previously,
and the pace of their disintegration stepped up significantly. Not only rank
and file basmachi but kurbashi as well were voluntarily surrendering with in-
creasing frequency.

A total of 1063 rank and file basmachi and 17 kurbashi voluntarily surrendered

in Septeaber-October 1931. During this sane period of time 84 basmachi were
killed and 98 captured in combat encounters. But some of the leaders still
refused t lay down their arms. At the beginning of October, for example,
remnants -' the scattered Kazakh and Turknen groups in the northern part of the
Kara Kum, totaling up to 400 men, once again consolidated into a united force.
The principal role in this unification was played by Durdy Hurt and Bekdzhan-khan

A cavalry reginent and other units were sent against the basmachi. Conducting
joint actions, they wiped out the basmachi main forces (most were captured,
while only Bekdzhan-khan and Durdy Hurt succeeded in escaping). ‘

The ist Turkmen Regiment and a mechanized detach-eat were operating in Kunya-
Urgenchskiy Rayon, the Uzbek Cavalry Reginent and the 2d Battalion of the

10th Cavalry Regiment in Il'yalinskiy Rayon. while the 86th Cavalry Regiment was
operating in Takhtinakiy Rayon.

165

INDI*0FFIC1AL.USIZ(H‘LY
I‘ll UI’I’ILIRI. not. UJIJ

A general offensive began on 7 October, in which local residents took extensive
part. They actively assisted in searching out, capturing and disarming basmachi
and in confiscating hidden weapons. As a result of assistance by the local

population, more than 6000 rifles and revolvers were confiscated just between
7 and 10 October 1931.

As a result of the operation in the Kara Rum, 3287 basmachi voluntarily sur-
rendered. were captured. killed or wounded.

By tlw fall of 1931 the basmachi main forces in Turkmenia had been eliminated.
The feudal-clan elite had ceased to exist as a socioecononic stratum. Thus the
basmachi were deprived of a nutrient medium. soil and base. In the course of

the struggle against the basmachi, as many as 50,000 sheep and goats and 10,000
camels were handed over to the poor peasants.

This did not end the struggle against the basnachi in Turkmenia. Thanks to
assistance by the counterrevolutionary emigré community. some kurbashi continued
their banditry activities for quitesonetiae, which was fostered by the
geographic conditions of Turksenia -- vast desert expanses in which small
basnachi groups c0uld easily hide.

in 1932 and in the first half of the 1933 Dzhunaid-khan, Akhmed-bek, Durdy Hurt
and others sent several dozen basmachi gangs into Soviet Turkmenia. Fron

1 January through 7 March 1932 alone 32 groups totaling more than 1,630 men
crossed over into Soviet territory; the majority of these were either taken into
custody or killed by border guards in skirmishes on the border. In July 1932
six small bands were hiding deep in the Kara Rum.

Toward August 1932 Akhmed-bek and Durdy Hurt succeeded. for the last time. in
putting togetller a fairly large force, which raided Soviet establish-cuts
and kishlaks. This force was subsequently divided into two groups: a central
and a eastern group.29 Avoiding encounters with border guards and volunteer
detachments. the basmachi were able to hold Out for more than 6 months. In May
1933 the central group was caught up with and defeated in detail. Durdy hurt
and Akhmed-bek were killed in the engagement.30 Somewhat later the bands of
the Easmrnforce were wiped out or disintegrated. Only a few small groups
were hiding in inaccessible areas and infrequently conducting pillaging forays.

The ground was burning under the feet of the basmachi. A vivid example of this
is the last foray of Utan-bek. On 11 October 1933 this experienced veteran
basmachi. accomplanied by 20 horsemen, crossed over into Turkmenia. But the
very first hours of their sojourn on Soviet soil, the very first tens of
kilometers becaae a terrible nighmare for Utan-bek and his associates. Roman
gazed at them with hatred and cursed than, "krasnopalochniki" posts guarded the
entrances to kishlaks, their way was ﬂocked at crossroads. and they could hear
the relentless clattering of hooves of the approaching pursuit....

Awareness of the inevitability of defeat. fear, and the self-preservation
instinct this time proved to be stronger than anger, desire for revenge, and the
wish to loot and kill.

166

FIN!(MWH(JAI.USE(HVLY
...Stondlng up in his stirrups, Utan-bek waved his kamcha [riding whip], and the
entire band wheeled in the direction of the border. Several days after Utan-bek
had successfully crossed back over the border, he went to lshan Khalifa,

leader of the Turkmen emigre cot-unity, and stated that he would never again
cross the Soviet border.

The basmachi did enormous detriment to the Turk-en Republic. The old truism
which states that a dying predator is dangerous was persuasively confirmed.
The basmachi -- predators of the Kara Kum Desert - left behind wounds which took

a long time to heal. How many courageous fighters for socialism fell at the
hands of the basmachi, and how many children became orphans!

The list of fallen heroes includes Berdyyev and Sadykov, rayon officials in
Kunya-Urgench; the Annamuradov brothers, activists from the aul of Hulik-Yazy
(Vekil-Bazarskiy Rayon); Bekmnrad Dovletov, Komsomol cell secretary in the

aul of Khodzham-Kala-Z in Kara-Kalinskiy Rayon; Amannepea Ovezov, activist from
Porsinskiy Rayon; activist Keyik Sametova from Rarabekaul'skiy Rayon; poor
peasant Nobat Ovezmuradov from chardzhouskiy Rayon; Rakhman Niyazov, hired farm
laborer and kolkhoz activist from BayramrAliyskiy Rayon; plus many others.

The basmachi did great detriment to the economy. The list of warehouses put
to the torch. looted stores, demolished enterprises, sovkho: buildings and

dwellings is long. And added to this are trampled crops and destroyed farm
equipment!

Stock raising was hit particularly hard. The total number of head of livestock
declined by 19 percent just in the winter of 1930. A total of 375,000 karakul
sheep died. were stolen or driven abroad. In 1931, when basmachi activities in
Turkmenia reached their apogee, the total number of karakul sheep declined by
41 percent. coarse-fleeced sheep by 62 percent, and cattle by 52 percent.

Long years and persistent labor by the workers and kolkhoz farmers of Turkmenia

were required in order to heal the wounds inflicted by the "predators of the
desert."

167

FIHICNﬂWCJAL USIZCNVLY
[III WCO\ URI. In": v-‘Lt

CONCLUSION

The activities of the basmachi comprised one of the forms of the class
struggle in Central Asia, which assumed an exceptionally savage character.

It constituted an expression of the class struggle of the bai, the local
bourgeoisie and the reactionary Islamic clergy against the dictatorship of
the proletariat. H. V. Frunre correctly noted in a memorandum to V. l. Lenin
that the basnachi represented an "armed protest against the new principles
on which a new life 1; to be built."1

The feudal lords, clan nobility, former large landholders, emirate and

khanate functionaries constituted the social base of the basaachi. Stripped
of their wealth and privileges by the revolution, they were its sworn enemies.
The majority of basmachi leaders came from this milieu. It was emphasized in
the accountability report of the RP? Central Committee to the 7th KPT Congress
(March 1923) that "all individual kurbashi are great feudal lords. great
oppressors of the broad dekhkan masses.”2

The emerging local national bourgeoisie also took active part in development
of the basmachi. lts position was defined by the struggle against the
socialist path of development of Turkestan and the struggle for the capitalist
path.

The bai and the feudal nobility. which were the most numerous exploiter class
in Central Asia. provided the basmachi with cadres. The Ksrstegin bek Fuzayl
Naksun and the wealthy Kuvandyk-bai, who owned more than 10,000 karakul sheep;
prominent enir functionary and Lokay clan leader Kayum Parvanchi and the power-
ful bai Bayran Holla; Salakhutdin Suleymanov, mullah and son of the head of

the Islamic clergy in the Bukhara emirate. and wealthy stocknan Kurartyk
Adirov; powerful Kirghiz manap [privileged class of Kirghiz feudal-clan elite]
Muctdin, who had in his employ more than 5000 agricultural laborers. chayriker.
and herdsnen: and Turkmen feudal lord Dzhunaid - these are social photographs
of the basnachi leaders. Common criminals, lumpen and other déclassé'elements
who joined the ranks of the basnachi forces intensified their sinister, bandit.
and briggand-terrorist coloration to an even greater extent.

The 6th Congress of the Turkestan Communist Party (August 1921), defining the
social countenance of the hasmachi, stated that "the hai and declassé

professional banditry elements constitute the leaders and organizing force
(or the basnachi -- Auth.)."3

168

FE”!(HWW(1A1.USE(NVLY
The counterrevolutionary thrust of the basmachi is also persuasively attested
by numerous facts of basmachi making cor-on cause with blackguard Uhite
Cuardists. It would seem that the basmachi, who claimed to be spokesmen for
the national interests of the peoples of Central Asia, should have seen as
manifest enemies the Russian White Guard. who made no attempt to conceal their
chauvinist views. But the basmachi were not enemies but rather friends and
allies of the Russian white Guard. Admiral Kolchak, General Denikin. and the
white Cossack atamans Dutov. Tolstov. and Annenkov maintained close relations
with and assisted the basmachi leaders. Basmachi ranks contained many white
Guard officers. serving as military instructors.

The reactionary lslamic clergy played an important role in organizing the
basmachi. lt proclaimed a "gazavat" and declared the basmachi to be "warriors
of Nuhamnad" and "fighters for the faith," calling those who would not join
basmachi bands "giaours" and "Rafirs." Extensive pan-Islamic and pan-Turkist
propaganda and agitation were conducted with the assistance of the Islamic
clergy.“ The basmachi camps always contained pan-Islamic agitators.

Characterizing the basic nucleus of the basmachi. H. V. Frunze wrote in Hay
1920 that the ranks of the basmachi contained those who were accustomed to
brigandage and violence. who were accustomed to living an idle and un-
trammeled life at the expense of the ruthlessly fleeced population, those who.
with the support of a gang collected under their banner, dreamed of becoming
ruler of the region, a new khan.5

Bourgeois nationalists were the ideological leaders of the basmachi. claiming to
be defenders of overall national interests but in actual fact expressing the
interests of the exploiter classes. they kindled interethnic hostility and at-
tempted to use the basmachi to reestablish the domination of the feudal lords
and bai and to detach Central Asia from Soviet Russia. A number of bourgeois
nationalists. holding positions in executive agencies in the Central Asian
republics. were secretly supporting the basmachi and arranging for supply of
arms and ammunition to them.

But the basmachi did not include only representatives of the overthrown ex-
ploiter classes. A certain portion of the toiling dekhkans was also enlisted
into basmachi hands.

This was due to a number of factors. Following the victory of the socialist
revolution in Turkestan. just as throughout the country. measures were taken
to implement Lenin's land decree. Success was not achieved in Turkestan.
however. in implcnenting the Land Decree and the law on socialization as was
the case in the Russian village. The bulk of the land remained in the hands
on the exploiters. The Fourth Regional Conference of Soviets ascertained that
in spite of the [and law. purchase and sale of land was continuing in the
region. This applied to an even greater degree to Bukhara and Khorezm.

Rvnulutiun of the land question in Turkestan was connected not only with the
elimination of land ownership by the landed gentry but also to a significant

dvuruc invnhau the necessity of eliminating land ownership by Russian kulak
settlers.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA Urtnmu van ways

the land question in the conditions of Central Asia had to be resolved in a
close link with the water question. Central Asia's irrigation system was
little developed, and this was impeding resolution of the agrarian question.

Feudal-patriarchal carryovers were strong in the najority of areas in Central
Asia. This was particularly true of the raote areas of mu, Tajikistan,
and the southern part of Kirghizia. The Kirghiz co-unity, for angle, con-
sisted of several clans, at the head of which stood the hereditary nanap,

who was considered to be the absolute naster. His decisions had the force of
law for all residents of the co-unity. Following the victorious October
Revolution, the nanaps sought to retain in control and endeavored to set the
members of the co-Inity against Soviet rule.

The 2d Congress of the Uzbekistan Co-unist Party (1925) stated in its
resolutions that the land question had not been resolved in Uzbekistan right up
to 19%. The congress resolution stated: "Vestiges of feudal relations in the
kishlaks, expressed in the existence of private ownership of land and leading
to the concentration of sore than one third of cultivated land in the hands of
a snall group of landed gentry and urban and rural bai-hulah eleunts, and
bondage of the poor and niddle peasant strata of the hishlak, have not yet been
eradicated."6

The conduct of the dekhkans was to a substantial degree deter-ined precisely
by the fact that the agrarian question had not been resolved. Not having

felt through their personal aperience the great changes of land ownership,
the dekhkans renained to a substantial degree dependent on and mder the in-
fluence of the old erploiters and clergy, who were calling upon the- to coebat
Soviet rule. At the she tine basnschi activities seriously comlicated and
inpeded the inplenentation of radical agrarian referee. The class eneny was
counting precisely on this: through baa-schi activities they hoped to preserve
the old socioecononic relations and, preserving than, to leave a base for new
has-achi outbursts.

Distortions of party nationalities policy, co-itted chiefly by chauvinist,
nationalist and socialist revolutionary elenents which had infiltrated agencies
of Soviet authority in Central Asia, proeoted the enlistnent of a certain

part of the dekhkans into basaachi gangs. Distortin, the nationalities

policy of the Soviet authorities, alien elenents aroused distrust among the

backward segnent of the dekhkans, a fact which was extensively exploited by
the organizers of the has-chi.

The political and cultural backwardness of the dehhkan nasses as well as their
religiOus prejudices offered a nutrient Iodin- for agitation by the “chi
leaders and reactionary clergy. In addition. the basaschi hindered overseeing
this backwardness by thwarting the political-education efforts on the part of
the Soviet authorities. engaging in terrorist actions not only against Soviet
activists but also against any bearers of progress and culture. nor should
one underestinate the significance of terrorist activity, with the aid of which
the basaschi kurbsshi coapelled dekhhans to join their forces. Coercion and
int iaidation as well as eaployaent of the nethod of holding hostiges (persons,
livestock. property) resulted in thousands of persons who hated the bamchi

170

FOIOFFIGALUSEONLY
enlisting in their ranks against their own will, subsequently having great
difficulty in returning to a peaceful life.

The organizers of the has-echi took advantage of the difficult econonic
situation in Iurkestan on the eve of the Great October Socialist Revolution.
A decline in cotton growing led to the iwoverishnent of hmdreds of
thousands of dekhkan failies. ‘i'he basachi leaders nade every effort to en-
list into their hands inpoverished dekhkens vho could not obtain vork in
agriculture. And the bamchi activities in turn were leading to a worsening

of the financial plight, retaining this reserve for replenishing basaechi
forces.

The participation of a certain order of dekhkane in hasnchi detect-ants did
not give base-chi activities the character of a popular novenent. The clain
that the basaachi were supported by the aejority of the indigenous popula-
tion of Turkestan throughout the civil war constitutes slander against the
peoples of Central Asia. Let us recall that on the eve of the Great October
Socialist Revolution V. I. Lenin wrote: “The broad aasses of the oppressed
nation... have greater trust in the proletariat of Russia than in the
bourgeoisie.... The bourgeoisie has foully betrayed the cause of freedo- of
oppressed nations, while the proletariat is faithful to the cause of freedom"7
It is quite natural that the toiler lessee of Turkestan could not support the
hasnachi. who were their inveterate class males.

The overwhelning najority of the toiler population of Central Asia had con-
tenpt and hatred for the has-achi. lit-stone facts. reflected in archival
doculents and in the recollections of the participants in the events of those
years. attest to the negative attitude toward the beseechi on the part of the
aajority of residents of the kishleks and auls and attest to the fact that the
toiling Urbeks. Tajiks. Turbens. Kirghiz. Kasakhs. and lara-Kalpaks fought
against the has-achi. The 6th Congress of the or (August 1921). analysing

the results of the struggle against the Malachi for the preceding years, noted
in its resolution that the njority of the dekhkan toiler aesses ”do not

smathize with but oppose this oovenent (the has-echi - Auth.), these
sentiaents being based on an overaastering desire to liquidate the has-achi at
all costs and as quickly as possible."3

The m Central Co-ittee accoutability report to the 1th m Congress en-
phasized that the nasses were fighting the basaechi. At the sue tine it was
pointed out that the overthrown eaploiter classes Were endeavoring to give
the basnachi a political coloration. to provide a specific progran. and to
turn it into a broad popular noveaent."9

Hany popular Uzbek. Tajik, and Turk-en songs fro. the tine of the struggle
against the hasnachi have been preserved. All of then speak of the baa-achi
as butchers. oppressors. and brigade.

He harvested the grain -
‘rhe banachi took it away.

The hasnachi left us
Grief, aisfortune. and tears.10

171

MWLUSEONLY
I“ Wdelﬂdo Uét. BALI

As has been indicated in this book, the majority of toilers of the indigenous
nationalities did not support the bastachi. This was the nain reason for

the defeat of the basaachi. and this was one of the nost iaportant conditions
for the victory of Soviet power over the united forces of the interventionists
and donestic counterrevolution in Central Asia.

Basaachi activities, sharing and then flaring up once again. continued for a
period of alaost 15 years in certain areas. A question arises: what is the
reason for the great duration of this struggle? lie discussed above the so-
cial roots of the baeaachi and the internal factors proaoting their spread.
The external factor, however, should be acknowledged as the main factor
causing the vitality of the basaachi. Foreign support, given on a mat exten-
sive scale, ensured the initial upsurge on the part of the basachi, their
subsequent expansion, and galvanized and inspired subsequent flareups of
basnachi activity. Once can consider to be an absolutely proven fact that the
Anglo-American intelligence services, with the assistance of official represen-
tatives in China. Iran, and Afghanistan, and supported by the ractionery
circles in those countries, were in constant contact with has-achi leaders and
bourgeois-nationalist organizations and directed their activities. All
proainent bamchi leaders were agents in the eaploy of the 0.5. and British
intelligence services. It was precisely foreign organizers. foreign aras and
gold which ensured the establish-eat of nany baaaachi bands -- large and
snnll. The significance of this factor was particularly graphically nanifested
in the final stages of the banachi. Throughout the period of a nuber of
years the principal hasnschi cadres. following defeats. were ensconced safely
and snugly across the border. There the bands arned. reorganized, added per-
sonnel, and free there invaded Soviet territory, in order once again to suffer
defeat and once again to take refuge abroad.

A statement by H. V. Frunze (Hay 1920) that the has-achi. "lacking support
anong the local population," were finding support "abroad, in British. Afghan
and Bukharan gold and arns,"11 excellently characterizes the role of foreign
assistance.

Thousands upon thousands of facts confirn that the baslnchi were receiving
money. arms. equipnent and clothing fron abroad and attest to the participa-
tion of foreign nilitary units. instructors, and advisers in conbst operations.
and to the infiltration of numerous agents, couriers, and saboteurs. Many of
these facts have been acknowledged and corroborated by forner nilitary
officers. diplomats. and intelligence officers of foreign countries.

Basnachi thenselves rise and again gave daaning testimony on the guiding role
of their foreign nasters. lbragia-bek, one of the nost prominent basnachi
leaders, stated to the investigators that when the invasion of Setiet
Tajikistan was being planned, persons representing the forner Bukharan enir
gave his. lbragin-bek. detailed instructions "pertaining to the further
struggle against Soviet rule," supplying the basaschi with arns, a-unition,
etc. lbragin-bek was to "head for the Soviet border. cross it and organize an
extensive novenent against Soviet rule."12 aor did IbregLo-bek conceal the
following "ninor" detail: a British representative took part in the discussion
of all these matters.
Analyzing the history of the struggle against the basmechi, one inescapably
reaches the following conclusion: without foreign support the baa-chi move-

ment could not have asstned such a substantial scale and could not have con-
tinued for such an extended tine.

International reaction assigned to the basmachi an important role in strategic
anti-Soviet plans both during the period of struggle for the victory of the
October Revolution, during the years of civil war. and at subsequent historical
stages. At first the objective was to prevent a victory of Soviet power in
Central Asia. When this failed. international reaction decided, with the aid
of the basmachi. to iapede the building of socialism and to establish a large
anti-Soviet bridgehead. At all stages it was the fervent aim of the foreign
patrons of the bassachi to turn Central Asia into a colony. In case of victory
by the basmachi. the toilers of Central Asia were to pay with their own sweat
and blood. bearing a colonial yoke, for the rifles and mschinegune which had
so generously been provided to Dshunaid-khan, Ibragim-bek and their ilk.

The basnschi were living as parasites on the ignorance of the masses. on the
dominance of religion, and on economic backwardness. The counterrevolution
was attempting to incite a wave of nationalism. seeking to profit from the
hostility of the nasses toward the policy of national oppression which had been
conducted by caries in the preceding years.

Development of the basmachi was fostered by the economic-geographic isolation
of any areas of Central Asia. which was intensified in connection with the
total encirclement of Turkestan by civil war fronts, which toolt place twice -
in the su-er of 1918 and in the spring of 1919. The basmschi were not cut
off from the other Turkestsn fronts (Transcaspian, Seeirech'ye, Orenburg13) by
a conbat zone. The development of fronts in Turkestan pursued a single ob-
jective. They were closely interlinked and in the final analysis guided by a
single conductor -- Anglo-American iaperialism, which was hoping to strangle
Soviet rule throughout Central Asia by launching a cosbined attack from the
Fergana. Bukhara. the Transcaspian. and the Semirech'ye. One's attention is
also drawn by the fact that subsequently basaschi bands were entrenched in
areas situated in the sountaina or in the desert, in areas with an isolated
patriarchal economy, with practically no links with the outside world. This
cultivated econonic backwardness and impeded sociopolitical development. It
is not surprising that the focal centers of basmachi activity were most per-
sistent precisely in such renote, isolated areas.

The basnachi did considerable detrieent to the republics of Central Asia. The
immense economic devastation in turkestan, Bukhara and Khorezn following the
defeat of the main forces of the interventionists and White Guard was to a
substantial degree the result of basnschi actions. But even in the first half
of the 1920's. when the Soviet nation was undertaking peaceful economic con-
struction, in a number of areas of Central Asia fighting was continuing,
people were dying. crops were being trampled, kishlaks were being burnt to the
ground. and livestock was being driven off. The Central Asian republics also
Sustained enormous losses during the basmachi raids of 1929-1932. It was not
merely a matter of losses. however. The struggle against the basmachi was
diverting the people‘s energies away from accomplishing productive tasks and

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UV“ V. see-ans. hp“..- 9-9“.

was hindering consolidation of the soviets and cultural development. All
this cosplicated and to a certain degree inpeded the building of socialise.

The struggle against the has-achi demnstrated the invincible power of the
Soviet systen. The broad nasses. united under the leadership of the Comist
Party. becane active fighters and builders of a new life. neither the in—
vocations of nyrmidons of the comterrevolution nor terrorist acts by the
basnachi could force them to turn froa their chosen path.

The workers of Central Asia displayed outstanding staunchness and courage.
with the aid of the workers of Central Russia, they became the cementing
nucleus in the young republics of the East and led the nillions of toiling
dekhkans. The dekhkan nasses, the vast najority of whom supported Soviet rule,
subsequently becane increasingly more active and resolute in standing to its
defense. Tens of thousands of dekhkms who fought against the basmachi in

the ranks of the Red Artsy, in volunteer detach-ants and self-defense forces
were the genuine spokesmen for the thoughts and feelings of the people.

Liquidation of the basmachi signified victory of the lofty ideals of socialise
and progress. This was a victory over intellectual darkness and ignorance,
over ethnic and religious prejudices, over social, economic, and political

backwardness. over feudal-bai carryovers, and over the force of clan-tribal
ties.

The defeat of the has-schi in Central Asia was of significance not only for the
subsequent fate of the peoples of the Soviet East. It also thwarted to a
considerable degree the plans of foreign imperialism to strangle the national
liberation move-cut in the colonial Bast, particularly in China and India.

Huscovite and Uzbek workers, the Fergana dekhkan, the Ukrainian peasant and
Bukharan handicraft worker fought shoulder to shoulder against the baanachi,
and Taj ik "krasnopalochniki" supported the Red Any coapany in the assault.
The friendship anong peoples, sealed by col-Ionly shed blood, becane tempered
and strengthened in this struggle. Liquidation of the basnachi would have been
impossible without a class alliance of the toilets of all nationalities of
Central Asia. A military-political alliance between the worker class and the
toiling dekhkans, which became a decisive social and political force in
achieving victory over the eneny, was created and became strengthened in the
course of the struggle against the basnachi. A nost inportant factor which
ensured strengthening of this alliance in the conditions of Central Asia was
unswerving inplenentation of Lenin's nationalities policy by the mist
Party. The ideology of proletarien inter-nationalism gained victory over the
envenomed weapon of nationalism.

The toilers of our entire country rendered fraternal assistance to the
peoples of Central Asia in the difficult struggle against our enenies. This
assistance was a vivid exaaple of perfornancs of internationalist duty.

The Leninist nationalities policy implemented by the Com-mist Party ensured
creation and strengthening of an alliance of peoples, the advance and

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
prosperity of the national Soviet socialist republics. The toners of Central
Asia aarched to the victory of socialise as a single fanily, shoulder to
shoulder. fighting and building. and together with the entire Soviet people
are successfully advancing along the road of building eo-mien.

At the end of the civil war the dehhkans of Uzbekistan cosposed a song, which
went as follows:

The am has risen above the muntains.
The ice has nelted throughout the world.
Our govern-ant is with us,

The people have expelled the bastachi.“

The words of this popular song speak of the glory of the people and the in-
glorioua end of the baa-achi.

Blinination of the baeuchi becane possible thanks to the leadership of the
party Central Co-ittee. which attached enornnus importance to preserving and
strengthening Soviet rule in mrkestan. and subsequently in the Central Asian
republics as well. as a beacon of socialise for the entire Bast. Attesting to
this are repeated discussion in the Central Co-ittee Politburo of setters per-
taining to the struggle against the beanschi. adoption by the highest party
body of critical decisions which deter-ined the policy of defeating the
bamchi. as well as the fact that it sent to the basaachi fronts such
prestigious party. goverment and military leaders as H. V. Prunes, V. V.
Kuyhyshev. G. R. 0rdrhonikidre, Ya. 3. kudrutak, S. I. Guscv, Sb. 2. Eliava.
S. S. Kaaenev, and S. H. Budennyye.

The finest sons of the peoples of Central Asia and Kazakhstan and proninent
party-govern-ent officials led the fight against the banachi together with
then and under their direction: ll. Aytakov, K. S. Atabayev, Yuldash Akhunbaheyew,
B. D. Dadabayev, I. A. Zelenskiy, Ahal' Ikremv. Turar Ryskulov. lazir
Tyurakulov. and Psyzulla Khodshayew. Proninent nilitary leaders were assigned
to the Turkestan fronts: K. A. Avksent'yevshiy. I. P. Below, P. Ye. Dybenko,
A. l. Kort, h. K. Levandovskiy, A. I. Todorskiy. V. D. Soholovskiy, and V. I.
Shorin. Party-political work along the troops of Turkestan was conducted by
Yu. I. Ibraginov. D. I. Henrhara. II. A. Paskutskiy, Ta. Rh. Peters, D. P.
Sslikov, Rh. Sakhstauradon 3. Tursmklodrtayev, [ha-ea Khakis-rule, and
Abdulls Yanukhaaedov. Courage and herois- were displayed by front co-snders,
co-anders of groups of forces, coﬁined units and units: ll. A. Verevkin-
Rokhal'skiy. V. H. lonov. I. S. Kutyakov. l. P. Kuts. I. I. Lansnov, Va. A.
Hel'kunov. Hirhaail' Hirsharapov, P. A. Pavlov. I. Ye.Petrov, II. V. Safonov.

A. P. Sokolov. II. D. Tonin, I. P. Ped'ko, Ya. D. Chanyshev, and T. T. Shapkin.
Internationalists free the countries of Europe and Asia who gained fame in-
cluded B. P. Kuxhelo. G. S. Markovich. and He Sanchi. The names of Yskub
Kuliyev. A. A. Luchinskiy. N. G. Lyashchenko. Abdulla liabiyev. A. Osmonbehov,
Sahir Rakhinov. Yuldash Sakhibnararov, H. Sultanow, and Ye. Khanidov were in-
scribed in the chronicle of the heroic struggle against the basaachi.

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UV. veeesme- well.- v-‘hi

The baseschi suffered a logical, historically dictated defeat. Victory over
then was of enornous significance, since the beseechi waned the ai- of
detaching the peoples of Central Asia fron Soviet Russia. of overthrowing
Soviet rule, of restoring the do-inion of the khans, heke, bei, and local na-
tional bourgeoisie, and of transforning Central Asia into a colony of in-
perielien. The hunchi were fighting against the socialist path of develop-
nent of Central Asia and for preservation of the old, prerevolutionary order.
Consequently the struggle of the toiler nasses against the hasnehi vas a
struggle to defend the achievements of the Great October Socialist Revolution
and for trimh of the cause of socialist.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPENDIX

Historiographic Survey

Professional historians, party and soviet officials. ailitary leaders and ar
tive participants in the civil war have devoted their research and nenoirs to
the history of the anergence of the basaachi, their roots, the war against

then, and their final defeat. Extensive literature has been ansssed up to the
present tine, which requires synthesis and a historiographic appraisal, not only
to review what has been written but also to deteraine new horizons of research
work, which is of great political and theoretical-cognitive significance.1

Fornatiou of the problem emined in this hook took place for the aost part
within the boundaries of the generally accepted periodization of developaent
of historical science of the Soviet society, since the general patterns of
developnent of historical science in the USSR are characteristic of literature
on the basnachi. At the sane tine certain specific features of study of this
subject have also been observed, which is natural for such a unique
phenoaenon as the class struggle which was fought in the outlying areas of
distant. backward Central Asia.

The first period — foraation and close examination of the subject of the
energence and defeat of the basaschi: fro. the beginning of the 1920's to the
end of the 1950's.

The second, contemporary period. when the lost substantial success in research
has been achieved: fron the end of the 1950's to the present.

There are also individual stages within these periods.

The formation and developaent of Soviet historical science is closely linked
with the organization and inprovenent of a systen of scientific-historical
centers. The heart of their activities. as of the entire front of Soviet
social sciences investigation, was the caapaign for confirmation of hernia-
Leninisn as the ineologicsl-theoretical and nethodological foundation of
scientific achievement.

177

POROFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Us}. ONLY

In Turkestan the first scientific centers around which congregated young

cadres of historians, party-soviet and military officials, who on the party's
instructions began synthesizing the experience of the October Revolution and
the civil war. included the Turkestan People's (from 1920 — State) U iversity,
the TurkTle Commission to Study the History of the Revolutionary Movement,
established at the end of 1921. and the Commission on History of the Turkestan
Communist Party, formed that same year. In 1922 the Commission on History of
the October Revolution and the Turkestan Communist Party (Turkbyuro Istparta)
began functioning in 1922 under the auspices of the Thrkestan Co-unist Party
Central Committee; this commission was subsequently transformed into the Central
Central Asian lstpartbyuro (Department of History of the Party and the

October Revolution of the VKP(b) Central Committee Sredazbyuro, which existed
up to 1930).2 Military-scientific societies were being established at the same
time. Problen topics connected with the basmachi were also being elaborated at
the Turkestan (subsequently the Central Asian) worker-Peasant Con-unist
University, which existed in 1921-1931; this institution trained cadres of
scientific workers from representatives of indigenous nationalities. The
Society for the Study of Kirghizstan and the Historical—Regional Studies Com-
mittee of the Turkmenistan TsIK, plus certain other scientific organisations
dealt with these same problems to a certain degree.

Study of the history of the Soviet society and the civil war, including the
basmachi, began during those years when the flame of struggle was still
blazing in Turkestsn. The most characteristic feature of the “embryonic"
state of historiography was the fact that those who were beginning to in-
vestigate the history of the formation of the Soviet society were themselves
actively participating in the struggle for the victory of Soviet power, which
was entirely logical. This was dictated not only by the lack of professional
historians and established archives. but also by'the fact that the process

of accumulation of knowledge was only just beginning and that the par-
ticipants in the struggle against the basmachi were endeavoring to make the
amassed experience available to the broad masses. Therefore study of events
took on enormous political and indoctrinational significance from the very
outset.

Personal recollections were extensively utilized in many works written soon
after the events themselves. The first works by Marxist historians were
small articles. published chiefly in the journals ZHIZN' NATSIONAL'NOSTEY.
KOVYY VOSTOK (Moscow). KOHHUNIST, VOYENNAYA HYSL', VOYENNYY RABOTNIK

TL RKESI‘ANA. KRASNAYA LETOPIS' TURKESTANA (Tashkent), and others.

A correct understanding of the history of the class struggle in Central Asia
was connected first and foremOSt with publication in periodicals, including
those published in indigenous languages, of the works of V. l. Lenin, and
mastery of the Lenin legacy by historians.

History ox the struggle against the basmachi. as well as certain other topics

pertaining to history of the Soviet society, became an area of knowledge in

which a fierce ideological struggle developed. Party member-historians, who
were still in the military or doing party-soviet work. endeavored to interpret

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the course of historical events which were taking place before their eyes.
Their attention was focused not only on combat operations on the Turkestan
Front but also on such important probleas as the class nature of the basnachi,
their political objectives, and the role of British imperialism in organizing
hasmachi forces. At the same time those who were expressing the interests of
the national and the Russian bourgeoisie, feudal-clerical circles and the
former colonial bureaucracy were falsifying the great achievements of the
October Revolution, the nationalities policy of the Communist Party, and the
course of events of the civil war. Thus at the very dawn of existence of the
Soviet State, Soviet historical science entered into an uncompromising
struggle against the ideologues of the opposing class camp. he should note
that not all Communist-historians, and not immediately, were able correctly to
assess the history of the establishment and consolidation of Soviet power in
Turkestan. the history of the Turkestan Communist Party during the civil war
years, and the history of the struggle against the baanachi.

The journals VOYENNAYA HYSL' (published by the Turkestan Front Revvoyensovet)
and ZHIZN' NATSIONAL'NOSTEY were among the first to develop the topic of the
basnachi. The two years' issues of VOYENNAYA HYSL' for 1920-1921 contained
several articles, chiefly about the Pergana basaachi, including an article by
one of the leaders of the Turkestan Communist Party, Nasir Tyurahulov (T.
Dervish).3 while V. Kuvshinov expressed the idea that it would be useless to
seek the causes behind the emergence of the basnachi ”in the conditions of
realities of the revolutionary time." R. Shklyar was one of the first to show
that the basnachi constituted a politically counterrevolutionary phenonenon
which "is nourished primarily by substantive support by the bai and wealthy
profiteers"; as a consequence of this the basnachi were waging a struggle, as
he put‘it, against the ”peaceful villagers," who were "on the side of Soviet
rule."

An attempt to investigate the class roots of the basmachi was undertaken by
N. Tyurakulov, whoa V. V. Kuybyshev called "an outstanding person of natural
gifts, a Marxist-thinking person."5 Opposing the point of View according to
which the basmachi constitute "a criminal anthropological atavism." allegedly
characteristic of the inhabitants of Central Asia, N. Tyurakulov defined the
basnachi as "a counterrevolutionary petit-bourgeois element," as a product of
the economic and social conflicts of a transition period. the breaking of the
old, precapitalist native society and the birth of a new society.6 A vulgar-
economic approach could not, however, produce fruitful results in
elucidating the true nature of the analysed phenomenon.

Some political writers (A. Vinogradova et a1) were the first to attempt to

gain an understanding of the distribution of class forces and the social com-
position of the Khoreza hasnachi.7 They state questions pertaining to the
place of individual Turhnen tribal leaders in the struggle against the basmachi
and the role of British imperialism in organizing the hasaachi in the KPSR.

The latteg question was specifically addressed in an article by V. A. Gurko-
Kryazhin. There was not sufficient data available in the 1920's, however.

fully to reveal the counterrevolutionary activities of inperialism pertaining
to guiding the basmachi.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IN3R¢OFFICJAI.IJSIZ(N‘LY

The process of formation of this complex topic took place in a tenacious
struggle. Attempts to falsify the history of the Turkestan Conunist Party

were revealed. including its stru e against the basmacbi. A vivid example

of this was a book by G. Safarov. written by a future active participant in
the Trotskyite-Zinov'yev opposition bloc. it contained an antiscientific analysis
of the main questions pertaining to the history of the first years of Soviet
rule in Turkestan and distorted Communist Party policy in the Soviet East and
the history of the struggle against the basmachi. G. Safarov incorrectly
analyzed the causes behind the emergence of the basmachi and the degree of
participation by the toilers of indigenous nationalities.1° G. Safarov's

views were uncritical}! accepted by N. Batmanov. G. skalov, S. Ginsburg. D.
Zuyev. and A. Syrkin.

Errors in interpretation of the essence of the basmachi were caused both by the
inadequate theoretical and methodological training of the first historians and

political writers and by the extremely narrow range of sources utilised in
their scholarship.

Articles by F. Khodzhayev and Di-Hur on the basmachi. and books by S. Ayni,
P. Alekseyenkov, N. A. Paskutskiy, and Ye. Kozlovskiy were a certain indicator
of initial successes in investigation of the history of the basmachi.12

Broadening of the territorial and chronological framework of study of this
topic was a new element.

A book by famed Central Asian writer and historian Sadriddin Ayni gave
historiographers reason to place him among the ranks of the first historians
of the people's revolution who laid down the foundations or study of the
basnachi on the territory of the B?Sk.13

In his brief article (four pages of text) Di-Hur correctly stated that the
EasuanuHurau basmachi had free beginning to end deployed "under the banner of
reactionary feudalism, which is attempting to unite all anti-Soviet, counter-
revolutionary elements behind a broad pan-Islamic program."1‘ Developing this
initial thesis. Di-Hur showed that slogans about the commonality of interests
and goals of the indigenous inhabitants of Central Asia being preached by the
exploiter elite and clergy are alien to the teller masses and "are directed
only at a narrow stratum of the Muslim intelligentsia and merchant class."15
Former beks, mullahs, bureaucrats, and Turkish officers were the leaders of
the basmachi, noted Di-Nur.

The ideas stated by Di-Hur. just as prior to that time the ideas presented

by the authors of articles in VOYENNAYA HYSL‘, were not further developed
initially, however. It is possible that these writings were not even known to
some historians.

P. Alckseyenhw made an appreciable contribution to elaboration of the history
of the struggle against the basmachi. Studying the question of a "peasant
rebellion" in the Fergana, he succeeded in fairly completely showing the
history of unification of the basmachi and the Russian kulaks for a joint
struggle against Soviet rule and in describing the heroic defense of Andizhan
and the defeat of the united kulak-basmachi forces. The author attempted to

180

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
analyze the causes of the victory by the Red Arny and the failure of the forces
of the counterrevolution. Many pages in P. Alekseyenkodb book, in spite of

the fact that they were written nore than 50 years ago, have still retained
their scholarly significance and even today are read with great interest.

P. Alekseyenkov also deserves credit for the fact that he was the first to
show the activities of the local party organizations as well as the nobilizing
and guiding role of the uyezd-city committees in the struggle against the
basnachi.

while P. Alekseyenhov specifically focused on the history of the struggle
against the basnachi. Ye. Kozlovskiy showed in his book on the Red Army in
Turkestan how the toilet nasses of Khoreze - Uzbeks and Turksens - or-
ganized for the struggle against the bands of Dehunaid-hhan.

One con-on shortcoming of the first studies of the basmachi was the fact that
their authors made almost no mention of the link between the facts they were
describing and the events taking place at that tine on other fronts in
Turkestan. and particularly throughout the entire Soviet Republic.

At the end of the 1920's and beginning of the 1930's developnent of historiography
of Central Asia was beneficially influenced by celebration of the 10th an-
niversary of the October Revolution and establishment in 1929. at the ini-
tiative of the VKP(b) Central Connittee Sredazbyuro. of the Central Asian
Association of Scientific nesearch Establishments (SAANIU),16 which in-

cluded a Marxist historian section, which laid the foundations for the

Central Asian Society of Marxist Historians (1930-1939). Subsequently his-
torical science in Central Asia developed during a period of 12 years with

the assistance of the party Central Connittee Sredasbyuro (from April 1922
through October 193$). In 1930, on the basis of the 28 hay 1928 decree of

the VKP(b) Central Con-ittee entitled “0n ﬁeorganization of Istpart," which
called for establishnant of party-history scientific research institutes based
on local istparts, Sredasistpart was reorganized into the Central Asian
Scientific Research Institute of History of the Revolution (SANIIR). Party
influence on the development of historiography of the civil war in Turkestan
was also exerted by the journals of the Sredazbyuro, other party and sci-
entific organs -- 2A PARTIYU. PARTRABOTNIK, KOHMUNISTICHBSKAXA HYSL'. and
REVOLYUTSIONNYY VOSIOK. The first reviews of works on history of the civil
war in Turkestan appeared in these and other journals (including those pub-
lished in Moscow) and publications.17 A campaign was being waged both against
Trotskyites and nationalists, who were attempting to distort the heroic
struggle with the counterrevolution. as well as against foreign falsifiers of
history, who were seeking to justify British intervention in Turhestan.18

work was in progress to organize archives and put them in order. of great
importance was establishment of a unified party archives at the Lenin Institute
in 1929. by decision of the 15th Party Congress and taking into account the
recommendations of the VKP(b) Central Committee. Local party archives were
being made into branches of the Central Party Archives. A Unified Party
Archives of the RKP(b) Central Committee Sredazbyuro was established in 1929.
Documents of party organizations (up to 1924) of Uzbekistan, Ta ikistan,
Turkmenistan, and Kirghizia were concentrated at this facility. 9

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR10FFHJAI.USE(NVLY

All these organizational measures promoted the accumulation and assimilation
of a large quantity of factual material on the hasmachi, which had an effect
on deepening of investigative research on this topic. A positive role was
also played by further work in the area of study of the common problems of
the history of Soviet Iurkestan and the Turkestan Communist Party, as well as
the Khorezm and Bukhara republics and their party organisations.

Development of study of the problem of the basmachi was furthered by books

by D. A. Furnanov, S. Huraveyskiy (V. Lopukhov). T. Ryskulov, and A. Hel'kuaov
(with a preface by l. Vareykis), as well as the three-volume "Grazhdanshaya
voyna 19123-192133." [The Civil Her. ism-19211.20 At the same time some
authors. T. Ryskulov and S. Huraveyskiy in particular. did not fully com-
prehend the class nature of the basaachi. T. Iyskulov ignored the processes
of stratification in the kishlak and aul and therefore was unable to show the
class foundations of the basmachi. S. Huraveyakiy saw the roots of the
basnachi chiefly in the econonic crisis and economic chaos.

The first major specialized study of the bssmachi, written by P. Alekseyenkov.
was published in 1931.21 Since this work determined for a number of years

the directional thrust of research in this area, we shall examine it in greater
detail.

Having formulated the question: “Just what is the hasmachestvo?" P.
Alekseyenkov proposed the following definition: basmachestvo is a “form of
struggle by capitalist elenents against the socialist development of Gen ral
Asia." He wrote that the basmachestvo was "antinational in character.”2

These theses unquestionably represented a step forward in study of this prob-
len. but were not yet adequate for a scientific understanding of it. since one
cannot agree that the basmachestvo is merely "a form of struggle by [capitalist
elements] (our italics - Auth.) against the socialist development of Central
Asia.“ Bourgeois (Russian and local) strata of the population and representa-
tives of feudal circles also joined the basmachi. The last group were the
predominant force in the basnachi.

P. Alekseyenkov traced in a fair amount of detail the difference between the
prerevolutionary and the post-October basnachi and characterized the process

of class differentiation in the Turkestan kishlak. One can on the whole

agree with the author's following conclusions: the post-October basmachi
”essentially were in no degree whatsoever a continuation or development of the
pro-October basaachi"; "the post-October basaachestvo took from the pre-October
hasnachestvo in the main only its external form, while in essence it was a
movement independent of it. had absolutely specific socioeconomic causes and
set for itself objectives which were to 3 significant degree different from
those of the pre-October basnachestvo."2 He shall note that the author is in-
correct in considering the basmachi activities to be a'hovement.9

The author. just as in his preceding work. addressed the role of the subjective
factor in formation of the basmachi. He stood firmly on his position that
errors in the area of nationalities policy could not be the "cause of the
emergence of the basmachi."2‘ In his opinion they were merely exploited by
caunterrevolutionary forces for their own purposes. Such a statement of the
question was an important contribution by the author.

182
i1)340FFICJAI.lﬁ5Ei(HNLY
P. Alekseyenkov also sought to answer the following question: what was the
attitude of the toiling dekhkans toward the basnachi?

ihﬂe in his preceding book ("The Kokand Autonomy"25) P. Alekseyenkov per-
suasively argued that following the October Revolution the great majority of
the dekhkans were not active supporters of the bourgeois nationalists, in his
book on the basnachi, while correctly noting that the basaachi were diversi-
fied in social structure. he unwarrantedly stated, however. that the dekhkans
supported the hasnachi. constituting their principal nanpower pool.26 It is
true that the author did sake the reservation that this applies only to the
"first years of the basaachi nova-ant" and by no neans signifies that all the
dekhkans of Turkestan supported the baa-achi. Even with these stipulations,
however. his conclusion does not correspond to the historical truth. One's
attention is drawn to the fact that P. Alekseyenkov stated his conclusion
without any reference to sources.

Thus although P. Alekseyenkov formulated a large nunber of questions per-
taining to the struggle against the basnachi, he was unable to present an
integral scientific picture.

i. Kutyakov. one of the military leaders in the struggle against the basmachi,
addressed the history of the defeat of the bssmachi at the same time as

P. Alekseyenkov.27 Basing his presentation on his own personal observations
and archival docunents. he endeavored to analyze thereasons for the relative-
ly protracted basnachi operations in Khorern. The author drew upon a large
quantity of factual naterial, which serves to clarify the course of conhat
operations by the Red Army and nilitary units of the KPSR. The theoretical
value of this book was diminished to a great extent due to the introductory
article by its editor, N. Kakurin, in which the roots of the hasmachi are in-
correctly characterized.

For a long period of tine following publication of the book by P. Alekseyenkov
and I. Kutyakov, no special suuies dealing with the struggle against the
basnachi were published. Individual elements were touched upon in general
works (for example. V. Borhko, "Grazhdanskaya voyna v Sredney Azii" [The Civil
Har in Central Asia]. Tashkent. 1930; D. l. Hanzhara, "Revolyutsionnoye
dvizheniye v Sredney Asii" [The Revolutionary Hovenent in Central Asia],
Tashkent. 1934).

Thus the initial stage of accumulation of knowledge on the topic is character-
ized by an intense class and ideological struggle. Questions pertaining to
study of the history of the defeat of the basmschi were defined during this
tine. The problem of the social and class essence of the basnachi and the
attitude of the toiling dekhkans toward them was becoming the central focus of
scientific investigation. The topic of the role of British inperialiss in
organizing bssmachi forces was also specified.

in the Subsequent period. covering alnost 20 years, the historiography of this
prohien became enriched with new topics and theoretical points.

183

FOIiOFFKJAl.US£(MNLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Further development of scholarly work on the problems of the civil war was
pronoted by a VKP(b) Central Co-ittee decree dated 30 July 1931 on publica-
tion of a multivolune history of the civil war in the USSR. A. ll. Gor‘kiy,
initiator of this publication, net with medaers of the Bureau of the Central
Asian Association, veterans of the revolution and the civil war -- A. A.
Kazakov, P. l. Kolesov, and N. A. Paskutskiy — for the purpose of activating
efforts in the area of collecting materials and elaboration of the history

of the October Revolution and the civil war. The newspaper masonotsrs
UZBEKISTANA published a telegram from A. H. Gor'ltiy to the veterans of the
revolutionary struggle, in which he emphasised that "the history of the civil
war should show the selfless struggle by the toilers of the national republics
for Soviet rule, for the world proletarian revolution, and for socialism."
The telegram ended with the appeal: "Gather in a shock-work manner material
on the history of the civil war in your republic."28

The job of collecting materials was directed by the VKP(b) Central Cousittee
Sredazbyuro, the central co-ittees of the Com-mist parties of the union
republics. the Central Asian Scientific Research Institute of Harxism-Leninisn
under the VKP(b) Central Comittee Sredazbyuro, established in 1933 on the
base of SANIIR, and republic institutes of the history of Harsisn-Leninisa,
history of the revolutionary movesent, and history of the party.29 Numerous
get-togethers were held with veterans of the civil war. At the same tine the
press began carrying extensive criticise of great-power-chauvinist and
baurgeois-nationalist ideas on history of the party and history of national-
statehood organizational developnent.

VKP(b) Central Comittee and USSR Sovnarlnon decrees in 1936-1936 on teaching
civil history and the development of historical science, undertakings in the
area of planning scientific research, as well as eatablisl-ent of departments
and faculties of history at the universities and pedagogic higher educational
institutions in the Central Asian republics in turn pronoted the developnent
of scientific research work on history of the civil war and the defeat of the
basnachi, a conponent part of civil war history.

Investigators could henceforth be guided by new materials from the Leninist
ideological legacy: the XVIII, XXI and XXIV Lenin collection volumes were pub-
lished in 1931-1933, containing docuaents on the civil war. Individual closu-

nents on the history of the civil war in Turkestan were being published at the
same time.30

At the end of the 1930's and beginning of the 1940's institutes of party his-
tory under the central comitteea of the Cot-lunist parties —- branches of
mu. [CPSU Central Comaittee Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute] -- were established
in the Central Asian republics.

A notable phenomenon in Central Asian historiography prior to the Great
Patriotic War was the publication of two small books which, although not
specifically dealing with the bssnachi, exerted considerable influence on
studies of this subject.31 K. Zhitov and V. Nepomin provided for the first
time in the Soviet literature a synthesized sketch of the history of colonial

1810

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N. Prokhorov, revealing the reasons for the collapse of the Bukhara emirate,
endeavored to define the character of the revolution and of revolutionary
transfornations in the BPSR.

ﬂew steps were taken in studying this problem in the 19‘0's and 1950's. No
books by S. P. Tinoshkov and a nonograph by A. Kb. nabakhodzhayev dealt with
the role of British imperialisn in organizing the basmachi and supplying them
with weapons and mition.32aWs showed for the first time in
Soviet historiography. utilizing a wealth of naterial. how British inperialisn
planned its aggressive policy toward the Soviet East. what ains it pursued.
and by what nethods it sought to achieve its objectives. He should note in
passing that the policy of 0.5. inperialisu in Central Asia and the nethods

of its iaplenentation have as yet been little studied.

Another topic which attracted the attention of historian was the role of the
‘l‘urkkonissiya of the V'l'sIK and BSPSR Sovnarkon and the arm) Central Com-
mittee Turkbyuro in the struggle against the basnachi following the final
unification of Turkestan with the country's central region (September 1919).33
As a result of fornulation of this topic and utilization of new sources.
chiefly obtained from central archives. the activities of the party Central
Comitteo and Soviet Goveth and their official agencies in Turkestan in
organizing the struggle against the basnachi began to be more thoroughly in-
vestigated. A number of aspects of party-political work among toilets of in-
digenous nationalisties were studied, and a change carried out under the
guidance of H. V. Frunze and V. V. Kuybyahev in the tactics of the struggle
against the basnachi was shown. At the same tine new subjects of investiga-
tion were specified: the extensive enlist-eat of toilers of indigenous minn-
.‘tlities into the Red Arny and onto the front of the struggle against the
basnachi. activities of local party and Soviet organisations in the kishlak
and aul. etc.

parallel with elaboration of the general questions of the civil war in Central
Asia, to treat nore thoroughly the history of the baenachi. Kirghisia, and

in part Turhenia and ‘raj ikistsn were particularly "fortunate" in this

regard.

Books by Aziz h‘ialio and P. P. Nikishov present a general picture of the
struggle against the basmachi in the areas of contemporary Kirghizia. It is
to the credit of P. P. Nikishov that he traces. although within a linited
framework (the southern part of Kirghizia), the struggle against the basmachi
f row the emergence of the first bands to liquidation of basnachi remnants in
1923. Investigations had not been conducted in the past within such a
chronological framework. At the sane tine these authors. just as some of
their predecessors, were unable fully to reveal the causes of the energence of
the basnachi. P. P. Nikishov. for emple, did not see a difference between
bandits of the pre-October period and the basIIachi. The bandit gangs operating
in Central Asia prior to the October Revolution. which were frequently called
basnachi, differed radically in their class origin and political thrust from
the basnachi who emerged following the defeat of the "Rolland Autonony."

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

6. Xepesov undertook to show the class composition of the Khorezm basmachi.

But the author was unable to cope with this task. His book was subjected to
harsh criticism.35 The ensuing debate indicated that extreme views existed

in appraising sane of the clan-tribal leaders who fought against Dshunaid-khan.
At the same tine it becaae clear that further scientific investigation of the
question is necessary. with the enploylent of archival data.

Tajik historians (H. lrkayev.k. Amanov. and I. T. Yusuf-sade) attempted to in-
vestigate on a coaparatively narrow source base (chiefly on the basis of the
reminiscences of participants in the civil war) the struggle against the
hasmachi in the central and southern areas of Tajikistan. They devoted partic-
ular attention to the libesgtion of Eastern Bukhara and the Hatchinskoye
Bekstvo from the basaachi.

D. Fan'yan and H. Zelinskaya. for the first tine in a popular scientific
pamphlet, dealt with coabat by Red Aray ethnic units against large basaachi
bands. The authors exaggerated, however, the degree of consciousness and or-
ganization of the toilers of indigenous nationalities in the first year
following overthrow of the emir's rule in Bukhara. Books by H. Irkayev and
Yu. Nikolayev also discuss the organization of volunteer ethnic detachments.37
Through their efforts the nanes of Tajik con-anders who fought for the
victory of Soviet rule became known to scholars.

The shortcomings of the books and articles published up to the end of the
1950's were due in large measure to the fact that they had a fairly narrow
source-material base. Highly valuable materials from central and local
archives were not yet available to scholars. There was extreaely little
collecting and publishing of memoirs of active participants in the civil war,
as a result of which soae important aspects of the historical process re-
mained almost totally uninvestigated.

Additional factors included the negative consequences of the cult of per-
sonality. as a result of which the decisive role of the assess was not adequate-
ly revealed. particularly the role of toilets of the indigenous nationalities,
in the struggle against the interventionists, Hhite Guard and basaachi; the

role of V. i. Lenin as organizer and leader of victories inthe civil war was

not investigated. and there was little analysis of the activities of local

partv and soviet organizations in the area of leading the toilet nasses. The
names of many party. soviet and military officials who played an important

role in the struggle against the basaachi received almost no mention in these
works.

The process of overcoming these and other deficiencies took place in the
productive atmosphere generated following the resolutions of the 20th CPSU
Congress. in the course of assisilating new scurces which became available to
scholars after the congress. and as a result of growth in cadres of historians
on Central Asia. Of particular importance were new publications of the Lenin-
ist ideological-theoretical legacy ("Voyennaya perepiska" [Military Cor-
respondenccl the lab voluae of the "Leninskiy sbornik" [Lenin Collection]), and
republication of the records of proceedings of the 8th, 9th, and 10th RKP(b)
congresses. The results of the activities of the institutes of history of the

186

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
union-republic Academies of Sciences and branches of the CPSU Central Committee
institute of Harxisn—heninism, which had become stronger and were engaged in

productive work. gradually had an effect. The latter published collected
voluaes of memoirs and reminiscencgs of participants in the October Revolution
and the civil war in Central Asia. The CPSU Central Committee Institute of
Marxism-Leninisa prepared and published in 1960-1961 a three-volume collec-
tion of documents entitled "Is istorii grashdanskoy voyny v SSSR" [Pros the
history of the Civil Her in the USSR]. Some of the documents are connected
with the basmachi. The introductions prefacing each of the volumes were of
independent scholarly significance.

The nest important feature of development of historical science in Central
Asia at the end of the 1950’s was the publication of synthesizing works on

the history of the Central Asian republics, which contain chapters on the
civil war, 9 in which questions pertaining to the struggle against the
basmachi are presented in a fair amount of detail. The role of the masses,
especially the toilers of indigenous nationalities, in the events taking place
in that time is investigated in these studies more extensively than in
preceding works, and an attespt is made to show the activities of the party
Central Committee, headed by V. I. Lenin. pertaining to guiding the local
party organizations and their campaign to defeat the enemy in the Central
Asian republics. The authors endeavored to investigate the civil war in
Turkestan. including the defeat of the basaachi as a component and integral
part of the civil war throughout the country. They stated, although they

did not fully resolve it. the question of the factors which ensured victory
over the united forces of the interventionists, Uhite Guard and basmschi in
the extraordinarily difficult conditions prevailing during the civil war

years in Turkestan. Soviet econoaic and cultural construction are shown fair-
ly completely. The activities of the Turkestsn Conmunist Party in mobilizing
the masses for the struggle against the basaachi are reflected. These studies
present for the first time a Marxist definition of the bssmachi as an ”ex-
pression of the class struggle of the hai and reactionary Muslims against
Soviet rule.""0 A shortcoming of these studies was the fact that they took
little account of objective economic processes and the correlation of class
forces at the various stages of the civil war in Central Asia.

In addition to summarising works on the history of the Soviet society, the
problem topics pertaining to the struggle against the basmschi were also
reflected in special studies.‘1

Tajik historians H. lrkayev, Yu. Nikolayev, and Ye. Sharapov, in connection
with the fact that the besmachi engaged in their anti-Soviet activities in
Eastern Bukhara following the victorious people's revolution in Bukhars at
the end of 1920. concluded the necessity of changing the chronological frame-
work of the civil war period for the territory of their republic. They hold
that the war began here in 1921 and continued up to and including 1926, when
the basmachi were defeated. A proainent place in their book is given to an
investigation of the methods of fighting the hasmschi in conditions where the
process of rebuilding the economy was taking place throughout the country.
The authors failed. however, to show the struggle against the basmachi in the
northern areas of Tajikistan and in the Pamirs.‘2

187

FOR OFFICIAI.US£10NLY
PW UPPILIAI. 1.135 Ul‘LI

Books by Sh. Iashliyev and H. Yasykova. as well as a monograph by S. N.
Pokrovskiy help gain an understanding of the specific conditions of the
struggle against the basmachi in Turkmenia, as well :1 to gain an understanding
of the mobilizing role of local party organizations.53

K. Halyshev endeavored to present a general picture of the defeat of the
basmachi in the southern part of Kirghizia. he demonstrated that the areas
of present-day Kirghizia and adjacent areas of Turkestan were targets of in-
terest on the part of the British and American imperialists. K. Halyshev's
thesis about a high degree of social differentiation in the kishlak and the
aul is debatable. Drawing attention to only one aspect of this process --
the gradual land dispossession of the poor, he failed to consider another
factor; the strong dependence of the dekhkan on the mullahs, the bai, the
manaps, clan and tribal vestiges, etc, nentioned by V. I. Lenin at the 8th
Congress of the RKP(b) when discussingthe party's draft prograa.

A popular scientific pamphlet by a. Kokanbayev discusses the struggle against
the basmachi in the Fergana Valley. This. as well as the basmachi in
Samarkandskaya Oblast (chiefly on the territory of the present Tajik SSR).

are discussed in a pamphlet by T. Kh. Kel'diyev. A. Kokanbayev specifies the
vanguard role of the worker class of the Fergana and notes its staunchness and
devotion to Soviet rule.

The scholarly level of these pamphlets is diminished to a great extent by the
confused presentation of the question of the social nature and causes of
emergence of the basmachi. A. Kokanbayev, for example, correctly stating that
the local exploiters were the class support of the basmachi, subsequently in-
clines to the idea that the roots of the basmachi should be sought in the
colonial policy of Russian czarism in Turkestan. This naturally is incorrect.
Frequently A. Kokanhayev and T. Kh. Kel'diyev forget to link a given stage in
the defeat of the basmachi with the general Turkestan and general Russian
situation, in particular the situation on the civil war fronts.

The role of the Comunists in Turkestan, their political and organisational
work during the civil war years. including on the Pergana Front, are discussed
in a monograph by N. Kh. Nazarov.“

Sew data on the struggle against the basmachi at the final stage of their
existence are contained in a book which discusses the glorious past of the
troops of the Turkestan Military District."S Heriting attention is an en
dcuvor to determine and make available to scholars the names of commanders of
units and combined units who through their skill, experience and valor
contributed to the victorious conclusion of the war against the basmachi. A
thorough study of source materials and review of obsolete views and opinions
enabled 6. Nepcsov to advance significantly investigation of the problem of
the struggle against the basmachi on the territory of Khorezm. The

author presents interesting material on the contribution of the toilers of
many of our country's nationalities toward the defeat of the basmachi. The
question of dating the emergence of the basmachi on the territory of Khorezm,
however. remains controversial.“6

188

F08‘0FFHJAI.USE¢H§LY
Departures from achieved positions were also noted alongside substantial
achievements in study of the problem of the basmachi. This was indicated,in
particular, by a book by Sh. A. Shamagdiyev.’°7 The author was endeavoring to
show more fully the active participation of the toilers of indigenous na-
tionalities under the guidance of local party organizations in the struggle
against basmachi bands. He achieved some success in this as well. But at
the same time he "ignores all standards and demands which are generally
accepted in scientific research work in the field of history. He... adjusts
and adds to cited sources and documents, ascribes to party and soviet
agencies decisions which they never nade, cites sensational 'facts' and new
dates of events while making no reference whatsoever to sources, and con-
fuses names. positions, and party affiliation of some individuals."‘8

Thus in the first period, in spite of the fact that part of this period falls

within a time when, as a result of the operation of subjective factors, there

was limited source material availability, as well as the operation of certain

adverse factors in scholarly activity, considerable successes were achieved in
investigation of the history of the defeat of the basmachi.

A number of monographs and books were published on history of Soviet society
in the Central Asian republics, which contained special chapters on the
basmachi in which the authors discussed fron a scientific party position
fundamental questions pertaining to history of the struggle against the
basmachi which had previously not been investigated or had not been examined
in full measure (for example, on the role of the nasses in achieving victory
in the civil war and on the social nature of the basmachi). The following
conclusion was a major achievement of historiography: the basmachi represent

one of the forms of the class struggle in the era of dictatorship of the
proletariat.

Investigations published after the end of the 1950's, in spite of certain
debatable and even erroneous theses, determined a qualitatively new stage in
the development of historiography of this topic.

In the contenporary period new successes have been achieved in investigation

cf history of the struggle against the basmachi. They were dictated by such

an objective factor as the victory of developed socialism in the USSR as well
as by the influence of subjective factors: publication of new materials from

the Leninist ideological legacy, theoretical and methodological instructions

of the 22d-26th CPSU Congresses and party Central Comittee documents, and

by growth in the professional expertise and maturity of historians.

The appearance of specific-topic collected volumes containing writings of

Lenin pertaining to the history of Central Asia acquired particular importance
for Central Minn historiography: "V. I. Lenin o Sredney Azii i Uzbekistane"

[V. I. Lenin on Central Asia and Uzbekistan] (Tashkent, 1957) and "V. I. Lenin
o Sredney Azii i Kazakhstane" [V. 1. Lenin on Central Asia and Kazakhstan]
(Tashkent, 1960). Other titles published include "Rezolyutsii i postanovleniya

s"yczdov Kommunisticheskoy partii Turkestana (1918-1924)" [Resolutions and
Decrees of Congresses of the Communist Party of Turkcstan (1918-1926)]
(Tashkent, 1958). "Pis'ma trudyashchikhsya V. I. Leninu (1917-1926 gg.)"

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FINI!)FFIC1AJ.I£§EZ(M§LY

[Letters from Toilers to V. l. Lenin (1917-1926)] (Tashkent, 1966), and
"Trudyashchiyesya Turkmenistana V. l. Leninu" [The Toilets of Turkmenistan to
V. I. Lenin] (Ashkhabad, 1960).

The Complete Collection of writings of V. l. Lenin and the Biographical

Chronicle of V. l. Lenin expanded the theoretical and source-material arsenal
of Central.Asian social scientists.

Characteristic features of the present stage of investigation of the history
of the defeat of the basmachi include detailed specialized study of the
topic. formulation of new questions, and utilization of new sources.

By the beginning of the 1960's books and articles were appearing on problems
which had not been raised in previously published works. This applies first
and foremost to questions pertaining to the international unity of toilets in
the struggle against the basmachi, as well as certain theoretical aspects of
the role of British imperialism in stirring up the basmachi.

1.5. Sologubov, A. H. Hatveyev, Ya. H. Seryy, and G. B. hikol'skaya‘9
demonstrated for the first time in Central Asian historiography how during the
difficult years of civil war Czechs, Slovaks, Hungarians, Austrians, Germans,
Chinese, lndians, Persians and others residing in Central Asia manifested a
feeling of proletarian solidarity upon being given their freedom by Soviet
power: with weapon in hand, fighting shoulder to shoulder with Russians,
Uzbeks, Kazakhs. Tajiks, Turkmens, Kirghiz and representatives of other
peoples, they defended the achiVemente of the Great October Revolution, taking
part in defeating the basmachi forces.

The role of international, particularly British imperialism in the unleashing
and spread of civil war in Central Asia, in organizing and guiding the hasmachi
was investigated by A. Kh. Babakhodzhayev.5° Of particular interest is a
second book. in which the author, on the basis of additional sources, provides
a new understanding of a number of fundamental aspects of the foreign policy of
British imperialism.

The fact that A. Kh. Babakhodzhayev examines the policies of British imperial-
ism in Central Asia, Afghanistan and Iran from a single, consistent point of
view is praiseworthy. Such a statement of the question made it possible to
elucidate two most important aspects of the subject: the significance of the
defeat of British intervention and subsequently the basmachi as well in Central
Asia for development of the liberation movement in Afghanistan and Iran; the
interrelationship between the struggle of the peoples in Central Asia and the
peoples of the Middle East against a common foe. This aspect, as was
persuasively demonstrated by A. Kh. Babakhodzhayev, is not in conflict with the
fact that the toilets of Central Asia, under the guidance of the Communist
Party. were fighting for socialism, while the peoples of the Middle East were
waging a national liberation struggle.

A. Kh. Babakhodzhayev extensively utilized party documents, which enabled him
to give a correct political assessment of British policy aims and methods fol-
lowing the victorious conclusion of the civil war in Central Russia. He showed

190

FOR 0I11C1A1.1EHE(MULV
how, having failed with their undisguised intervention, the British imperial-
ists shifted to organization of anti-Soviet conspiracies and ineurgencies. to
expanding the basmschi, inciting neighboring countries to anti-Soviet aggres-
sion. and utilizing economic chaos with the aim of penetration by British
capital and restoration of capitalism in our country.

The history of the struggle against the bssmachi also found reflection in the
fivedvolume "Istoriya grszhdanskoy voyny v SSSR" [History of the Civil War in
the USSR]. While the basmachi are only mentioned in the third volume, in the
fourth and especially in the fifth volumes1 an attempt is made in the sections
entitled "Decisive victories of the Red Army Over the United Forces of the
Entente and Domestic Counterrevolution (March l9l9-Pebrusry 1920)" and "The
End of Foreign Military Intervention and Civil War in the USSR. Liquidation of
the Last Focal Areas of Counterrevolution (February 1920-1922)" to reflect some
of the most important events in the history of the struggle against the
basmachi. The significance of these synthesizing works lies not only in the
factual material presented but also in a new methodological approach to study
of the history of the civil war, in the endeavor on the part of their authors
to overcome the errors and deficiencies characterizing works written prior to
the 20th CPSU Congress, as well as the extensive presentation of the names of
those military leaders and political workers who had not been mentioned
previously in the literature. This could not help but have an effect on sub-
sequent study of the history of the struggle against the basmschi.

A detailed investigation of the history of the basaschi was manifested in
study of the struggle against them within the framework of the contemporary
Central Asian republics. But the following questions arise: Is it correct for
the struggle against the basmachi within the geographic framework of the con-
temporary Central Asian Soviet republics which were formed in the 1920's to
become the subject of investigation? Is this not an aggravation of the well-
known deficiencies of historiography of the civil war in Central Asia of the
preceding period? H. Irkayev used the example of the Tajik $38 to demonstrate
the possibility of independent investigation of the history of the hasmachi
within the boundaries of regions which were not independent governmental
entities at the time of the struggle against the basmachi.52

H. Irkayev rejected the previOusly adopted chronological framework of the
civil war in the central and southern areas of Tajikistan (1921-1924)53 and
proposed a different dating: 1921-1926. He divided the entire period of the
war into three stages: the first (1921 to the first half of 1923) -- emergence
of and large-scale basmachi activities; the second (latter half of 1923 to the
end of 1920) -- loss of power by the haemachi and the changing of basmachi ac-
tivities into banditry; the third (l925-first half of 1926) -- end of the
civil war in Tajikistan and liquidation of remnants of the hasmachi. H.
Irksyev points out that at all stages the aims of the basmachi remained un-
changed, while the forms of the struggle and its scope changed.59

The periodization advanced and substantiated by the author was in its basic
features approved by Tajikistan's scholars.

191

FOR OFIWCJAI.IEHE(NVLV
FOI:OFFKJAI.USEIMVLY

An important place in H. Irkayev's book is devoted to the internal and external
circumstances of the emergence of the basmachi, a description of their social
base, and the reasons for a significant intensification of basaachi activities
at a moment when restoration of the economy had begun throughout the country.
The author correctly states that the feudal lords, the clergy, the bureaucracy,
the bai. and emerging bourgeois elements constituted the social base of the
basmachi.55 Examining the degree of participation of the toiler population in
the basmachi movement, he reaches the general conclusion that "in the initial
period basmachi activities occurred on a significant scale on the territory of
Tajikistan due to the backward anddeceivedsegment of the pepulation."S6 Par-
ticipation by the toiler masses in the basmachi bands is also traced in this
book at other stages. The author does not hold, however, that all toilers

of indigenous nationalities sided with the bssmachi. H. lrkayev writes that
"many dekhkans. from the very first days of the revolution, sided with them
(the new authorities - Auth.) and actively struggled for establishment and
strengthening of the power of the Soviets," and that "at the beginning of the
struggle for Soviet rule a substantial segment of the toiling dekhkans took

a tacit-and-see position, and then quite soon, recognizing the facts of the
revolution and the Soviet system, also began supporting the policy of the So-
viet authorities."57

H. Irkayev made new party documents available to scholars for the first tine,
particularly decisions of the RKP(b) Central Committee Politburo pertaining to
the struggle against the basmachi, and a quantity of factual data obtained fron
Central Asian and central archives.

The civil war on the territory of Soviet Tajikistan is also discussed in a
number of other works. Important among these is a monograph by G. Kh.
quaydarov.58 The author attempted to establish the time of activities by
basmachi bands in the Hatcha areas9 and combat against them by led Army
forces.

While H. Irkayev succeeded in making a thorough study of history of the
struggle against the basmachi on the territory of this republic, which in the
past had belonged to various political entities or administrative units,

S. B. Zhanzgarov, the author of a book dealing with the civil war in

Kirghizia, did not succeed in this endeavor, and here is why. The following
should definitely be a condition for such an approach: the existence of a

broad general background of class struggle; an investigation of the dialectical
interrelationship of the struggle in different areas within the region, as well
as the ability objectively to separate the most important from the secondary.
But there is noticeable in s. B. Zhantuarov's book a separation of the events
in Kirghizia from the overall events in Turkestan, of which they were a part,
not to mention operations on the fronts of the entire Soviet republic.

The successes of historiography of the civil war in Central Asia and
Kazakhstan. the amassing of factual material. resolution of a number of
fundamental problems, as well as growth of cadres of historians grouped around
branches of the Institute of harmism-Leninism and history institutes of the
Academies of Sciences of the Central Asian republics and Kazakhstan promoted
activation of research on the history of party organisations. Publications

192

FOI‘OFHKJAI.USB(HVLY
included a aonograph on the history of Turkestani61 books on the history of in-
dividual republics and their Col-moist parties,6 , as well as other works on
party history.63

The most important achievaents of the authors of these works include investiga-
tion of the struggle against the basnachi as an integral coaponent part of the
struggle against the entire Central Asian counterrevolution, as well as
examination of the history of the Laninist resolution of the nationalities
question in Turkestan and ilplementation of a policy of enlisting the masses

to defend the republic, which ensured a solid military-political alliance of
workers and peasants of all the nationalities of Central Asia.

The above-mentioned books had overcome a nusber of deficiencies and short-
comings characteristic of previous publications and stated substantiated
opinions on certain questions which previously had been considered debatable
or unresolved. In "history of the Kazakh $58." for era-pie, the author
demonstrates more solidly, utilizing some new data, the specific features of
the civil war in Kazakhstan and the causes of the victory by the people over
counterrevolutionary forces, and nore fully reveals the essence of

the policy of war Coanunisn. The events on the Semirech'ye Front are nore
closely linked with the events on the other Turkestan fronts. Certain factual
errors occurring in the previous edition were also corrected.

In "History of Kirghizia" one can consider as successful the author's
elaboration of questions pertaining to ispleaentation of the policy of Har
Connunisn on the territory of contemporary Kirghizstan and on the coebat
operations of local units.

"history of the Tajik People" synthesizes civil war historiograpbic data on
the various areas contained within today's boundaries of the Tajik 88!;
Northern Tajikistan and the Panirs, which were previously a part of the
Turkestan ASSR; Central and Southern Tajikistan. which up to 1920 were under
the authority of the emir of Bukhara. Revelation of sons of the specific
features of the class struggle during the first years of Soviet rule is one

of the positive elenents of this book. A no less i-portant distinctive
feature of this book is the fact that it closely ties in local events with
events of a deternining nature which were taking place in Tashkent, the
central city of Central Asia. The authors discussed the defeat of the baseschi
in Eastern Bukhara in detail, partially on the basis of new material. The
authors sought to reveal the role of the Tajik toilers in defeating the forces
of the couterrevolution and foreign iaperialists. Confirnation was presented
for the view that the civil war in Eastern Bukhara continued up to aid-1926.

Shortcomings of the first edition of the "History of the Tajik People" in-
cluded the descriptive character of many processes and statenent of facts in
the absence of athoroughanalysis of the distribution of class forces and the
causes which ensured victory in the civil war.“

In "History of the Uzbek 858" (Volume III, Chapter 2), published at the end
of the 1960's, the authors consolidate successes achieved by that tine in
studying the history of the defeat of the baaaachi. They present not only a

193

FIHICNHNCJAI.USE(HVLY
FIHICHNWCJAI.US£1JNLY

formulation of the basmachi as an expression of the class struggle. a statement
which has become generally accepted. but also make a successful attempt to
elucidate additional reasons for participation by a portion of the dekhkan
toilets in the basmachi bands. The course of progress of the civil war on the
territory of Uzbekistan. including the struggle against the basmachi, is
viewed as a part of the general military offensive against Soviet Russia by
domestic and international reactionaries.

Historical sketches on local party organizations devote considerable attention.
alongside problems of a party-organisational nature and matters of party-
organizational development, to party activities in the area of mobilizing

the toilets to defeat the enemy. The value of these publications lies in the
fact that they cite most important party documents pertaining to the struggle
against the basmachi. They also present for the first time the names of

many active participants in defeating the basmachi. These sketches laid the
groundwork for producing a single synthesizing work on the history of the
Central Asian party organizations.

Subsequent successes in studying the history of the civil war in Central Asia. in
particular history of the basmachi, as well as discussion of untreated and
debatable questions were impossible without new documents and sources. In
connection with this, substantial publishing activities were undertaken begin-
ning in the 1960's. activities which far from exhausted all possibilities
existing in this regard.

The institutes of history of the Academies of Sciences of the Central Asian
republics and Kazakhstan, the Kazakh and Kirghiz branches of the CPSU Central
Committee Institute of Marxism-Leninism, together with the archives ad-
ministrations of the Councils of Hinisters and Central State Archives of the
Kazakh, Uzbek, Tajik, Turkmen, and Kirghiz SSks, published two volumes of
documents on the civil war in Central Asia and Kazakhstan.66 The compilers
discovered a great many new documents and materials in archives in Moscow,
Tashkent, Ashkhabad, Alma-Ara, Frunze, Dushanbe, Orenburg, Astrakhan', and
other cities. A total of 1158 docments were published, some of which were
being made available to the scholarly community for the first time; a number
of these documents were connected with the basmachi. 0f great value is the
25 December 1918 Uorkers' and Peasants' Defense Council decree calling for a
"more aggressive offensive against Orenburg" with the objective of breaking
Turkestan out of encirclement and linking it up with the country's central
region (Volume I, page 279), as well as a direct-wire conversation between
N. V. Frunze and I. P. Belov on 2 October 1919 (Volume II. pages 261-263).
These materials shed additional light on the concern of V. I. Lenin, the party
and Soviet State for the peoples of Central Asia during these peoplss' dif-
ficult days of existence and struggle. A letter from Denikin to British
General Halleson (Volume 1, page 363), published for the first time, recon-
firms the conclusion of Soviet historiography thatthe civil war in Central
Asia and Kazakhstan was a component part of the struggle throughout our
country and reveals a new aspect of the role of British imperialism in anti-
Soviet intervention in Turkestan. Also attesting to this is a report by
Dzhunkovskiy (one of the leaders of the "Turkestan Alliance for the Struggle
Against Bolshevism") to Denikin (Volule 1. page 341) and the latter's reply

196
llﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1kl.lﬂﬂi(HVLY
(Volune I, pp 86-87), as well as a report on links between the hasnachi and
British inperialian (Volt-e II, pp 615-616).

The history of the struggle against the baa-achi in 1918-1923 occupies an in-
portant place in the two-volune "History of the Civil war in Uzbekistan."67
In this publication the authors endeavor, utilizing preceding advances in
historiography, to resolve a number of theoretical and nethodological problems
(periodization of the civil war in Central Asia, patterns and specific
features of the policy of liar (Jo-anis- and m in hrkeatan, etc). The
historiograpbic introduction presented in the first volune is of definite in.
terest. Its pole-ical keenness shows the existence of debatable and un-
resolved prohlens in the topic area of investigation.

This two-volune study presents new factual nsterial on the struggle against

the besnachi, especially on the territory of the Bukhara and lhorezn People's
republics and in Kara-Ralpakia. One inportant virtue of this work is the
profound analysis of the economic and political life of the peoples of the
Turkestan Republic, the bukhara and there:- people's republics, without which

it is inpossible to understand the history of the emergence and collapse of

the basaachi. The authors reveal in greater detail than had been done in the pat
the role of party nationalities policy in briuing the basnachi to an end in

the Fergana and show the economic. food supply and cultural work of party

and governnental agencies.

Published in this work for the first tine are basic docments of the m(b)
Central Cos-ittee and party Central Co-ittee Sredasbyuro in 1921-1922 pertain-
ing to the struggle against the hasnachi, and their aohilizing and organising
role in defeating the many 1 s shown; the natarials of a nunher of local
party and soviet agencies are analyzed.

In connection with the fact that this study is to a certain degree a sun-
narizing work on the problen of the basnachi, we shall mine it in greater
detail.

One of the principal tasks assigned the authors was /"to reveal the class
essence of the basnachi, exposing the true instigators and leaders of the
comterrevolutionary novenent."/ 8 This state-eat of the topic of investiga-
tion would be entirely legitimate if no attenpts had been nade in this area
prior to that tine. In the introduction to the first volume. however, the
authors drew attention to the fact that an extensive literature existed, which
has aade fire attenpts to define the class essence of the hes-chi and to
reveal the actual instigators and organizers. We have already discussed in
this survey the fairly successful resolution of these questions.

Also incorrect. as has already been noted. is the statement that the basnachi
constitute a "novenent."

One of the najor nethodological problana of historiography is the problen of
periodization of the struggle against the hasnachi. “to authors correctly
hold the view that the civil war in Uzbekistan, including the hasnachi. "is
not an isolated phenonenon but a conponant part of the struggle of all the
people, on a scale of the entire Soviet State.""9 This by no neans

195

I’OIOMCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USO; ONLY

signifies, however, that the general laws and patterns did not have specific
manifestations in the concrete historical conditions of such areas as the
Fergana, Buhhara, Khiva, and Kara-Kslpahia. This also applies to periodica-
tion. The end of 1918 and the beginning of 1919 are considered to be the tine
of intensification of the civil war in Turhestan. what ccnfirnation is there
for this? The fact that "a plan was drawn up for a joint offensive against
Soviet Turkestan by British troops, white Guard, and banachi bends." As we
know, however, this plan was a total failure. The authors also state that

“at the end of 1918 the civil in the terms Valley intensified... in connection
with preparations for a general offensive on Tashkent." Such preparations were
indeed being made at that tine.

In actual fact. however, intensification of the civil war in Turkestan was
taking place in the spring and auner of 1919. This was due to the following
circunstanccs: in April 1919 Turkestsn, follow-ting a brief linkup with the
country's central region via Orenburg, once again found itself encircled by the
enemy, a fact which counterrevolutionary forces on alnost all the Turhestan
fronts utilized for an offensive against Soviet rule. The volune's authors
themselves acknowledged this. They write about the "revival of counterrevolu-
tionary forces in Turhestan“ in connection with lolchak's offensive.

The authors hold to debatable views on the chronological franework of the con-
cluding stage of the struggle against the bee-chi. They claim that the end

of the civil war in Turkeatan and, consequently, the end of the bassechi took
place in 1920, while "liquidation of renants of the bee-achi" took place in
1921-1923, that in these years "not military, but rather political and eco-
nonic neasures advanced to the forefront in the struggle against remants of
the basaschi."71 Standing in conflict with this view is the actual state of
affairs in the Fergana Valley, and even nore soin the Bukhara and Khoreea
People's Soviet Republics. where a stubborn and bloody civil war was in

progress in 1921-1923. This did not scan that the process of rebuilding them
may was not taking place and the New Bcononic Policy wasnotbeing inplenented in
a nunber of areas of Central Asia beginning in 1921. Political and economic
neasures were taking on increasing significance, but they could not yet be
carried out at full effort without resolving the nilitary question.

This was indicated in a number of party documents. The man Central Com—
nittee, for example, enphasized in a circular dated 11 January 1922 that the
basmachi vac "an important factor in the economic disintegration."72 On

21 August 1922 the RKP(b) Central Col-litres, in directives to the Central Com-
nittee Sredazbyuro, the Turkestan Mist Party Central Couittee, and the
Bukhara Columnist Party Central Cousittee. stated the task of wiping out the
basmachi "as one of the nost is rtant," without which restoration of the
economy could not be achieved.7 The 7th Regional Conference of the Turhesten
Conunist Party (October 1922) stated in its resolution on the report of

Ya. B. Rudzutak: "In addition to wiping out the baanechi, we are faced with
the fornidable task of Turkeatan's econoaic recovery!" This resolution also
noted the role of British imperialisn in leading the baa-schi.75 These
doctments provide us with a bearing for correctly assessing the actual state
of affairs in Central Asia.

196

FOIOFI'ICIALIBBONLY
The authors of this book themselves state repeatedly the "protracted nature of
the civil war in Uzbekistan,”6 and therefore almost half of the material in
the second volume deals with events which took place in 1921-1923.

Works dealing with individual major problems of the history of Central Asia of
the Soviet period help gain a deeper understanding of the objective and sub-
jective reasons for the defeat of the basmachi, the nobilizing and organizing
role of the party in the struggle against oounterrevolutionery forces. Of
particular importance among the- are works on history of Soviet organizational
development during the civil war years, and particularly dealing with the role
of the Proletarian Tashkent Soviet in the struggle against the basmachi. as

well as new synthesizing studies on history of the party. Several
monographs deal with the sovieta."

R. A. Nurullin drew attention to the activities of the sovieta pertaining to
enlisting dekhkans into the Red Army and on disintegration of the basmachi
bands. The role of the Tashkent proletariat in forming units and detachments

sent to the basmachi fronts is given extensive treatment in books by G.
Rashidov and T. Pulatov.

An important event in the ideological-political affairs of the Central Asian
republics was publication of "llistory of Communist Organizations of Central
Asia,"78 produced by a team of leading party historians of the Central Asian
and Kazakh branches of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee Institute of Harriso-
Leninism. The significance of this work is determined not only by the fact
that it contains chapters. written on a high theoretical level. which present
the history of party direction of the struggle against the basmachi. but also
and chiefly by the fact that a number of theoreticalmthodological problem
are examined in it which are of great importance for an understanding of the
mechanism and specific features of the defeat of the counterrevolution in
Central Asia. These include the following: the international mission of the
Russian revolutionary proletariat —- the guiding force in the campaign to
liberate the toilers of indigenous nationalities fro. social and ethnic
oppression; the character and specific features of the military-political
alliance of workers and peasants and its role in the victory over the basmachi;
the character and aims of the popular revolutions in Bukhara and Khiva and the
process of their gradual develop-cut into socialist revolutions; the
mechanisms of the noncapitalist path of development of the peoples of Central
Asia; the process of consolidation of Bolshevik organizations in conditions of
a former outlying colonial region; the position of the Commoist Party
vis-i—vis the various classes, political parties and organizations operating
in Central Asia during the first years of Soviet rule.

This work introduces a new element into one's understanding of the essence

of the basmachi. In the chapter entitled "The Turhesten Conunist Party in
the Period of Foreign Military Intervention and Civil war," the authors
present, on the basis of previous scholarly works and the employment of new
material, an objective reply to questions about the social-class nature of the
basmachi and the reasons for their greatest development namely in the Pergana
Valley. It states, in particular: "The basmachi represented an armed form of

197

FOR OFFICIAL 18$ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

struggle by the overthrown local exploiter classes against the dictatorship of
the proletariat."79 It further states: "It would not have been particularly
difficult to put down the besnachi if only the exploiter elite and déclassé
elements had participated. The situation was in fact nuch more comlicated,
for may toiling dekhkans joined baa-achi bands."3° This chapter provides

an explanation of the reasons why a portion of the toiling dekhltans joined the
hasnachi and indicates the revolutionary forces which came to the defense of
Soviet rule. Precisely this fornulation of the problem nade it possible cor-
rectly to analyze the heroic struggle against the baa-achi.

The struggle against the basnachi in the BPSR and KPSR is presented in less
detail in "History of Consist Organizations of Central Asia."

This synthesizing work on the history of party organisations of Central Asia
once again confined that the nein thrust of subsequent research on problems
of party history as well as on specific topics pertaining to history of the
civil war lies in the direction of further thorough study of the Lenin
ideological-theoretical legacy, Marxist-Leninist nethodology, and a Leninist
analysis of factual material.

New thenee appeared in historiography in the latter half of the 1960's and in
the 1910's. These include first and foremost studies grouped under the title
"Lenin and the Peoples of Central Asia and Kasakhstan.”31 ‘lhey show the
essence of the beninist scientific conception of the history of the peoples
of Central Asia and Kazakhstan and disclose the scientific laboratory of its
fornation. Particular attention is devoted to Leninist ideas on the nationali-
ties question and their significance for the victory over the united forces
of the interventioniste, Hhite Guard, and the basmachi. At the same time
there remains a great deal to be done in order to achieve further detailed
study of the Leninist ideological-theoretical legacy and methodology of a
Leninist analysis of factual material. It is also necessary to make
available to the scholarly cal-unity new materials fro- the cmlete vorks

of V. I. Lenin. and especially fron the biographical chronicle of V. I. Lenin,
including on the history of the class struggle in Central Asia.

Anather topic which was also of great methodological sipificance for studying
the struggle against the basmechi is that of the activities of the ma)
Central Co-ittee Sredazbyuro. Solid. substantial nonographs were written

by V. H. Ustinov, S. hazarov, H. 1'. Anderson, K. Khasanov, A. ‘l‘. Azizkhanov,
and A. A. Roslyakov; Ye. M. Seryy published a nunber of articles.82

These works contain sections or chapter subdivisions with aaterial on party
guidance of the struggle against the basnachi. A. A. Roslyakov holds that

at the first stage of the history of the Sredazbyuro (1922-19210), its sain
task was ”crushing of the arsed resistance of the feudal-bai counterrevolution,
that is, defeat of the l~=snschi."83 he also endeavored to give a definition
of the social nature of the baa-achi at the concluding stage of their
existence. To quote the author. they constituted "a feudal-nationalist
counterrevolution," "an undisguised armed feudal counterrevolution."8‘ In

our opinion this definition can apply (and even then not fully) only to cer-
tain areas (Eastern Bukhara, certain areas of mrhnenia). One can hardly

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
discount the bai and the emerging national bourgeoisie. which played a decisive
role, together with feudal circles, in pro-sting the basaachi. The author's
theses on the reasons for the participation of certain dehhkm groups in
hasnachi forces are not entirely accurate.85

The third topic is connected with showing the nationalities policy of the
Conunist Party and its inplenentation by local party organizations.86 In
monographs by Rh. 1'. Tursunov, K. A. Gafurova, N. Ran-snow and other in-
vestigators, the authors show how the party. due to its internationalist
policy, united peoples for the struggle against the enemy. K. A. Gafurova
presented new asterial on the role of British inperialisn in supplying the
baseschi with srns and on giving then eaterisl assistance.

Leninist principles of party nationalities policy were also embodied in a
practical esnner in military organisational develop-ant in Central Asia. In-
vestigators could not help but note this, as a result of which special
studies by V. H. Kuz'nina, K. Alenzholov, O. Khudoyberdiyev and others on

Red Arey national units and their participation in defeating the counterrevolu-
tion were published.

The fourth topic was history of the popular revolutions in Bukhara and naiva.
Substantial nonographs were written (by A. I. Ishanov, K. Hukhanedberdyyev,

B. I. Iskanderov, and Rh. lnoyatov), and collected volunes of consents and
the proceedings of jubilee scientific sessions were published. 7 It was es-
tablished as a result of debates and exchange of views that the revolutions in
Bukhsra and Khiva were popular-dementic. antifeudal and antiinperislist.
They were a consequence of the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolu-
tion and a continuation of this revolution. These conclusions are of great

significance for a correct assess-ant of the basaschi on the territory of the
BPSR and KPSR.

At the end of the 1960's and in the 1970's the history of the struggle against
the basnachi was reflected in two books on the civil war in Turkestsn -— by
H. lCn. Naurov and Sh. T. Tashliyev and in a nonograph on the period of

"war Couunisn" by R. A. lurullin.“ These works, written at a party-history
level, contain a wealth of naterial on the struggle against the basaschi.

H. Kh. Nazarov in particular deaonstreted in greater detail than his
predecessors the role of the (Jo-mist Party and its political and organiza-
tional work in defeating the baa-achi in the Pargens Valley in 1918-1920. The
study by Sh. T. Tashliyev is of the greatest interest fron the standpoint of
our topic of investigation in its presentation of asterial dealing with the
history of the energence and defeat of the [Olivan hes-achi led by Dzhunaid-khan.
In analyzing these questions, the author revealed the great conplexity of the
intertribal and and interethnic relations in Turk-enistan and euphasized that
an enormous role in wiping out the local baa-achi was played by observance of
the greatest caution by party. govern-eat and military agencies and an under-
standing of the way of life of the Turhene and Uzbeke, their custoss,
religious beliefs and prejudices.

199

FOIOFMALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R. A. Nurullin, while not specifically discussing the history of the

struggle against the basnachi. presented naterial on the specific features of
inplenentation of the policy of "Her Co-nnisn" as a whole in the Turkestsn
Republic and in individual areas of this republic, particularly in rural areas,
which fosters an understanding of the reasons for the successful struggle
against the basnachi bands.

An analysis of the development of scientific thought on the topic reflected in
our book enables one to reach the following nain conclusions.

As a result of the collective efforts of a large group of historians in the
republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan, as well as Moscow scientific
workers, a Harxist-Leninist conception of the essence and class roots of the
counterrevolutionary basnachi has been elaborated. An essentially faithful
picture has been created of the heroic struggle of the peoples of Central
Asia. who were defending the achieve-ants of the Great October Revolution
against encroachments by the united forces of the white Guard, baseschi and
interventionists, a struggle which took place under the guidance of the
Connunist Party. Many cardinal questions pertaining to history of the
struggle against the bsmchi have been resolved on the basis of Marxist-
Leniniat methodology.

Special studies have been written on this subject, which is extremely 1r
portant for historical science, including monographs, books and articles, as
well as sections, chapters. and chapter subdivisions in synthesizing works on
history of the civil war in Central Asia, history of Central Asian party or-
ganizations. as well as in books on individual theoretical questions con-
nected to one degree or another with the class struggle in the 1920's and
1930's. Investigation of the decisive role played by the taller nasses.
guided by the Commie: Party, is occupying the center of attention. It has
been proven that, in waging a struggle to preserve Soviet power in Central
Asia, the Comnist Party created and consolidated a military-political
alliance between the worker class and the toiling dekhkans as a decisive
social and political force which ensured victory over the easily. The nost
important factor which pronoted strengthening of this alliance in the condi-
tions of Central Asia was unswerving inplenentation of a Leninist nationali-
ties policy by the Coalaunist Party.

A no less inportant condition for organization of a successful struggle against
the counterrevolution in Turkestan was the rendering of daily econoeic and
military-political assistance to the peoples of Central Asia by the BKNb)
Central Committee, the Soviet State, and the Great Russian people. This
assistance cesented the friendship of the peoples of Russia with the peoples

of the Turkestan Republic, the Bukhars and Khoresn People's republics.

As a result of historiography overch the consequences of the cult of
personality and related departures fron historical truth, the role of the Con-
nunist Party and its Central Co-ittee. headed by V. l. Lenin, in defeating
the united forces of the interventionists and donestic counterrevolution in
Turkestan began to be revealed increasingly sore fully. Much has been accol-
plished in order fully to show the theoretical and practical assistance
rendered by V. l. Lenin to the party organization of Turkestan and his

200
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
struggle for ideological-organizational strengthening of the m, for victory
of the ideas of Narnia. snd proletarian internationalisn in the young party
organizations which arose following the October Revolution in the outlying
regions of the Russian East. Thanks to skilled leadership by the Central Con-
nittee, headed by V. I. Lenin, and assistance by plenipotentiary agencies of
the Central Co-ittee and Soviet Govern-ant, the mannissiya, Turkbyuro and
Sredszbyuro of the Central Co-ittee, the Co-unists of Central Asia, over-
coning enormus difficulties and correcting their own nistakes and shortconings.
were able' to forge out nuerous cadres who becane the leading detath of
the worker class and the toiling dekhkans and who led the canpaign to
strengthen Soviet rule and the building of socialist in this region, and the
struggle for victory in the civil war.

Historians have given essentially correct answers to such couples and in-
portant questions as the social and class nature of the basnachi and the
reasons for their relatively prolonged existence in certain areas of Central
Asia; the ferns and nethods of foreign intervention and the reasons for the
failure of British intervention in Turkestan.

0n the whole a successful endeavor has been nade to investigate the na-
tionalities and agrarian policy of the Mist Party and its role in the
struggle against the basnachi. The for-s and nethods of enlisting the

toiler masses of indigenous nationalities in the business of building socialist
and their unification behind the proletariat and the (lo-mist Party have been
studied and are being studied in connection with this. A nunber of studies
have shown how an indissoluble alliance of Soviet peoples was forged out and
how proletarian internationalisn developed in the struggle against the
basnachi and other counterrevolutionary forces.

The list of treated problem topics has expanded, especially in the last

20 years, which has nade it possible to study the history of any important
events which had not been investigated for a protracted period of tine. In
the 1920's and 1930's, for exanple, for the seat part only the course of con-
bat events on the civil war fronts was analysed, while today studies encou-
pass the situation on the hose front, the unity between battle front and hose
front, the distribution of class forces and their change at various stages of
the civil war, the establishes: and strengthening of the alliance of the
worker class with the dekhkans during the war years and the role of this
alliance in bringing the war to a victorious conclusion, and party na-
tionalities and agrarian policy. Methods of political organization of the
toilers in conditions of a noncspitalist path of develop-est and the forts

of their enlistnent in political activity, which was one of the important con-
ditions for defeat of the bamchi bands, are revealed at the sane tine. The
names of any co-anders and political workers as well as civil war heroes who
have been undeservedly forgotten or who previously have not been aentioned in
historiography are being awakened in the nenory of the people.

There still exists, however, a certain unevenness in investigation of a
nuaher of problems. The nilitary and political history of the struggle against

the basuchi has been sore fully studied than the socioecononic conditions
of their energence and defeat.

201

FOIOFHCIALUSIONLY
MWMWLY

The scholarly level of investigation inrovad appreciably in the 1960's and
1970's. An i-portant role in this was played by a broadening of the source
naterials base. supple-eating archival and newspaper nsterials with the
nenoirs of active participants in the civil var. as well as improving the
level of scholarly qualifications of historians and strengthening historical
scientific research eatablisI-ents and depart-ants of social sciences of
higher educational institutions in Central Asia.

The nonogrsph is gradually Meeting the principal tors of investigation.
One's attention is drawn not only by conclusions but also observations of a
particular character with have been lads during study and cowariaon of
diversified sources.

Thus nee qualitative results have been achiewd in study of this subject. At
the same tine, hovever, one cannot state that all problens have been resolved
and that investigation of this subject is fully cowleted. The future still
holds the writing of works vorthy of the dennds i-posed on historical sci-
ence by the 21st CPSU Congress.

202

mommussouu
Introduction

1.

2.

3.

10.
11.
12.
13.

V. I. Lenin, "Speech at e Conference of Reilvsy workers of the Moscow Rail Center
on 16 April 1919." ”Polo. Sohr. Soch.” [ob-pm. Works], Vol 38, page 315.

Lenin, "Speech on 6 (17) June 1917 st the Pirst All-Russian Congress of Soviets

of Worker end Pessent Deputies on Position Toverd the Provisionel Goveruent,"
"Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 32, pege 276.

Lenin, "Report of the (lo-ission on the lstionnl and Colonial Questions on

26 July 1920 st the Second Congress of the (Bo-mist International,” "Polnoye...,"
op. cit., Vol ‘1, page 2“; "Report to the 8th Congress of the mm on 19 lurch
1919 on the Psrty Progrsn," Vol 38, pp 158-159.

Lenin, op. cit.. Vol bl. page 2“.

Lenin. "Report st the Second All-Russian Congress of Co-unist Orgsnisstione of

the Peoples of the Best on 22 Rovenher 1919,” "Polnoye...," op.
cit., Vol 39. page 329.

I

Ihid.

Lenin. "Report st the 8th Congress of the m0) on 19 ﬂsrch 1919 on the Party
Progren." "Polnoye...," op. cit-., Vol 38, pegs 159.

Lenin. "Polnoye...." op. cit.. Vol 39, pegs 30b.

Lenin. ”0n the Pood Tex," "Polnoye...," op. cit.. Vol 33, psge 228.
Lenin, ”Report of the Co-ission..., op. cit. page 266.

Ibid., pp 294-265.

Main, "Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 62, page 132.

This was also true of the Ihive People's Soviet Republic.

203

mmmmv
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

35.

um W'KML 03". UNI-I

Lenin, "Letter of 7 August 1921 to G. H. Safarov," ”Polnoye...,” op. cit.,
Vol 53, page 105.

Ienin, "Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 39, page 329.

Lenin, ”Letter to the Con-unist Conradea of Azerbaijan, Georgia, Arlenia,
Dagestan, and the Hountain People's Republic,” "Polnoye..." op. cit., vol 43,
page 198.

Ibid., page 200.

Ibid., page 199.

Lenin, "Report of the Col-ission..,” op. cit.. page 244.

Lenin, ”Polnoye...,” op. cit., Vol 53, page 105.

Ibid., V01 34. page 215.

Ibid.

Ibid., Vol 37, pp 7-8.

Ibid., Vol 36, page 8; V01 37, page 38; Vol 39, pp 141-142; etc.

Lenin, ”Letter to the Workers of Europe and America," "Polnoye...," op. cit.,
Vol 37, pp 455-456.

Lenin, "Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 39, page 320.
Lenin, "Report at the 8th Congress...," op. cit., page 161.

Lenin, ”Letter to A. A. Ioffe dated 13 September 1921,“ ”Polnoye...," op. cit.,
Vol 53, page 190.

Ibid.

Ibid., V01 41, pp 435-436.

Ibid., page 153.

Lenin, "Report at the Second All-Russian...," op. cit., page 321.

Lenin, "Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 53, page 189.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i reaheniyakh s“yezdov, konferentaiy i plenuaov Tex

(1898-1970)" [The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses. Conferences
and Central Con-ittee Plenune (1898-1970)], 8th edition, vol 1, page 448.

Jhid., page 449.

204

EOI‘OFIICIAI.USB‘DNMN
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.
61.

62.

63.

66.

65.

66.

“7.

Ibid.. Vol 2, page 65.

Ibid., pp 266-251.

1bid.. pp 633-663.

lbid., page 269.

1bid., page 636.

These instructions were published in the local press.

V. V. Kuybyshev ves in Central Asia iron 6 W! 1919 to the beginning of
1921; H. V. Frme - iron 22 February to Sept-bar 1920; Ye. B. Rudsutak —
ﬁne 6 Novenber 1919 to May 1920, fron April to July 1921. free October 1922 to
April 1923, and fron January to May 1926.

Writings by H. V. Prunse which deal with urinates have been published in the
following: "Sobraniye sochineniy" [Collected Writings] (Vols 1-3, lbscov,
1961); "Isbrannyye proisvedeniya" [Selected Writings] (Moscow, 1960, 1957);
"K. V. Prunse na frontakh grashdanskoy vovyny v Turkestane" [IL V. France on
the battle Fronts of the Civil "er in Turkeeten] (lbscov, 1961). The writings
of V. V. Kuybyshev end Ya. 3. Msutak have not been collected and published.

Frunze, ”Na frontakh...," page 309.

See 1.. 1. breshnev, "uninskin bureau" [Following a uniniet Course], Vols 1-8,
Moscow. 1970-1981.

D. A. Kuneyev, "Isbrannyye rechi i stat'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles],
Moscow. 1978; Sh. R. Bashidov, ”V yedinoy een'ye narodov 8883" [In the United
Family of Peoples of the USSR], Tashkent, 1976; lashidov, "torshestvo
Leninskoy natsional'noy politiki" [Triumph of Lenin's Nationalities Policy],
Tashkent. 1976; Rashidov. "Sovetskiy Uzbekistan” [Soviet Uzbekistan], lbscov,
1978; Reshidov, "Yesyk nashego yedinstva i sotrudnichestva" [Language of Our
Unity and Cooperation], Mascot, 1979.

I. A. Zelenskiy, "0b itogakh provedeniye nateional'noy politiki partii v
Srednsy Asii" [0n the Result of laplenentation of Party Nationalities Policy
in Central Asia]. Sanarkand, 1927; P. Ihodshayev, "lsbrennyye trudy" [Selected
works], Vols 1-3, Tashkent. 1970-1973; A. Ikrueov, "lsbrannyye trudy" [Selected
Works]. Vols 1-3. Tashkent, 1972-1976.

"For-er Slaves Been-e Free"

1.

2.

Takyr -- a flat clay expanse in the desert. alnost totally barren of
vegetation.

‘.
mrkestanskiy Kray consisted of Zahspiyskaya. Sauerkandskaya. Senirechen-

skaya, Syrdar'inskaya. and Ferganskaya oblasts and the Anuder'yinskiy Divi-
sion ("Sovetskaya istoricheskaya entsiklopediys" [Soviet Historical Ency-
clopedie]. Vol 16, Hoscov, 1973. page 525).

205
POI omau. [SE ONLY
6.

7.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

OUO~ woo-~54... —...... ,..-.

Other population figures for Turkeatanskiy Ktay are also encountered in
the literature.

See "lstoriya Bukharskoy i Khorezaskoy narodnykh sovetskikh respuhlik"
[History of the Bukhara and Khoretn People's Soviet Reptblics], Moscow,
1971, pp 13-14.

In 1914 Turkeatan contained a total of 856 industrial enterprises, in-
cluding 239 cotton ginning sills. The cotton processing industry ac-
counted for 73 percent of gross industrial output. Sse “Ocherki
khozyaystvennoy zhizni Turkrespubliki" [Essays on Beononic Life in the
Turkeatan Republic]. Tashkent, 1921, page 133; ”Statisticheskiy yeshegodnik
l9l7-l923 gg." [Statistical Yearbook, 1917-1923], Vol 2, Tashkent, 1924,

page 42.

The average wage per worker in the processing industry in Turkestan in 1908
was 147 rubles per year -- 98 rubles or 60 percent less than the average
for the Russian enpire. 0n the eve of Horld Her I the degree of exploits-
tion of Turkestan workers was 4.5 tines that of Russia as a whole (see

'1'. S. Hel'nikova, "Fornirovaniye pronyshlennykh kadrov v Uzbekistane"
[Formation of Industrial Cadres in Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1956, pp 21-22).

V. V. Zaorskaya and K. A. Aleksander, ”Pronyshlennyye zavsdeniya
Turkestanskogo kraya" [Industrial Bstahnslnents of Turkestanskiy Kray],
Tashkent, 1915. ‘

Cited in "lstoriya ko-Iunistieheskikh organizatsiy Sredney Aaii" [History
of Conunist Organizations of Central Asia], Tashkent, 1967, pp 24-25.

S. Ayni, "Bukhara. Vosponinaniya" [Bukharm Beniniscences], Stalinahad,
1954, pp 243, 246, 247, 256, 258.

Lenin, "The Revolutionary Proletariat and the Right of Nations to Self-
Determination," "Polnoye...," op. cit., Vol 26, page 62.

Kh. Sh. lnoyatov, "Poheda Sovetskoy vlasti v Turkestane" [The Victory of
Soviet Power in Turkestan], Moscow, 1978, page 41.

Cited in T. Ye. Yeleuov, "Ustanovleniye i uprocheniye Sovetskoy vlasti v
Kazakhstane" [Establish-eat and Consolidation of Soviet Rule in Kazakhstan],
Alna-Ata. 1961. page 161.

"Dekrety Sovetslnoy vlasti" [Soviet Covert-ant Decrees], Vol 1, Hoscow, 1957,
page 40.

"latoriya grazhdsnskoy voyny v Uzbekistane" [History of the Civil war in
Uzbekistan]. Vol 1, Tashkent, 1964, page 58.

NASHA GAZETA, 15 Deceﬂer 1917.

206

MWLUSEONLY
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

"S"yezdy Sovetov Soyuea SSE, soyusnykh i evtononykh sovetskikh
sotsialisticheskikh respublik. Shornik dohnsntov v trekh ton " [Con-
gresses of Soviets of the 0881, Union and Automnous Soviet Socialist
Republics. Collection of Docuents in Three Values], Vol 1, Moscow, 1959.
page 255.

”Dekrety...," op. cit., Vol 2, Moscow, 1959, pp 2710-278.

Lenin, ”Pro- the Diary of a Political Countator," Polnoye..., op. cit.,
Vol 35, page 189.

"NBA. 15 April 1978.
PRAVDA, 10 February 1976.

Lenin, “0n nevising the Party Prograa,” ”Polnoye...,“ op. cit., Vol 36,
page 379.

Inperialist Intervention and Civil war

1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

V. I. Lenin, "Speech at a Political Rally in befortovskiy Rayon on 19 July
1918," "Polnoye Sobreniye Sochineniy" [Co-plate works], Vol 36, page 528.

ZVEznA VOSTOIA, No S, 1953, page 103.

1... Ya. Bventov, "Inostrennyy hapitel v naftyenoy proayshlennosti Rossii"
[Foreign Capital in Russia's Oil Industry], Noam-Leningrad, 1925, pp 66,
62, 85, 89.

See 1. P. Gindin, "Rusddye ho-ercheshiye banki" [Eurasian Co-ercial Banks],
Moscow, 1968, page 362.

See 1.. l1. Lends, "A-erican Inperialisa - Active Organizer of Anti-Soviet
Intervention in Central Asia (1918-1920) ," 11mm WA IS‘l'ORll puma!

588 [works of the lineu- of History of the Uzbek. 889.], Issue 11, Tashkent,
1954, page 25.

See "Otchet Russko-Aziatshogo banks as 1910 g." [Report of the Russo-Asian
Bank for 1910], Saint Petersburg, 1911, page 2. -

The "governnent" of Round intended to cone to an agreenent with Dutov on
including mrkestsn in the "Southeastern lussien Union," in vhich the
Orenburg, Kuhan', Urals. and Seairech'ye Cossack troops, as sell as the
population of the Kal-yh, Kazakh, end Kirghis lands and the Muslin popula-
tion of the Caucasus were to unite against Soviet rule.

"Dokusenty po istorii grarhdanekoy voyny v 888!" [Docunents on history of
the Civil Us: in the USSR], Vol 1. Moscow, 19b0, page 492.

"Arkhiv polhovnika Khauze" [Archives of Colonel House], Vol ‘, Hoscov,
19“, pp 152-153.

207

“MUSE“Y
1°.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19 .

20.

21.

22.

23.

25.

25.

sv-e velew‘u ~u~ we!“-

See A. Ye. Ruins, ”Proval nerikanskikh planov uvoyevaniya nirovogo
goepodetva v 1917-1920 gg." [Failure of 0.8. Plant to Gain Uorld Deline-
tion in 1917-1920), aeeond, enlarged edition, bacon, 1956, page 95.

See A. Girehfel'd, "0n the U.S. Role in Organizing anti-Soviet Interven-
tion in Siberia and the Far Beat," worms! 15101111, No 8, 19108, page 20.

See Kunina, op. cit., pp 95-96.

"Arkhiv polkovnika..., op. cit., Vol 3, Moscow, 1930, page 275; Vol 4,
PP 152-1530

"General-layer Denetervil'. Britanehiy iaperialisn v Baku i Persii. 1917-
1918 gg" [Hajor General lhmsterville. British Inerialisn in Baku and
Persia, 1917-1918], translated fro- Bnglieh, riflie, 1925, pp 122-123.

DIE POST, 6 hrch 1919.

‘l‘eCAOR SSSB [USSR Central State Archives of the October Revolution], Fund
1318, 11st 1, File 627, Sheet 78. Iron the report of Barakatulla, head of
an Afghan delegation to hasten, 1919.

Town UzSSR [Uzbek 583 Central State Archives of the October Revolution],
Fund 8-17, List, Pile 317a, Sheet 80.

Photocopy of neesage, eee Yu. Aleskerov, "lnterventeiya i grazhdanekaya
voyna v Sredney Azii" [Intervention and Civil War in Central Ania],
Tashkent, 1959, page 31.

"letoriya Urbehskoy 883" [history of the Uzbek 883], Vol 2, Tashkent, 1957,
page 56; see also NASUA mm, 17 Dec 1917 and 1 Jan 1918; BL'-8AYIACI,
16 Jan 1918.

Ye. A. Babuehkin (1880-1927), joined the party in 1902, delegate to the
6th Congreae of the BSDRNb), sent by the party to Turkestan in 1917 to
direct party work. Subsequently eervad in diplonatic poeta.

‘l'eGADR 8383, Fund 130, List 2, File 1095, Sheet 2, reveree aide.

Cited in A. l. Zebelev, ”1: ietorii grarhdanshoy voyny v Uzbekistane”
[Pros the History of the Civil Us: in Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1959, page 6‘.

NASHA mm, 9 March 1918.

"v boyakh ta Sovetehuyu vlaet' v Perganekoy doline. Sbornik
vosponinaniy" [Fighting for Soviet Rule in the Fergana Valley. Collected
Reniniscencee], ‘l'aehlnent, 1957, page 182.

In Septeﬁer 1918 Drhunaid placed the weak-willed Seyid Abdulle on the
khan'e throne.

208

Newman“
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

60.

61.

62.
63.

No.

U. Cherchill', "Hirovoy krizis" [Horld Crisia], Hosea, 1932, page 105.

Lenin, ”Speech at Joint Session of V'l‘sIK on 29 July 1918," "Polnoye...,"
op. cit., Vol 37, page 7.

"Snene vekh" [Change Of Land-arts], collecned' volune of articles, Prague,
1921, page 125.

Cited in R. l. {Ill-an, "Anglo-Soviet Belationa, 1917-1921," Vol 11,
"Britain and Russian Civil Her.” Princeton-Oxford, 1966, page 16.

See SOLOVI‘I'SKIYB OSMA, No 6, 1926, pp 68-69.

‘rsGAOR UsSSk, Fund 3-25, List 1, rile 27a, Sheet 2. In 1918 there were

approxinetely 10 nieeione, delegation and foreign agencies in Tashkent
alone.

A. Niallo, "cherki iatorii revolyuteii i grarhdanakoy voyny v Kirgirii i
Sredney A211" [Sketches on History or the Revolution and Civil war in
Kirghiria and Central Asia], Prune, 1961, page 66.

SOLOVB‘I'SKIYB OSTROVA, No 4, 1926, page 62.

See It. A. Gafnrova, “Bor'ba re internatsional'noye splocheniye
trudyaahchikhsya Sredney Arii 1 Kazakhstan" [Struggle for the Interna-
tional Unification of ‘roilers of Central Asia and Kasakhetan], Moscow,
1972, pp 56-61; Gafnrova, "Dom-snta Expose," mm 1810811, lo 8, 1970,
pp 30-61.

Cited in Gafnrova. "Bor'ba...," op. cit., page 59.

SOLDVBTSKIYE 03mm, No 5-6, 1926, page 37.

1614., lo 6, page 68.

Ibid.

lbid., page 69.

Ibid., llo 5-6, page 36.

”Iatoriya graehdanskoy voyne v Uzbekistan" [nietory of the Civil liar in
Uzbekistan], Vol 1, Tashkent, 196‘, page 238.

TOGAOR 8383, Fund 1336, Liat 1, File 3, Shot ‘1.

Party Archives of the Uzbekistan mist Party Central Co-ittee, Iund

6o, Lie: 1, File 1“, Sheet 3. The precise ember of workers sent is not
indicated.

Zevelev, "I: ietorii...," op. cit., page 288.

209

mmmouu
(05.

106.

b7.

68.
69.

50.

51.

52.

53.

510.

55.

56.
57.
58.

59.

[VB 0". .blﬂtn vue. Ul‘h.

"Istoriya Uzbehskoy SSH." [llistory of the Uzbek ssn], Vol 3. Tashkent.
1967, pp 187-188.

"Istoriya grazbdanskoy voyny v 8881” [History of ths Civil War in the
USSR], Vol lo, Moscow, 1959.

"H. V. Frunze na frontakh grashdenskoy voyny" [14. V. Prunse on the Civil
Uar Fronts], page 209.

"Krasnyy arkhiv” [Red Archive], Vol 3(100). Voscov. 1930, page 16.
2eve1ev, op. cit., page 616.

Lenin, "To the mist Conradea of Turksstan," "Polnoye...," op. cit.,
Vol 39, page 306.

Ibid. , page 329.

Ferganskaya (blast consisted of 5 uyesds: Skobelevshiy. [Ia-angsnslliy.
Oahskiy, Kokandskiy, and Andishenshiy. In 1917 Perganshaya Oblast had a
population of approxinntely 2.5 nillion persons.

According to the figures of the Roland Buchnnge Co-ittee, which conducted
a survey in 47 volosts in the oblast (out of 8‘), nore than 50 percent of
the area under crops was planted to cotton. In nine volosts cotton coe-
prised 90 percent of the land under crops, 80 percent in four, and 70 per-
cent in 23 (see A. ll. Denidov, "Wcheuiy ocherh hhlopkovodstva.
khlophotorgovli i khlopkovoy prolyshlennosti mksstana" [Beononic Sketch of
Cotton Growing. Cotton Trade and the Cotton Industry of ‘rnrhestsnl, unseen,
1922. page 69). In 1916 Fergsna produced 11 nillion poods of the 16 nil-
lion poods of cotton exported tron rurhestan (‘reCASA [Central State
Archives of the Soviet Any], Fund 110. List 1. Pile 163, sheets 156-157).

K. K. Palsn, "Haterialy i kharakteristika narodnogo khosyaystva ‘hnrhestsna"
[Materials and Description of the W of Turkestan], Saint Petersburg,
1911 (calculations by A. R. Ihshevenko].

'ﬁiaterialy sel'skohhosyaystvsnnoy perepisi 1917 3.” [Materials of the
1917 Agricultural Census], Vol 2.

Ibid., page 53.
'l‘sGAOR 888R, Fund 1318, List 1, Pile 621, sheets 135-136.

"Zhisn' natsional'nostey" [Life of the Nationalities], look 1, 1923,
page 87.

Bron a report of the Syr Darya nilitary governor. See "Zenel'nyy vopros
v Ushekiatans. Haterisly ho vtoronu hnrultayu Sovetov" [the Land Question

in Uzbekistan. Materials on the Second nurultay of Soviets], Sansrkand,
1925. page S.

210

”WWW!”
60.

61.

62.
63.

65.
66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.
72.

73.

In 1917 there were 159 cotton ginning nills operating in Ferganskaya
Oblast, conprising 68 percent of the total m-ber of cotton ginning nills
in Turkeatan (26 in Andizhan, 17 in hanangan, 11. in Hargilan, 10 in
Kokand). Seventeen out of a total of 38 oil nills were in Ferganshaya
Oblaat (“.7 percent). these were the largest nills (12 presses). Just

as the cotton ginning nills. they were concentrated for the noet part in
Kohndand Andizhan (see I. Alhin. ”Srednyaya Asiya" [Central Asia], lbscou,
page 283). Also operating in this oblast were the Chi-ion oilfield and

oil refinery. the Santo oilfield, as veil as the Kysyl-liya and Sulyukta
coal nines.

"Statisticheskiy yeshegodnik losaii re 1913 6." [Russia Statistical Year-
book for 1913], Vol 2, part 1, Saint Petersburg. 1916, page 87.

“ASIA W, 26 Rov 1917.

K. Ye. Zhitov, "Establish-ant of Soviet Rule in Uzbekistan," "1: istorii
Sovetskogo Urbekistana" [Pro- the History of Soviet Uzbekistan], Tashkent,
1956, page 8.

NASHA mm. 11 and 30 lav 1917.
TsGAOR 0:883, Fund 25. List 1, File 15, Sheet 123.
Ibid., File 16, Sheet 35.

The nunicipal dunes in unangan and Osh were dissolved in the amer of
1918, and in Andirhan in October 1918.

TsGADR 0288!, Fund R-ZS, List 1, tile 80, Sheet 70.

Polloving the February Revolution, drushinaa of the Arnenian

Dashnshtsutym bourgeois nationslist party vere found in the Fergana. The
Dashnsks, however, did not so nuch protect the Athenian civilian popula-
tion in Perganskaya Oblast fro: pillagers as rob the inhabitants of hishlaks
and auls under the pretext of fighting the besnschi. The Turk'l'sll Cheha

for the struggle against the counterrevolution in the Fergana stated in its
order dated 26 Hay 1919: "In the l'ergana detaclnsnts of the party
(Dashnaktsutyun -- Auth.) have displayed ethnic intolerance toward the local
population, which has to a substantial degree fostered the develop-ant of

an extensive brigand novenent" (Zevelev, op. cit., page 129).

V. n. Pigel'shiy - an outstanding son of the Polish people and one of the
1b Turkestsn couissars killed in January 1919 during an anti-Soviet in-
surrection.

TOGADR SSSR, Fund 3-25, File 7. Sheet 5.

TIGAOR 5883, Fund 1318. List 1, File 627, Sheet 373.

levelev. op. cit., page 128.

211

mmussouu!
76.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.
83.

85.
86.
87.

Materials of the Turkestan Republic Sovuarkoa for January 1918 state that
in the uyezds of Ferganskaya Oblast'there is noted an influx of clergy

tron Bukhars... issuing an appeal to support lrgashkhan, who is defending
the interests of the mslise“ [rooms 8853. Fund 25, List 1. File 80,

Sheet 3].

1‘st UzSSR, Fund 3-25, List 1. File 69-a, sheets 61-62; Furty Archives of
the Uzbekistan 00-min: Party Central Co-ittee, Fund 60, list 1, File 205.
Sheet 9, reverse.

Party archives of the Uzbekistan Co-Inist Party Central Oo-lttee, Fund 60,
List 1, File 205, Sheet 9.

lbid.. Sheet 8, reverse.

According to the figures of the People’s Oo-isssriat of Agriculture of the
Turkestan Republic, as a result of looting and plundering by the basaschi,
the indigenous population of Andishanskiy Uyesd retained no nore than 2 per-
cent of their horses.

For ample, In Novenber 1919 Irgash issued an order for hay-snake” Volost,
according to which each pyatidesyatnik [designated elder of a 50-household
unit‘ll was to collect fros his jurisdiction 500 rubles for the basnachi,
while every dekhkan who possessed land was obliged to contribute 500 rubles
per tanap [50 tanap equal about 37 acres] of land (TsGASA, Fund 1&9, File
71, Sheet 229). Another basnschi kurbashi, Hakhknn-khodzha, levied a tar
in kind - clover and oats - on the residents of the kishlak of Tokachi:
each pyatidesyatnichestvo was to deliver 1 chirik of oats (5 poods 24
pounds) and 50 sheaves of clover ('rsGASA, Fund 25859, List 1, File lob,

Sheet 356).

‘l'sGASA, Fund 110, List 2, File 609. sheets 35-38.

"Inostrannays voyenneya interventsiya i grazhdanskaya voyna v Sredney
A211 1 Kazakhstan. Sb. doklnentov" [Foreign Military lnterventioa and
Civil 1m in (antral Asia and Kazakhstan. Collection of Docunents], Vol 1,
Alas-its, 1963, page 622.

1hid., page 1.23.

Ibid.. page “3.

Ibid., page “9.

Ibid., page 650.

lbid., page 655.

‘l‘sGASA. Fund 169, File 81, Sheet 65.

‘l'sGASA, Fund 169, File 187, Sheet 28.

212

summon“
89.

90.
91.

92.
93.
9b.
95.

96.
97.

98.

99 .
100 .
101 .
102 .
103 .

106.

105.
106.
107.

Initially it was called ”Operations ueadquarters for the Struggle Against
the Brigends." -

‘l'sGASA, had 169, File 156, Sheet 16.

Party Archives of the Uzbekistan (to-mist Party Central Co-ittee, Fund 60,
List 1, File 210, Sheet 10.

NASH mm, 7 Jan 1919.
‘rsGASA, Fund 169, File 155, sheets 11-12.
PIAVDA V0810“, 22 30v 1957.

Party Archives of the Uzbekistan (Io-mist Party Central Oo-ittee,
Fund 60. List 1. File Iol, Sheet 1.

TsGASA, Fund 169, File 81. Sheet 26.

Throughout 1919 and at the beginning of 1920 one of the principal gather-
ing places of the beenachi bends operating under the co-end of Nada-rin-
beh was the area sound the kishlak of Gorbue. situated 18 ha fro-
Gorchakovo Station and 8 kn fron Vladykino siding. ‘l'he beenechi were based
not in the kishlak proper but in a Rustin cemetery located in the vicinity,
which use intersected by aryhe and hillocke and containing a large

burial nound in the center.

Not far fro. Round, in the vicinity of the mum; of Bachkyr, Irgash
constructed fortifications, ringing then with adobe walls.

Zevelev, op. cit., page 33..

Ibid., page 335‘.

Ibid.

VOPROSY ISTORII. No 12. 1980. page 88.

'l'sGASA. Fund 110. List Io, File 275, Sheet 26.

a cmique’ issued by the goth of the ‘Iurheetan lepub1ic stated that
foreign inperia11sts were the initiators and inspirers of the conspiracy
and that "it was supported chieﬂy by foreign capital" (mm MIA.

29 Oct 1918).

1.0103 0:888. Fund R-ZS. List 1, File 31. Sheet 10; File 120, Sheet 36.
Gafurova, op. cit.. page 38.

1113 was. confining the fact that Bailey had gone underground, reported
that he had been operating "undiscovered in mrkeetan for nore than a year."

213
m 0mm US! ONLY
.
3.

run vteoymu vac. ensue

This also includes his sojourn in lukhara (see RSFSR People's Coe-
nisssriat of International Affairs telegran sent to the ‘rurkkoeissiya
in February 1920). levelev, op. cit., page 2‘6.

TsGASA, selection, List 2, File 835. Sheet 188.

According to other infornation, the nission consisted of three officers,
an interpreter, and accoapsnying persons ("Indy linseys istorii All 02883.”
op. cit., Issue 2, Tashkent, 1954, page 37)..

“Zhizn' natsionsl'nostey," op. cit., Book 1. 1923, page 89.

Cited in "Trudy llu:eya...," op. cit.. page 38.

Party Archives of the Uzbekistan Co-Iunist Party Centrsl Co-ittee. Fund
60, List 1, File 65, sheets 22-23; TIGAOI 8883. Fund 1336, List 1, File 6,
Sheet 159.

‘rsGASA, Fund 169, File 51, Sheet 126.

Cited in "Bor'ba es ustanovleniye i uprocheniye Sovetskoy vlasti v
Khodzhenskon Uyezde (1917-1920 3;). Sb. dokuaentov" [The Struggle for
Establish-cut and Consolidation of Soviet Authority in nodehenskiy Uyeed
(1917-1920). Collection of Documnts]. Leninebad, 1957, page 107.

A privileged stratun of Russian kulsk settlers. who had loyally sup-
ported the cearist eutocracy in mrhestan, bees-s established in several
uyezds of Fergsnshsya Oblsst, today situeted for the noot part on the
territory of the Kirghiz $83.

This exceeded Soviet forces in the Fergsne approxintely fivefold.
‘rsCASA, Fund 25859, List 1, File 66. Sheet 328.

Ibid., Sheet 42.

lbid. , Sheet 97. Fron intelligence obtained by the Fergana Front Special
Branch.

Ibid., List 6, File 47, sheets 231-3, 232.

FROLE'IARSKAYA HYSL' (Organ of the Fergansksya Oblsst Co-ittee of the
m(b)), 10 Sep 1919.

TsGASA, Fund 25859, List 1. File 7, Sheet 352 reverse.
Ibid., File No, Sheet 43.
Fron the nenoirs of Mirro-Kasyn Althnedov, n party saber fro. 1918.

See "Voapuinaniya uchastnihov grashdanshoy voyny v Andishanskoy Oblasti”
[Ruiniscences of Participants in the Civil War in Andizhanskaya Ohlast],

2M

“MANNY
126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.
132.
133.
134.
135.
136.
137.
138.

139.

160.

1101.

162.
163.

l“.

Andiehnn, 1957. pege 11‘. lo record of proceedings of this nesting hes
been found.

The ranks of the Andishnn perty orgnniution contained spproxinetely 300
CO-unists.

S. K. Kury-Akhnedov — one of the organisers of the defense of Andiehen,
in the pest had been e helm oil worker, petty ester fro- 1918.

Pros the nenoirs of V. N. Sidorov. See "Vosponinnniye uchestnikov...,”
op. cit., pege 103.

I. P. Shishhnov stetes in his senoirs thet ”letters end proclnsetions
of surrender begs: to be sent" into the city end the detechsents defend-
ing Andizhen (Ibid., pege 39).

”V boyelnh re Sovetskuyu vlest' v Pergenshoy douse" [In the Betties for
Soviet Rule in the Pergene Veney], reshkent, 1957, pegs 1‘8.

“Vospo-ineniye uchestnikov...," op. cit., pp 25-26.
TsGASA, Fund 25859, List 1, File M, sheets 109-110.
Ihid., File 13, Sheet 456.

‘l‘sGASA, Fund 110, List 3, File 881, Shot 77.

Ibid., List 2, File 600, Sheet 307.

‘rsGASA, Fund 25859, List 1. File M, Sheet 193 reverse.
TsGASA, Fund 110, List 3, File 86, Sheet 19.

A. Hiddendorf, "Ocherki Pergenelroy doiiny” [lergene Valley Sketches],
St. Petershurg, 1872.

H. V. Prunes, "Isbrsnnyye proizvedeniye" [Selected writings], Vol 1,
Hoscov, 1950, pegs 102.

Such activities were conducted for en extended period of tine md
produced positive results.

This ides we: also expressed in other doculents of Pergnne petty-soviet
organizations.

Zeve1ev, op. cit., pege S36.
'reGASA, Fund 110, List 3, File 285, Sheet 80 reverse.

Ihid., List 1, File 23. Sheet 17.

215

memosemv
165.

166.

167.
168.
169.
150.

151.

152.
153.
156.
155.
156.
157.
158.
159.
160.
161.
162.
163.
166.
165.
166.
167.

168.

a vs. vs a awhile. was Us O...

"H. V. Prunze ns frontshh...," op. cit., page 280.

Five major has-schi chieftsins joined Kurshinst: Ishst Bayhschi (his
hands operated in Kokandskiy Uyud), Pat-pi (in Andishenskiy Dyud), Ann-
Pslvan (Wash, Uyezd), m1 (the foothills of the Chatkalhhiy
Range), end Huetdin-yulchi (south of a line running Sinhalev-Osh).

Sh. z. Eliava soon left the tenses for Hoseov.

Zeveiev, op. cit.. page 560.

'H. v. Prunse na frontskh...." op. cit.. page 282.

Ibid.

Lenin. "Speech at the Fourth Conference of Gubernia dishes on 6 Pehruary
1920," "Polnoye...,“ op. cit., V61 60, page 119.

"H. V. Prune ns frontakh...,” op. cit.. pp 309-311.

151a“ page 312.

IZVBSTIYA, 'l'sahkent, 16 June 1920.

levelev, op. cit.. psge 582.

TsGASA, Fund 110. List 2. File 609, Sheet 153.

"Istoriya Kirgizii" [History of Kirghisia], Vol 2, Prune, 1956, page 106.
‘rsGASA, Fund 110. List 3. File 522, sheets 60-63.

Ihid., sheets 63, 67.

Ibid., Sheet 66.

Ibid., Sheet 82.

‘rscASA. Fund 110, List 1. File 29. sheets 230, 257, 261.

TsGASA, selection. List 2. Pi1e 836. Sheet 256.

levelev, op. cit.. page 588.

Ihid.

lhid.

Lenin, "Speech at the Fourth Conference...." op. cit., Vol 60, page 116.

Dutov was in Hestern China at this tine.

216

INDI‘OIIICIAI.IEEE(INIJV
169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

176.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.
180.
181.

182.

levelev, op. cit., pege 589.

P. 1. Bersnov. en old Bolshevik, served subsequently as chief of the Air
Forces Directorate of the Bed Any and chief of the Avietion Industry Ad-
ninistrstion of the Supreme Coucil of the Betionsl Icons-y. he wss
killed in en eirplene crssh in 1933.

The Pergsns Any Group contsined the 1st Turkesten Division, the 3d
Turkesten Cevelry Division (Andishen), the 7th Brigede (lokend), the loth
Brigede (Andizhen), the 5th Brigade (Pedchenko), the 6th Brigede
(he-engen). end certain other unite.

These neesures, however, were not carried out sufficiently consistently in
certain ports of the oblest.

At this sens tine uyezd end villege conferences of perty-uneffilieted
toiling dekhksns were being he1d.

Beenechi forces here never exceeded severel thousand non.

The history of the struggle egeinst the forces of Dzhuneid-khen during
this tine is presented in detail in the wire of B. V. Cheprunov
("Porerheniye Dzhunsid-khsns. 2s Sovetskiy Turkesten" [The Defest of
Drhunsid-khsn. For Soviet Turkestsn], Teshkent. 1969), end in e work by

T. Guenyuk (“Bor'be 2e Petro-Alekssndrovsk. Pyeteye godovshchius

Kresnoy Areii" [The Struggle for Petro-Aleksendrovsk. Fifth Anniversary
of the Red Arty], Tashkent. 1923). The following reply by the defenders of
Ilukus in the sutum of 1919 sttests to the herois- diepleyed in the

struggle sgeinet Dehuneid's bends: ”The Bolsheviks will not lsy down their
erns until every lest one of then is deed" (GI-enyuk, pege 93).

"Istoriye Bukhsrskoy i nureenskoy nerodnykh respublik” [history of the
Bukhsre end Khorers People's Republics], lbscov, 1971, pege 96.

IZVBSTIYA, Teshkent, 22 July 1920.

Cited in A. lshenov. "Bukhsrskeye Bsrodnsye Sovetskeye Beepubliks" [The
Bukhsrs People's Soviet Republic], Teehkent, 1969, page 165.

1514., page 188.
"H. V. Bronze ne frontekh...," op. cit., pege 330.
‘l‘sGAOR 8888. Fund 1318, List 1, File 715, Sheet 13.

Khiven Jedids -- pout-bourgeois denocrets vho initielly opposed Khivs'e
feudel system end who densnded the iqlsnentstion of refer-s li-iting the
power of the khen. Their politicel orientetion ves extresely indeter-
ninete. For this reeson they could not leed the revolutionsry struggle
of the dekhken mess. Subsequently sons of then colleboreted with the
Soviet euthorities, while the rest took the peth of strugls against the
dictetorship of the proleteriet.

217

FOIOWICIALUSIONLY
183.

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.
189.

190.

191.

192.

EUR UI'I'IQJAL UBI‘. UNLI

See "Istoriya koanunisticheskikh organizatsiy Sredney Azii...," op. cit.,
page 630.

See "Obrazovaniye SSSR. Sb. dokunentov 1917-1926" [Pbr-ation of the USSR.
Collected Docunents, 1917-1926], Moscow, 1969, pp 261-267.

This is attested by P. B. Btherton, British consul general in Kashgar, in
his book "In the heart of Asia," London, 1925.

”Pogranichnyye voyaka 8883. 1918-1928 gg. Sb. Dokulentov" [USSR Border
Troops, 1918-1928. Collected Docunents], Moscow, 1973, page 39.

“Hazey pogranichnykh voysk" [Border Troops Museum], Folder 245, File 3,
Sheet 1.

TsGASA, Fund 110, List 3, File 260, Sheet 3.
These proposals were of a military-political character.

"Boyevyye podvigi chastey Krasnoy Arnii. 1918-1922" [Combat Exploits
of Red Army Units, 1918-1922], page 183.

"Uokunenty vneshney politiki SSSR" [USSR Foreign Policy Doculents], Vol 3,
Hoscow, 1959, page 552.

See "Obrazovaniye 8858...," op. cit., pp 251-257.

Enenies of Peaceful Labor

1.

2.

3.

5.

6.

H. V. Frunze, "Izhrannyye proizvedeniya" [Selected writings], Vol 1,
Moscow, 1950, page 620.

'S"yezdy Sovetov Soyuza SSR, soyuznykh i avtonoanykh sovetskikh
sotsialisticheskikh respublik. Sb. dokulentov v trekh tonakh" [Con-
gresses of Soviets of the USSR, Union and Autonomous Soviet Socialist
Republics. Collected Documents in Three Volules], Vol 1, Moscow, 1959,
pp 155, 156.

K. Yarnatov, ”Ribbon of Tine," DRUZDBA NARDDOV, No 11, 1977, page 212.

In 1929 the Tajik ASSR, which had been a conponent of the Uzbek SSR,
became a union republic. In 1932 the Kara-Kalpak Autononous Oblast

becane an autononous republic. In 1936 it becane a conponent of the
Uzbek $88.

In 1925 the Kara-Kirghiz Autonouous Oblast vas redesignated the Kirghiz
Autonolous Oblast, in 1926 Has nade an autononoua republic, and in
1936 a union republic.

KRASNAYA KAZARHA (Organ of the Political Directorate of the Turkestan
Front), No 6, 1923.

218

FOR'OFFKJAI.UBE(IVLY
7.

8.

9.

1°.

11.

12.

13.

16.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

See MIST (organ of the Central Couittee of the Turkesten Commist
Party), No 3-6, 1922.

See Sh. II. Ul‘nashsyev, "Pro-yshlennoye rasvitiye Sovetshogo Uzbekistan"
[Industrial Developnent of Soviet Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1958, page 84.

Party Archives of the Uzbekistan Co-Inist Party Central Co-ittee, Fund 60,
File 1503. Sheet 1.

See ‘Vxhrki istorii Ko-nisticheskoy partii Turksstana" [Sketches Fro- the
History of the Turhestan Co-unist Party], Tashkent, 1960, pp 65-66.

"Istoriya greshdanskoy voyny v Ushekistane" [History of the Civil ﬂat in
Uzbekistan], Vol 2, Tashkent, 1970, page 296.

TsGASA, Fund 7, List 2, files 38, 230. See also 181081013qu MTV, No 1,
1961, page 132.

"Istoriya grazhdansltoy...," op. cit., page 296.

Turkestan Comnist Party Central Co-ittee Party Archives, Fund 60,
Folder 1, bid, sheets 66-68.

"Istoriya grazhdanskoy...," op. cit.

Uzbekistan Co-mnist Party Central Co-ittee Party Archives, Fund 60,
List 1, File 1621, Sheet 36.

IZVESTIYA, Tashkent, 6 and 8 July 1922.
MC? CC Party Archives, Fund 60, Folder 2, h/d, 2148.

"Byulleten' VII konferentsii m" [Bulletin of the 7th Conference of the
Turhestan (Jo-mist Party], Tashkent, 1922, page 25.

02C? CC Party Archives, Fund 60, List 1, File 1821, Sheet 5.

KRASMYA mm. No 1, 19239 ”8‘ 150.

"Boyevyye episody. Baa-achestvo v Fergsne i [bores-e. Sb. Interialov"
[Co-bat Episodes. The Iasnschi in the Fergans and nurses. Collected
Materials], Moscow-Tashkent, 1936, pp 66-67.

Ahdulla Yarnuhhanedov was a hero of the civil var in Turkestan. He was
three tines awarded the Order of the Red Banner for courage and heroisn
displeyed in the struggle against the hasnachi.

KRASNAYA mam, No 7, 1923, page 116.

Ibid., 80 11, 1923, page 58.

219

summon“
26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

35.

36.

37.

39.
100.
lol.
42.

63.

Ml! urn-luau. Dee one!

UrCP cc Party Archives, Fund 60. List 1, File 3027, sheets 6-5; tile 3030.
sheets 85-86.

See A. Niallo. "Ocherki istorii revolyutsii i grashdanskoy voyny v
Kirgizii i Sredney Azii" [Sketches Free the History of the Revolution and
the Civil Her in Kirghizis and Central Asia], Prunse. 1961. pp 158-160.

See IZVESTIYA Isl mo»), No Q (52). 1923, page 5.

This conclusion was based on factual data.

"Rerolyutsii i reaheniya s"yerdov KP Uzbekistan" [Resolution and
Decisions of Uzbekistan Co-unist Party Congresses], Tashkent. 1957, page
21.

"Istoriya grazhdanskoy...," op. cit., page 311.

Cited in A. Ishanov, "Bukharskaya liarodnaya Sovetskaya Bespuhliha" [The
Bukhsra People's Soviet Republic], pp 275-276.

V. I. Lenin, "better to A. A. loffe on 13 Septeaber 1921," ”Poln. Sohr.
Soch.," op. cit., Vol 53, page 190.

Folloving Turkey's surrender, Raver fled to CerIeny, after which he spent
soee tine in Soviet Russia. Failing in his attapt to asks his way to
Anatolia and lead the struggle there against Huatafa Ksaal, he took active
part in the bsmchi insurrection in Central Asia. lle left for nukhara
allegedly to take a journey through the region (see BS! [Great Soviet
Encyclopedia], Vol 30, Moscow. 1978, page 173; ”Iatoriya ko-Inisticheakikh
organizataiy Sredney Azii" [History of the Co-uniat Organisation of
Central Asia]. Tashkent, 1967, page 676).

Cited in A. Rh. Babakhodshayev. ”Proval angliyshoy agresaivnoy politiki v
Sredney Azii" [Collapse of the Aggressive British Policy in Central Asia],
Tashkent, 1955. page 1“.

TsGASA, Fund 110, List 3, File 517. Sheet 155.

Border Troops Museum Folder 16, File 2, Sheet 5.

Ibid.. Sheet 6.

Ibid., Folder 265, File 3, Sheet 1.

11516., Folder 2105, File 3, Sheet 1.

Ibid.. Sheet 3.

See "Istoriya grarhdanskoy...," op. cit., page 326.

Border ‘rroope Museum, Folder 265, File 3, Sheet 3.

220

”OFFICIALUSEONLY
66.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
50.
51.

52 .
S3.

55.
S6.
57.
58.
59.

61.

62.

63.

65.

1b“.

See "Iotoriyo mutichookikh...,” op. cit.. pp 691-692.
Border troops m. Poldor 265, rilo 3, Shoot 3.
”lotoriyo ko-nioticheoukh....” op. cit.. pogo 686.

It was for-nod oo o poople'o oruy.

8oe "Iotoriyo ko-uniotichookikh...." op. cit.. pogo 563.
Ibid.

Seo V. H. Uotinov. "lstoblioh-oot of tho mm Cutrol (Jo-ittoo
Sredozbyuro and Its Iolo in Orgonioing aeonolic Cooperation Anon;
turkeoton, Bukhoro ond norm." mans! 1810111 088, lo 7. 1966.
See "Iotoriyo ko-miotiehookikh...," op. cit., pogo 689.
DENNIS! “0281318111“, 15 Jmo 1969.

"Iotoriyo konmiotichookikh...," op. cit.. pogo 56‘.

Ibid., pogo 566-565.

Ibid., pp 565-566.

zvazm vosm, lie 12, 1951. pogo 131.

Border Troopo mom, Folder 265, Filo 3, Shoot 3.

See IZVES'IIYA (argon of tho Turkeotoo co-miot Porty Control Co-ittoe
ond Turk‘roll), 6 ond 8 July 1922.

0158! RCA [Uzbek 88! Control Stoto Archival, Fund 67. List 1, Pile 136,
sheets 7l-73.

”8"yezdy Sovotov...," op. cit., Vol 2, lbocov, 1960. pogo $88.
Cited in D. Pon'yon, "K iotorii oovotokogo otroitol'otvo v rodrhikiotono"

[0n tho History of Soviet Orgoniootionol Dovolopoont in 'rojikiotoo],
Stalinobod. 1961, pogo 61.

See "lotoriyo ko-uniotiehookikh...." op. cit., pogo 692.
Ibid.
See "Iotoriyo Sowetokogo gooudorotvo i provo Uobokiotono" [liotory of

Soviet Stoto ond Low in Urbekioton]. Vol 1, Toohkont. 1960. pogo 173.

221

mommouu
66.
67.
68.
69.

70.

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.

83.

ml cerium. var. on»!

Border Troops unseen, Po1der 265, File 3, sheets 5, 62.

Ibid., Sheet 5.

Ibid.

Another figure -- 120 persons - is given in e work ll. lrkayev (”Istoriye

grszhdanskoy voyny v redshikistsne" [history of the Civil Her in
Tndshikistsn], page 600).

See I. A. Abdulkhayev, "Dprocheniye Sovetskoy vlesti v rayone verkhov'ya
Zeravshana (1918-1923 33.)" [Consolidation of Soviet Iule on the Upper
Reaches of the Zersvshsn (1918-1923)], Dushanbe. 1972, pegs 121. There are
also other accounts of Kholbuta's fate. In particular. ll. Irkayev, op. cit.,
writes that lholbuta end his band were buried by an avalanche. Documents
preserved in the Central Archives of the Border Troops corroborate the
sccomt given by R. A. Abdulkheyev.

"lstoriye grerhdanskoy...." op. cit., page 333.

"Istoriya kmmisticheskikh...." op. cit.. pogo 69‘.

Border Troops m, Folder 245, File 3. sheet 5.

Ibid., sheets 62-63.

Ibid., sheets 5-6. 63.

Ibid.. Folder 16, File 2, Sheet 10.

Ibid., Folder 245, File 3. sheets 5-6.

"Istoriya Ito-amisticheskikh...," op. cit., page 698.

Ibid.

Irhsyev. op. cit., pp 651. ‘52.

TsGASA, m 110, List 2, File 330. sheets 12-13; File 527. Sheet 18.
11.14.. File 531. Sheet 86.

Nikoley Dnitriyevich rosin (1887-1926) fought ageinst lolchak on the
Eastern Front in 1918-1919. In 1920 he served as co-ender of the 10th
Cavalry Division. 'rook part in defesting the “hits Guard bands on the
Kuban' and putting don the Mtonov insurrection in radonbya cast-nip.
Took part in the liberation of Volocheyevha and Ihaberovsk. Killed in
battle with the beenchi on 12 Augmt 1926.

PMVDA, 18 Deed-her 1970.

222

“WWMY
85.

86.
87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
92.

93.
96.

95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
106.
105.
106.
107.
108.

tech 0:581. Fund ‘7. Proceeding of the 5th “matey of the ”SI. Cited
in "Ietoriye ko-nieticheekikh...," op. cit.. me 707.

Border Tmpe the", Poldet 16, tile 2, eheete 12-13.
11:18., eheete 18-19.

11:111.. Sheet 28.

1518., Sheet 20.

11516.. Sheet 12.

In effect until 10 July 1925.

”Rewlyuteii i reeheaiye e“yezdov KP Methane" [molutioue end Deci-
eione of Uxbekieten co-niet Petty Cousteau]. reehkent, 1957. me 50.

"Kreenomyy Turkeetenekiy" [led-Deane! Wheaten], me 123.

"Ocherhi ietotii Ko-mieticheehoy pertii" [Sketchee Pre- the nietory of
the Conuniet Petty], Duehenhe, 1966, page 41.

See “anatomy..." op. cit., page 127.
Border Troops Hue“, Folder 16. File 5. Sheet 34.
Ibid., Sheet 51.

Ibid.

11:111., eheete 55-56.

Ibid.. sun: ‘7.

Ibid., Sheet u.

11:18., Folder 130. File 3, Sheet 3.

Ihid.. Folder 16. Pile 5. Sheet 71.

Ibid.. Sheet 88.

“516.. Sheet 109.

lbid.. Sheet 88.

Ibid., Sheet 109.

Ibid.. Sheet 18.

223

summon“
109.

110.

111.
112.

113.
116.
115.
116.
117.
118.
119.
120.
121.

122.

123.
126.
125.
126.
127.
128.

FUﬂIUVFIJAl.UDLQJNLY

Ibid.

In the ounce of 1926 the rutkaetan Front vaa todeaigneted the Central
Asian unitary District. See "human-amp..." op. cit.. pp 128. ‘09.

Ibid., page 129.

Central Petty Archives of the Institute of llarxiau-Leninian. Fund 62,
List 1, File 81. Sheet 228. Cited in "Ietoriya m.z1mum...."
op. cit., page 650.

Ihid., page 651.

Ihid., page 653.

See "Krasnoenanennyy...." op. cit., page 117.

Ihid., page 119.

See "Iatoriya ho-niaticheakikh....” op. cit.. pp 657-658.

11.14.. page 91.

”Kramenanannyy...," op. cit.. page 130.

ma” pp 131-132.

"No etraehe nirnogo truda" [Guarding Peaceful Labor]. page 91.
Skiniahea with Dahmaid'a detach-ante took place neat Shakh-lhnxad-Yah,
near the ruin. of the fortteaa of Sakyz-Otlyh, in the vicinity of Lake
Sarykalyeh and Aty Kuah Hen. See ibid.

lbid.. page 92.

Border Troopa Muse‘s. Folder 16. File 5, Sheet 88.

16111.. Folder 130, File 7. Sheet 3.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibld. [11¢ 9, Sheet 14.

A Dying aha-y Ia Dangerou

1.

2.

"Iatoriya SSSI. Epokha eotaializla” [history of the USSR, Era of Social-
ian], Moscow, 1976. page 261.

These detachments vare athed with etavea. axea, ecythee. knives, and fowl.-
ing pieces.

22‘

FOR40IIICIA1.USIIMNLY
3.
6.
5.
6.

7.

B.

9.

10.
ll.
12.
13.
lb.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
26.

Border Troopa m, Folder 23, File 9, Sheet 27.

lhid.. Sheet 28.

Ibid., Sheet 27.

WYA 13m. 12 February 1932. Cited in l. G. Gurdshlylntl and A. A.
Yea'kov: ”lo-mieticheakaya partiya (hol'ehevihov) Turk-alien” —
organiutor i rukovoditel' rargrona haenacheahoy avantyury 1931 g. --

V. l. Lenin i ietorieheakiye eud'hy turbenahogo nar'oda" [The (Jo-mint
Party (of lolehevike) of Turk-nut“ - Organizer and Leader of the

Defeat of the Banachi Adventure of 1931 -- V. l. Lenin and the Historic
Destiny of the Turk-en People], Aehkhahad. 1976, page 78.

V. I. Lenin. "Greetinga to the llungarin Uorkera." "Polo. Sohr. Soch.,'
op. cit.. Vol 38, page 387.

Border Troope Huaeu. Folder 163. Tile 1. Sheet 53.
lhid., sheets 57-59.

”Ila etrarhe nirnogo trade” [Guarding Peaceful Labor]. op. cit., page 96.
Border Troope Hosea. Folder 163, File l, Sheet 69.
"Ne atrazhe....” op. cit.. page 99.

Border Troops Men, Tolder 163. File l. Sheet 69.
Ibid., Folder 20, File 2. sheet. 1-5.

lhid.. Folder 25, File 3, Sheet 86.

"Na atrazhe...." op. cit., pp lOl-lOZ.

ISTORIYA 8853, No 2, 1972. pp lOl-lOZ.

Border Troops Hue”. Folder 25, File 3, Sheet 36.

A total of £000 houaeholde (22 aula). including 500 hai houaeholda, took
part in this love.

"Ila etrarhe....” op. cit. page 103.

Border Troope Men. Folder 25, File 3, Sheet 3.
"he otrazhe....” op. cit., page 10‘.

1514.. page 107.

lhid.

225

mmwzomx
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.

I van we e evens. av.- -. cue

Border Troops hum, l'older 23. File 3. sheets 1—2.

See Gurdehiyante and Yes'kov. op. cit.. page 85.

Ibid.. page 86.

"Konets beseecheetva" [End of the laslnchi]. Moscow. 1976, page 161.
Border ‘rroopa Muse‘s. Folder 23. File 3. Sheet 23.

Ibid.. Folder 25. File 11. sheets 1-11.

Conclusion

1.

2.

6.

7.

a.
9.

lo.

11.
12.
13.

14.

Central State Archives of the Soviet Any. Selection. List 2. File 836.
sheets 286-318.

"Otchet 1's! m c VI po V11 s"yezd an" [at Central Co-ittee Accountabil-
ity Report fro- the 6th to 7th m Congress], rashksnt. 1923. page 12.

”Rezolyuteii i postanovleniya a"yesdov Io-mieticheskoy partii
Turkeetana. 1918-192b gg.” [Resolutions and Decrees of Turkastan Coe-
nuniet Party Congresses. 1918-1926]. ‘rashkent. 1958. page 121.
SOIDVETSKIYE OSTIOVA. lb 5-6, 1926. page 36.

a. v. Frunse. ”Ila frontalh grazhdanshoy voyay. Sb. dotuentov"
0n the Civil Her Fronts. Collection of Docuente]. hosoov. 1941. page 308.

"Retolyutsii i postanovleniya II s”yesda Irma" [Resolutions and Decrees
of the 2d Congress of the Uzbekistan Co-nniat Party (of Bolsheviks”.
Sanarkand. 1925, page 67.

v. I. Lenin. "Hill the Bolsheviks Be Able to ﬁeld on to Government Poser?"
"Polnoye Sobraniye Sochineniy.” op. cit.. Vol 34. page 299.

'meeolyutsii i poatanovleniya s“yeadov....” op. cit., page 121.
'Otchet 1's! 01...." op. cit.. page 12.

H. Alyaviya. ”Uzbekakiye narodnyye pesni" [Uzbek tolk Songs]. in Uzbek.
Tashkent, 1959. page 12‘. Translation by Yu. A. Polyakov.

Prunze, op. cit.. page 308.
Border Troops Museum tolder 23, File 15. Sheet 1.

Subsequently Aktyuainsk.

Alyaviya. op. cit.. page 127.

226

”WWMY
Appendix

1.

2.

3.

6.

5.

7.

There are no special historiographic studies on defeat of the has-achi.
Separate aspects of this subject are reflected in the folloving hooks

and articles: V. P. Sheretohitov, K. K. Orosaliyev, and D. F. Vinnih,
"Ocherlti istorii istoricheskoy naulti v Sovetskon Kirgizstsne (1918-1960)”
[Sketches on the history of Historical Science in Soviet Kirghisstan
(1918-1960)], Frmse, 1961; A. 1. Zevelev, ”Istoriografiys Sovetskogo
Turkestsna (istoriografiys i istochniki po istorii grazhdanskoy voyny v
Turkestane)" [historiography of Soviet Turkesten (Historiography and
Sources on History of the Civil Her in Turkestan», Tashkent, 1968;

Kb. Sh. Inoyatov and L. H. Lands, Introductions to Volt-es 1 and 2 of
"Istoriya grazhdanekoy voyny v Uzbekistan“ [History of the Civil “er in
Uzbekistan], Vol 1, Tashkent, 1966, pp 5-22; Vol 2, Tashkent, 1970, pp 3-
13; S. Namtov, ”The Civil Bar in mores. (Survey of the Literature),"
ISTORIYA 58511, no 3, 1970, pp 137-1“; Rh. Sh. Inoyatov, "Sone Results of
Study of the History of the Hilitsry Intervention and Civil liar in Central
Asia," IstIYA SSSR, lo 6, 19710; Kb. Sh. lnoyatov, ”Krsthaya
istoriografiys grazhdanskoy voyny v Sredney Asii" [Concise Historiography
of the Civil Her in Central Asia], Tashkent, 1974; R. H. Hasov, "Sale
Results of Study of the History of the October Revolution and Civil Hot
in Tajikistan," lS‘l'ORIYA $883, No b, 1977; Hssov, "Istoriografiya
Sovetshogo redshikistans" [historiography of Soviet Tajikistan], Dushanbe,
1978.

Iatpart divisions were fornd after the national-state duarcation in
Central Asia (1926) under the Co-Inist parties of the national republics
(for examle, under the Central Co-ittee of the Co-mist Party (of
Bolsheviks) of Turkmenistan). A Kazakh depannent of lstpart no es-
tablished in 1922.

v. Kuvshinov, "The Pergana area”; ll. Shklysr, "Travel breasions of the
Fergana," VOYBIRAYA 1081', Book 1, Septuher 1920; '1'. Dervish (II.
lyurakulov), "The Fergana Prohlen," MMYA HYSL' , look 2, lay-July 1920.
See also: ‘1‘. Dervish, "The Conteeporary Banachi," Wis-r, Ito l, 1922.
VOYMAYA HYSL', Book 1, page 278.

2eve1ev, "ls istorii...," op. cit., page 1056.

See VOYMAYA WSL', Book 2, page 118.

A. Vinogrsdova. "The [mores- People's Soviet Republic," ZBIZII'
NA‘I‘SIORAL'MSTEY, No 1, 1923, pp 181-196. See also W, "Bor'ba sa
Petro-Aleksandrovsk. Pystaya godovshchina Krasnoy Arnii" [The Battle for
Petro-Aleksandrovsk. Fifth Anniversary of the Bed Any]. Tashkent, 1923.

V. A. Gurko-Kryszhin, “British Intervention in the Transcaspian and
Transcaucasia," ISTORlK-HARKSIST, Vol 2, 1926, pp 115-139.

227

mommomv
10.

11.

12.

13.

1b.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Safarov, ”Rolonial'naya revolyutsiya (opyt Turkastsna)" [The Colonial
Revolution (The Experience of Turkestan)], Moscow, 1921.

For more detail see Zevelev. "Ietoringrafiya...." op. cit., pp “48.

ll. Ratnsnov, ”The Basnachi and the Struggle Against Then," KRASIIAYA mun.
llo 9, 1921; G. Skalov, ”The Social Nature of the Baseschi in Turkestsn,”
ZBIZR' MBIOML'NOSTEY, 1923, books 3-4; 8. Ginsburg, ”The Besuchi in the
Pergana," "Ocherki revolyutsionnogo dvizheniya v Sredney Asii" [Sketches on
the Revolutionary Hovenent in Central Asia], Moscow, 1926; D. D. Zuyev.

"The Pergm Bamchi." "Crashdnekaya voyna" [The Civil Her], Vol 3. Hoscov.
1921.; A. Syrkin, "Voetok v one" [The East in Planes]. mingrad. 1925.

II. Paskutskiy, "R ietorii grashdanskoy voyny v Mkestane" [0n the History of
of the Civil Her in T..~"-stan]. Tashkent, 1922; P. nodshsyev, 'Msterisly

k istorii revolyutsi‘. v Rukhare" [Materials on Elston of the Revolution

in Rukhara]. Taj ikistan-Sanarkand-Tashkent, 1926; Khodshsyev. "nassschestvo"
[The Bamchil, Tashkent, 1927; Di-liur, ”The Civil War in Tajikistan,”
"Tadzhikistan. Sb. st." (Tajikistan. Collected Articles], Tashkent. 1925;
S. Ayni. "Haterialy po istorii Rukhsrekoy revolyutsii” [Materials on the
History of the Bukhara Revolution], Hoeoou. 1926 (in Uzbek); P. Alekseyenkoh
"Krest'yanskoye voestaniye v Pergane“ [Peasant Insurrection in the Perseus],
Tashkent, 1927; Ye. Kozlovskiy. "Krasnaya Arsiys v Sredney Asii" [The Red
my in Central Asia], Tashkent, 1928.

See 1". Rasynov, "0n History of the Study of the Bukhara People's Revolu-
tion in the First Period of Soviet Historical Science," "llaterialy XXIV
nauchnoy konferentsii professorsko-prepodavatel'skogo sostava 3mm iseni
Navoi" [Proceedings of the 210th Scientific Conference of Faculty of
Sasarkand State University ineni Alisher Ravoi], Smrknd, 1967, page 1.6.

Di-Mr, "Grazhdanskaya voyna...," op. cit.. page 283.

Ibid.

New history study centers were established at the end of the 1920's in
Central Asian republics: the Institute of Turklen Culture (1927), the
Kirghiz Scientific Research Institute of Regional Studies (1928), the
Society for Study of Tajikistan and Iranian Rationalities (1925), etc.
:00va VOSTOR. No 10-11, 1925; 2A PARTITU. No 3-4. 9-10, 1929, etc.

NOWY VOSTOK, No 2, 1922, No 10-11, 1925; "levolyutsiya v Sredney Asii"
[The Revolution in Central Asia], Tashkent. 1929: etc.

See ”'rsentr istoriko-partiynoy nauki v Ushekistane" [Center of nistoricnl-
Party Science in Uzbekistan]. Tashkent, 1972. lo 63.

D. A. Fur-snov, ”Insurrection in Vernyy on 12-19 June 1920."
PROLETARSKAYA RBVOLYUTSIYA. No 11. 1923; S. liureveyekiy (V. lopukhov).
"Ocherki po istorii revolyutsionnogo dvieheniys v Sredney Asii" [Sketches

228

”WWW!”
l.

on the nietory of the Revolutionary Hove-eat in Centrel Aeie], ‘reehkent.
1922; A. liel'lnnov, "lieteriely revolyuteionnogo dvizheniye v Turbenii"

[Heteriele on the Revolutionary liovenent in national, Teshkent, 1924;

"Grezhdenekeye voyne 1918-1921 33.” [The Civil Her, 1910-1921], in three
volunee. edited by A. S. MM, 8. s. lenenev, H. II. ‘l’nkhechevehiy, end
1!. P. Bydenen. Moscow-minted, 1928, 1930.

P. Alekeeyenlwv, "Chto tekoye bee-echeetvo?" [Jnet her. In the
Bee-echeetvo‘n, 'raehkent, 1931.

Ibid., pp 6. 68.
Ibid.. pese 38.
Ibid.. page 16.

P. Alekeeyenkov. "Kokendekeye evtonoeiye" [The loltend Antonoly], ‘l'eehkent,
1931, page 65.

Aleksayenkov, "Chto tekoye...," op. cit.. pege 64.

I. Kutyekov, "Kremye honnitee i Voedualnyy flot v pnetyne v 192‘ soda"
(The Red Cevelry and Air Porce in the Desert in 1925]. ll. leturin, editor.
with foreword by S. X. Budennyy, bloom-union“, 1930.

"Voopoeineniya ucheetnikov Oktyebrye i grahdenekoy voyny” IReniniecencee
of Pertieipente in the October Revolution and the Civil Her]. Issue 1,
D. 1. Heather. editor, Hoeoov-‘l‘eehkent, 1931. page 1.

See "Teentr ietoriko...,” op. cit., pp 8-9.

or the greeteet intereet anon; published collection of docuente and
eeteriele were the follovina: "lieteriely i doh-enty II e"yezde thii
Turkeetene“ [Heteriele end Dom-lento of the 2d Congreee of the lurkeeten
Co-uniet Petty], Hoecov-‘l'eehkent. 1934; "Voyne v peekekh. Heteriely po
ietorii arezhdenehoy voyny" [war in the Sande. Heteriele on the History of.
the Civil Her]. Vol 12, edited by H. Gor'kiy, S. Ivenov, 1. Hints, end

P. Koleeov. lloecov 1935; ”H. V. Prune ne frontakh greehdanekoy voyny”

m. V. Prunze on the Civil Her Pronto], Hoecov 1961.

K. Zhitov end V. Nepomin. 'Ot koloniel'nogo rabetve h eoteieliuu" [Pro-
Coloniel Slavery to Socieliu]. Tubkent. 1939; B. Gefurov end I. H.
Prokhorov, "Pedeniye Bukharekogo e-ireta" [Pall of the Bukhare hirete],
Stelinebed, 1960.

s. P. Tinnehkov. "Bor'be e ensliyekoy interventeiyey v Turkeetene"
[atomic Against Britieh Intervention in Wheaten], lioecou. 19bl;
‘ri-oehkov, "Bor'be e interventai. belogverdeytee-i i bee-eche-i v Stethey
Azii” [Struggle Against the Interventioniete. White Gnerd and Bambi

in Central Aeie]. VAP. 1961; A. Rh. lebekhodzheyev, "Provel angliyekoy
aggrueivnoy politiki v Sredney Azii (1917-1920 33.)" [Collepee of

229

mmuscmv
IS.

l6.

l7.

18.

EU. Uttlbenu sue. cue-o

British Aggressive Policy in Central Asia (1917-1920)], Tashkent,
1955.

E. A. Voshoboynikov and A. I. Zevelev, "mkkuieelya V181! and SNK ISP'SI
i Turkhyuro ts mm v hor'be ea ukrepleniye Sovetskoy vlasti v Turkestand'
[The V'l'aIK and Silk RSI-‘58 Turkkonissiya and RIP“) Central (b-ittee
Turkbyuro in the Struggle for Consolidation of Soviet Power in Turkestan],
Tashkent, 1951; Klych aniyev, "lor'ba Ko-nisticheekoy partii ea
uprocheniye Sovetakoy vlaati i osushcheetvleniye nateional'noy politiki

v Sredney Asii (1917-1925 33.)" [the Struggle of the Mt Party to
Consolidate Soviet Power and Inlaent Nationalities Policy in Central
Asia (1917-1925)]. Ashkhshad. 1956; V. Nikolayeva, "the Turkkoeissiya —-
Plenipotentiary Agency of the K90) Central Conittee,” VOPIOSY lS‘lOItIl
KPSS, No 2, 1958.

Asia Niallo, "Ocherki istorii revolyutsii i greehdanskoy voyny v urgieii
i Sredney Asii" [Sketches on history of the Revolution and Civil Bar in
Kirghizie and Central Asia]. France, 1961; V. Ye. Kutareva. "Oenovnyye
etapy grazhdanskoy voyny v Kirgieii“ [Principal Stages of the Civil Bar
in Kirghizia]. Prunze, 1957; P. P. hikiehov, "Bor'ha a has-echeetvoe ea
yuge Kirgizii" [Struggle Against the Des-echi in the Southern Part of
Kirghisia], Prunes, 1957; D. K. Pen'yan and )1. Zelinekaya. "lraenaya
Areiya — oevoboditel'nitsa tadshikekogo naroda” [The Bed Any —
Liberator of the Tajik People] . Stalinahad, 1963; G. lspesov. ”Pobeda
eovetekogo stroye v Severnoe Turkmenistan” [Victory of the Soviet Systee
in northern Turtlenistan]. Aahkhlhad. 1950.

See BOL'SHEVIK, lo 23, 1951. pp 62-73.

A detailed analysis of the collected voluee "Haterialy po ietorii
tadahikskogo naroda v sovetskiy period" [Haterials on History of the
Tajik People in the Soviet Period]. which contains articles by the in-
diceted authors. is given by a. ll. Haeov in the monograph ”Istoriografiya
Sovetskogo Tadzhikistana," op. cit. (pp 25-30).

H. trkeyev and Yu. Nikolayev, "V bor'he za Sovetekiy 'l‘adshikistan" [1n
the Struggle for Soviet Tajikistan], Stalinabad. 1956 (in rajik); H.
Irkayev. Yu. Niholayev, and Ya. Sharepov. ”Ocherk ietorii Sovetekogo
'l'adzhikistana” [Historical Sketch of Soviet Tajikistan]. Stalinabad.
1957.

"Oktyabr'ekaya sotsialisticheskaya revolyutsiya i graehdanskaya voyna v
Turkestene. Vosponinaniya ucheetnikov” [The October Socialist Revolution
and Civil "er in Turkesten. Ruiniscencee of Participants]. Tashkent,
1957; "V boyakh ea Sovetshuyu vlast' v Perganskoy doline. Vosponinaniye
uchastnikov Oktyabr‘skny revolyutsii i graehdenehoy voyny (1917-1923 gg.)"
[Fighting for Soviet Pover in the Pergena Valley. leeiniecencee of
Participants in the October Revolution and Civil (1917-1923)]. Tashkent.
1957; ”Vosponinaniys uchaetnilwv grazhdanakoy voyny v Andiehanslnoy
oblasci" [Reeiniscences of Participants in the Civil “er in Andizhenskaye
Oblast], Andizhan, 1957; "Oktyabr'skaya eoteielieticheskaya revolyuteiya
i grazhdanskqa voyna v Kirgiaii (1917-1920)" [The October Socialist

230
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY
39.

60.

61.

42.

Revolution and Civil Her in Kirghizia (1917-1920)]: Prunze, 1957;
"Turk-eniatan v period inostrannoy interventsii i grazhdanakoy voyny, 1918-
1920" [Turksenistan in the Period of Foreign Intervention and Civil Har,
1918-1920], Ashkhahad, 1957; ”2a Sovetskiy Turkeatan” [For Soviet Turkestanl.
Tashkent, 1963; "2a Sovetskiy Turksenistan" [For Soviet Turneniatan],
Ashkhahed, 1963; "2a vlast' Sovetov v Tedshikiatane. Voaponinaniya
uchastnikov revolyuteii i bor'hy a basaacheetvon" [Por Soviet Power in
Tajikistan. Resiniacencee of Participate in the Revolution and the
Struggle Against the Baa-echi], Stalinahad, 1958.

"Istoriya Kirgizii" [history of Kirghiaia], Vol 2, Prunze, 1956, pp 68-111
(chapter author P. P. llikiahov); ”Ietoriya Ushekekoy 883" [History of the
Uzbek 583], Vol 2, Tashkent, 1957, pp 81-133 (chapter authors A. I.
Zevelev and ll. Kh. Naurov); "Iatoriye Turbenskoy 558” [history of the
Turhen SSE], Ashkhahad, 1957, pp 111-203 (chapter author 0. K. Kuliyev);
"Istoriya Kazakhakoy SSE" [History of the Kazakh 888], Vol 2. Era of
Socialisn, Ala-Ate, 1959, pp 75-161 (chapter author S. N. Pokrovskiy).

See "Istoriya Uzbekakoy SSB," op. cit.. page 83.

H. Irkayev, Yu. Nikolayev, and Ya. Sharapov, "Ocherk istorii Sovetskogo
Tadzhikistana (1917-1957 gg.)" [historical Sketch of Soviet Tajikistan
(1917-1957)], Stalinebad, 1957; Sh. Tashliyev. "Uetsnovleniye i uprocheniye
Sovetekoy vlaeti v Turkestane" [Establish-sot and Consolidation of Soviet
Power in Turkeetan], Ashkhabad, 1957; ll. Yasykova, "Bor'ha ea ustanovleniye
Sovetakoy vlaeti v Zapadnon Turkneniatane" [The Struggle for Establish-eat
and Consolidation of Soviet Power in Heatern Turnenistan], Ashkhahad, 1957;
A. Koksnhayev, "Bor'ha s has-echeatvon i uprocheniye Sovetakoy vlaeti v
Pergane” [The Struggle Against the Baseschi and Consolidation of Soviet
Power in the Pergana]. Tashkent, 1956; K. Halyehev, "Bor'ba za Sovety v
Kirgizii i Turkestane" [The Struggle for the Soviua in Kirghizia and
Turkestan], Prune, 1958; G. Nepeaov, "Velikiy Oktyahr' i narodnyye
revolyutsii v 1920 g. v Severnon i Voatochnon Turkneniatane" [The Great
October Revolution and Popular Revolutions in 1920 in Northern and Eastern
Turknenistan], Ashkhahad, 1958; T. Kb. Kel'diyev, "negro- interventeii v
Pergenskoy i Sanarkandskoy obleatyakh Turkestenskoy ASSR” (Defeat of the
Intervention in Ferganskeya and Suarkandakeya Oblaate of the Turkesten
ASSR], Tashkent, 1959.

Individual episodes in the struggle against the bamehi in the northern.
central and southern areas of contenorary Tajikistan are also reflected
in the following works: A. V. Hakaahov. "Utverzhdeniye Sovetakoy vlaeti

v Teentral'noa i Yuzhnon Tedahikistane" [Batablishnent of Soviet Power in
Central and Southern Tajikistan], Stalinabad, 1957; V. M. Ionova,
”Struggle of the Toilet Masses Under the Guidance of the Cos-mist Party
Against Intervention in the First Years of Soviet Rule (annoying
Materials on Northern Tajikistan)," "Och. up. Leninebadskogo
pedinatituta" [Scientific Notes of the beninahad Pedagogic Institute],
Issue 7, Leninahad. 1958; Ionove, "Political Work in the [leases During the
Struggle Against the has-echi in 1920-1923 (Based on Materials on Northern
Tajikistan),” Ihid., Issue 9, uninahad, 1960.

231

I-‘OIOMCIALUSEONLY
b3.

44.

65.

66.

67.

68.

b9.

50.

51.

52.

S3.

56.

IIIICNNNCJAI.1EH£(HVLY

s. N. Pokrovskiy, ”Pobeda Sovetekoy vlaeti v Seeirech'ye" [Victory of
Soviet Power in Senirech'ye], Alla-Ate, 1961.

M. Kb. Mazarov, "Turkestan v period interventsii i grazhdsnskoy voyny
(1918-1920)" [Turkestan in the Period of Intervention and Civil Her (1918-
1920)], Tashkent, 1961 (in Uzbek).

"Boyevoy put' voysk Turkestanskogo voyennogo okruga" [Conhat March of the
Troops of the Turkestan Military District], Moscow, 1959.

See S. Harnetov, "The Civil Har in Khoreu (Snrvey of the Literature),"
ISTORIYA sssn, Ho 3, 1970, page 153.

Sh. A. Shaugdiyev. "Ocherk istorii grazhdanskoy voyny v Perganskoy doline"
[Historical Sketch of the Civil Her in the Pergsna Valley], Tashkent, 1961.

V. Mineyev, "Conjecture in Place of Authenticity," PRAVDA VOSTOKA,
24 August 1961.

I. S. Sologubov, "Inostrannyye koamunisty v Turkestane (1918-1921 gg.)"
[Foreign Con-unists in Turkestan (1918-1921)], Tashkent, 1961; A. M.
Matveyev, "Foreign Communists in Turkestan," VOPRDSY ISTORII KPSS, No 3,
1962; Matveyev, "Foreign Internationalists on the Civil Her Fronts in
Central Asia,” HOVAYA I HOVBYSHAYA ISTORII, No 6, 1961; Ya. M. Seryy,
"Political Hork in Bed Arny International Units in Turksstan (1918-1920)],
"Trudy SACU" [Horks of Central Asian State University], Issue 170, Tashkent,
1960 (History of the CPSU); G. B. Hikol'ekaya, ”Sons Materials on Immigrants
fro- China in Turkestan After October 1917,” "Trudy SAGU," Issue 151,
Tashkent, 1959 (General History).

A. Kh. Habakhodzhayev, "Proval angliyskoy antisovetskoy politiki v Sredney
Azii i na Srednen Vostoke v period priznaniya Sovetskogo gosudarstva
de-fakto and de-yure (1921-1926 gg.)" [Collapse of British anti-Soviet
Po1icy in Central Asia and the Middle East in the Period of De Facts and
De Jure Recognition of the Soviet State (1921-1926)], Tashkent, 1957;
Babakhodrhayev, "Proval angliyskoy politiki v Sredney Azii i na Srednea
Vostoke (1918-1924 gg.)" [Failure of British Policy in Central Asia and
the Near East (1918-1926)], Moscow, 1962.

"Istoriya grazhdanskoy voyny v 8888" [History of the Civil Har in the
USSR], Vol 6, Moscow, 1959; Vol 5, Moscow, 1960.

M. Irkayev, "Istoriya grazhdanskoy voyny v Tadrhikistane" [History of the
Civil Har in Tajikistan], Dushanbe, 1963, second, enlarged edition,
Dushanbe, 1971.

Incidentally, he followed it in his preceding works.
In determining the chronological framework of the civil war in Tajikistan,
M. Irkayev proceeded fro: the materials of the debate along social

scientists (1956), during which a ache-e of periodization of the history
of Soviet society in Tajikistan was elaborated.

232
I!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ(lhl.llﬂi(ﬂﬂl¥
SS.

57.
58.

59.

61.

62.

H. Irkayev, "Istoriya grazhdanskoy voyny v 'radzhikistane" [History of the
Civil Har in Tajikistan}. lbscou, 1963, pp 255, 256.

Ibid.. page 260.
lbid.. page 265.

6. Kb. Khaydarov, "Bor'be za uatanovleniye i uprocheniye Sovetskoy vlasti
v Sever-non Tadahikistane (1917-1923 33.)" [The Struggle for Establishment
and Consolidation of Soviet Power in Northern Tajikistan (1917-1923)],
Dushanbe, 1966.

In counterbalance to the opinion of 6. K11. Khaydarov that baa-achi ap-
peared in the Hatcha at the end of 1918. R. Abdulkhayev demonstrated that
basnachi bands appeared here at the end of 1918 and beginning of. 1919,
following a counterrevolutionary insurrection and overthrow of Soviet
rule (R. A. Abdulkhayev, "Uprocheniye Sovetskoy vlasti v rayonakh
verkhov'yev Zeravshena" [Consolidation of Soviet Power on the Upper
Reaches of the Zeravshan]. Dushanbe, 1972). Questions pertaining to the
civil war in Northern Tajikistan were also partially addressed in a
nonograph by ‘l'. R. Kari-0v entitled "Pobeda Velikoy Oktyabr'skoy
sotsialisticheskoy revolyuteii v Sever-non 'radzhikistane" [Victory of the
Great October Socialist Revolution in Northern Tajikistan] (Stalinabed,
1957) and in other works by this author.

5. B. Zhantuarov, "Grazhdanskaya voyna v Kirsirskoy SSH" [The civil list
in the Kirghiz SSH], Frunze, 1963.

"Ocherki istorii Kommisticheskoy partii Turkestana" [Historical Sketches
on the Comnist Party of Turkestan]. Part III, "Komunisticheskaya partiya
Turkastana v period inostrannoy voyennoy interventsii i grashdanskoy
voyny" [Turkestan Conunist Party During Foreign Military Intervention and
the Civil War], Tashkent, 1966.

"Ocherki istorii Kmisticheekoy partii Kazakhstan" [Historical Sketches
on the Commist Party of Kazakhstan], Alla-Ata, 1963 (P. H. Pakhnurnyy,
author of the chapter on the civil war); "Ocherki istorii Ko-unisticheskoy
partii Uzbekistana" [Historical Sketches on the Commist Party of
Uzbekistan], Tashkent. 1966 (author - K. Rb. Hararov); Tashkent, 1976
(author -- R. A. Nurullin); "Ocherki istorii Ho-uniuicheskoy partii
Tadzhikistana" [Historical sketches on the 00-min Party of Tajikistan],
Dushanbe, 1966 (author -- H. l. lrkayev), second, enlarged edition,
Dushanbe, 1969; "Ocherki istorii Konmisticheskoy partii Turkmenistan"
[Historical Sketches on the Cor-moist Party of Turkmenistan], second edition,
Ashkhabad, 1966 (author -- Sh. Tashliyev); "Ocherki istorii
Komunisticheskoy partii Kirgizii" [Historical Sketches on the Conunist
Party of Kirghizia], Frunze, 1966 (author -- P. P. Hikishov); Prunse,

1979; "Istoriya Kazakhskoy SSR. Hpokha sotsialisna" [History of the

Kazakh SSR. Era of Socialisnl, revised and enlarged edition, Alas-Ate.
1963; "Istoriya Kirgizii" [History of Kirghizia], Vol 2. Frunze, 1963;
"Istoriya tadzhikskogo naroda" [History of the Tajik People], Vol 3. Book 1,

233

FOR OFFICIAL ISE ONLY
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.
69.
70.
71.

72.

73.

76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moscow, 1966; "Istoriya Usbekskoy 3811” [History of the Uzbek SSH], Vol 3,
Tashkent. 1967.

The following works have been published on Tajikistan. for exalple: I.
Gafurova, "K istorii Ko-misticheskoy partii Tadshikistana (1924-1929)"
[On the History of the mist Party of Tajikistan (1926-1929)],
Dushanbe, 1963; A. V. Hakashov, "Partiynaya organisatsiya Tadzhikistana v
19210-1926 gg." [The Tajikistan Party Organization in 1926-1926], Dushanbe.
1966; H. Razorshoyev, "Partiynaya organizatsiya hairs v bor'be so
sotsializa i komnizn" [The Panir Party Organization in the Struggle for
Socialisn and Con-union], Dushanbe, 1970.

R. H. Hasov correctly noted that in this publication "there is certain
enbellishnent... of the process of revolutionisation of the indigenous
inhabitants of prerevolutionary Taj ikistan." The author pointed out that
the book also contains other shortconings. This does not, hovever,

provide justification for a negative assess-ant of the work as a whole.

The same applies to the group-authored nonograph "Istoriya Tadzhikskoy
SSH." See H. H. Hasov, "Istoriografiya Sovetskogo Tadzhikiatana," op. cit.,
pp 62-43.

See also: "lstoriya Uzbekskoy SSH s drevneyshikh vrenen do nashikh dney"
[History of the Uzbek SSH Pro- Ancient Times to the Present Day], Tashkent,
19710; ”Istoriya Kara-Kalpakskoy asst" [History of the Kara-Kalpsk A883],
Vol 2, Tashkent, 197a.

"Inostrannaya voyennaya interventsiya i grashdanskaya voyna v Sredney A211
1 Kazakhstane. Dokunenty i naterialy" [Foreign Military Intervention and
the Civil War in Central Asia and Kazakhstan. Docunents and Materials],
Vol 1. Ray 1918-Septenber 1919, Alma-Ate, 1963; Vol 2, Septednr 1919-
Decenber 1920, Alma-Ate, 1964.

"Istoriya grazhdanskoy voyny v Uzbekistan," op. cit., Vol 1, Tashkent,
1964; Vol 2, Tashkent, 1970.

Ibid., Vol 1. pp 20-21. Our italics - Auth.
Ibid.. page 20.

Ibid.. page 201.

Ibid., Part 11, page 21.

"Obrazovaniye SSSR" [Pornation of the USSR], Moscow-Leningrad, 1969,
page 228.

"1storiya konunisticheskikh organisatsiy Sredney Azii" [History of Con-
nunist Organizations of Central Asia]. page 569.

"VII krayevaye konferentsiya m (Stenograficheskiy otchet)" [Seventh
Regional Conference of the Turkestan Commist Party (Stenographic Record”,

236
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tashkent, 1922; "Bulletin No 5 of the Seventh Regional Conference of the
Turkestm Co-uniu Party," page 25.

. Ihid.
"Istoriya grashdanskoy voyny v Ushekiatane," op. cit., Vol 1, page 186.

R. A. Romania, "Sovety Turkestanskoy ASS! v period inostrannoy voyennoy
interventsii i graehdanskoy voyny” [The Soviets of the ankestan Assn in
the Period of Poreign Hilitary Intervention and Civil liar], Tashkent, 1965;
G. Rashidov, "Tashkentskiy Sovet v hor'he re uprocheniye Sovetskoy vlasti"
[The Tashlnent Soviet in the Struggle for Consolidation of Soviet Power],
Tashkent, 1960; "lstoriya eotsialisticheskogo Tashkenta” [history of
Socialist Tashkent], Vol 1, Tashkent, 1965; T. Pnlatov and G. Rashidov,
"Tashkent v pervyye gody Sovetshoy vlasti" [Tashkent in the First Years of
Soviet Rule], Tashkent, 1972.

"Istoriya hos-misticheskikh organizatsiy..." op. cit.
Ihid., page 277.
1hid., page 278.

B. V. Lunin, "Lenin i narody Sredney Azii" [Lenin and the Peoples of
Central Asia], Tashkent, 1967; Sh. Sh. Abdullayev, and A. I. levelev,

"V. I. Lenin i istorichesltiye snd‘hy narodov Sredney Azii" IV. 1. Lenin
and the Historic Destinies of the Peoples of Central Asia], Moscow, 1968;
sane authors, "Lenin i narody Uzbekistan” [Lenin and the Peoples of
Uzbekistan], Tashkent, 1970; K. Khasanw, "V. I. Lenin i ankhyuro TsK
mm" W. I. Lenin and the 810(1)) Central Co-Iittee Turkhyuro], Tashkent,
1968; S. Beysenhayev, "Lenin 1 Kazakhstan" [Lenin and Kazakhstan], Ains-
Ata, 1968; C. P. Dakhshleyger, ”V. I. Lenin i prohieny Kazahhatenskoy
iatoriografii“ [V. I. Lenin and Prohlens of Kazakhstan historiography],
Alna-Ata, 1973; P. U. nuandanov, "Literature 0 Sredney Azii v tvorchestve
V. I. Lenina" [Literature on Central Asia in the Writings of V. 1. Lenin],
Tashkent, 1971; sane author: ”V. 1. Lenin o Sredney Azii" [V. 1. Lenin on
Central Asia], Tashkent, 1974.

V. M. Ustinov, "Leninskaya politika partii na Vostoke" [The Party‘s
Leninist Policy in the East], Prunze, 1963; sane author, "Reshaynshchiye
nsloviya sotsialisticheekogo stroitel'atva v Sredney Azii" [Decisive Con-
ditions for Building Socialists in Central Asia], Ashkhahad, 1967; S.
Nazarov, "I: istorii dsyatel'nosti Sredashyuro Ts mm (1922-1926)"

[Free History of the Activities of the mm Central Conittee Sredazhyuro
(1922-1926)], Tashkent, 1965; H. 1’. Anderson, "I: istorii partiynogo
stroitel'stva v Sredney Azii" [Pro- the History of Party Organizational
Develop-eat in Central Asia], Dushanbe, 1966; Ii. Khasanov, "Tel! mm

v bor'he za postroyeniye sotsializna v Sredney Azii" [The VKP(h) Central
Co-ittee in the Struggle to Build Socialisn in Central Asia], Tashkent,
1968; S. A. hazarov, "Rukovodstvo Tali mm partiynyn stroitelhtvon

v Sredney Azii" [mm Central Co-ittee Direction of Party Organization“
Developnent in Central Asia], Tashkent, 1972; A. T. Azizkhanov,

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
83.

850

86.

87.

DUI W'NIAL var. URL!

"Turkbyuro — polno-oclnyy organ Tax mm“ [The Turkbyuro .. Plenipoten-
tiary Agency of the mom Central Co-ittee], Tashkent, 1977; A. A.
Boslyakov, "Sredazbyuro Tel mm . Voprosy strategii i taktiki" [The
VKP(b) Central Co-ittee Sredesbyuro. Questions of Strategy and Tactics].
Ashkhebsd, 1975; Ye. H. Seryy. ”Pro. the History of the For-etion and Ac-
tivities of the Sredszbyuro of the mom Central Co-ittee,“
"Istoricheskiye zapiski" [Historical Notes], Vol 79, Moscow. 1966;

“The Sredaabyuro of the 800:) Central Co-ittee (Pro: History of Parna-
tion and Activities), Hay 1922-neginning of 1923," ”llauchnyye trudy
Tashkentshogo Conuniversiteta ineni V. I. Lenina" [Scientific Vorks of

the Tashkent State University ineni V. I. Lenin], Issue 26, “Iistory of the
CPSU." Tashkent, 1964.

Roslyakov, ”Sredacbyuro...," op. cit., page 3.
Ibid.. pp 21, 22, 4.7. et al.
lbid., page 22.

Kb. Tursunov. ”Netsional'naya politika Ko-mnisticheskoy partii v
Turkeetene (1917-1920 gg.)" [Co-mist Perty nationalities Policy in
Turkestan (1917-1925)], Tashkent, 1971; K. A. Gafurova, "Bor'ba :a
internetsional'noye splocheniye trudyashchikhsye Sredney Azii i Kazakhstan
v pervyye gody Sovetskoy vlasti" [Struggle for International Unity of the
Toilera of Central Asia and Kazakhstan in the First Years of Soviet Rule],
Moscow. 1972; S. Rakhnenov, "Osushchestvleniye Leninshoy natsional'noy
politiki v Srsdney Azii" [Inlenentation of Leninist Nationalities Policy
in Central Asia), Tashkent. 1973; 0. Khuioyberdiyev, "0n SAVO national
Units," vormuo-Isroncunsm mum, so 10, 1967 (sic: actually 1977];

v. H. Kuz'nina, "Bratstvo po oruzhiyu, rozhdennoye Velikin Oktyebren" [Brodnerb
hood in Arne Engendered by the Great October Revolution], Ashkhabad, 1977.

K. ﬂukhenedberdyyev, "Komisticheskaya partiye v bor'be 2a pohedu
sotsielisticheskoy revolyutsii v mores-e” [The Con-mist Party in the
Struggle for the Victory of the Socialist Revolution in Khoren], Ashkhabad,
1959; B. I. Iskanderov, "Bukllare (1919-1920)," Dushanbe. 1970; A. 1.
Ishanov, "Bukhsrskaya Narodneye Sovetskaya Respuhlika" [The Bukhare People's
Seviet Republic], Tashkent. 1969; "Istoriye Bukharskoy i Khoreuskoy
narodnykh sovetskikh respublik“ [History of the lukhere and notes.
People's Soviet Republics]. Koscov, 1971; "Velikiy Oktyebr' i poheda
nerodnoy revolyuteii v Ihoresne" [The Greet October Revolution and the
Victory of the People's Revolution in Khoreu], Tashkent, 1971; ”50 let
Bukherskoy Nerodnoy Sovetskoy Respuhliki. Heteriely ob"yedinennoy

neuchnoy eessii" [50th Anniversary of the Bukhara People's Soviet Republic.
Proceedings of a Joint Scientific Session]. Tashkent, 1972; "50 let
Khoreznskoy Narodnoy Sovetskoy Beepubliki. Heterialy ob"yedinennoy
nauchnoy sessii" [50th Anniversary of the thorns- People's Soviet Republic.
Proceedings of a Joint Scientific Session ], Tashkent. 1972; 1!. mandarOv,
"Obrezovaniye deyatel'nosti Khoreznskoy Ito-misticheskoy partii (1920-1926)
1926)" [Forution end Activities of the Khoreu Conuniet Party (1920-
192101. Tashkent. 197$; "Istoriya moresnskoy Rarodnoy Sovetskoy Respubliki

236

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
88.

(1920-1926 33.)" [History of the Khoreul People'e Soviet Republic (1920-
1920). collection of docunente. Tashkent. 1916; "Ietoriye Bukherekoy
Nerodnoy Sovetekoy Reepubliki (1920—1921. 33.)" [History of the Bukhere
People's Soviet Republic (1920-1926)], collection of docmente, ‘l‘eehkent,

1976. .

H. Kh. Nezerov, "Ko-unieticheslmye pertiye ‘rurkeetene vo gleve uehchity
zevoyeveniy Oktyabr'ekoy revolyuteii (1918-1920 33.)" [The Conniet Party
of Turkeeten. needing the Defenee of the Achieve-earn of the October
Revolution (1918~l920)]. Teehhent, 1969 (the euthor had previously pub-
lished the following book in Uzbek: “Turkeeten v period greehdenekoy
voyny" [Turkeeten in the Period of the Civil Her]. Tashkent, 1960); Sb. 1'.
Teshliyev. ”Gruhdenekaye voyne i angliyeheye voyennnye interventeiye v
Turkmenistan" [The Civil Her and British unitary Intervention in
Turkmenistan], Vol 1, Aehkhebed. 1976; Vol 2. Aehkhebed, 1975; R. A.
Nurnllin, "Ko-mieticheekeye pertiye mrkeetene v bor'be u
oeushcheetvleniye politiki 'voyennogo Ito-mien” [The Turkesten Con-
nunist Party in the Struggle for Ilpleoentetion of the policy of "Her
Con-mien"). Tashkent, 1975.

237

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”WMWONLY

was A!!!) ACRONYPS

BSP - Bukhara Oo-uniat Party

8m - Central Asian Military Diatrict

0:01! - Special Purpoae Unita

CPU - State Political Adainietration

mm. - CPSU Central Co-ittee tiara-Inule-Lenin lnetitute
KCP - Iboreu Co-miat Party

In - Turkeatan Co-miet Party

Kraykon - regional or tray co-ittee

Barb-us - People'a Co-iaaauat for nationalitiea

OGPU - Unified State Political Directorate

Orgvyuro - Organization Bureau

Politproavetotryad - Political Bducation Dated-ant
revkon - revolutionary oo-ittee

Bewoyenaovet - Revolutionary Military Council

mu - Horkere' and Peaeante' Bed Arly

mm - Ruaaian Co-niat Party (of Bolahevike)

BIS! - Buaaian You; Co-Iniat League

BSDRP(b) - Bueeian Social Damcratie Horkere' Party (of Bolahevika)
Sel'eovet - village aoviet

SNK. Sovnarkoa - Council of People'a Co-iaeara

Sovdep - Soviet of Hortera'. Peaeanta' and Soldiera' Deputiea
Sredacbyuro - Central Aaian Bureau

turkbyuro - turkeatan Bureau

Turkkoaiaeiya - Turkeatan Co-iaeion

mrk‘ralx - Turkeatan Central Executive Count“

238

”WISEONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500060030-7

IN I

an - contra Mutt" (Jo-um
mo) - All-Union (Io-nil: Party (of Dom)
V1.1! - All-Onion Outta mm Can-tun

COPYRIGHT: Gunny; mm mtochnoy lint-stun 1m

3026
050: 8064 [0859

239
m onucw. USIMY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000600060030-7