Berlin TUNNEL OPERATION
Historical Paper
No. 150

Clandestine SERVICES HISTORY

Berlin TUNNEL OPERATION
1952 - 1956

Controlled by: REDACTED
Date prepared: REDACTED
Date published: 24 June 1968

Written by: REDACTED

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
I. INTRODUCTION
II. PLANNING
III. IMPLEMENTATION
IV. TERMINATION
V. PRODUCTION
VI. AFTERMATH

Appendix A - Analysis of the Reasons for the Discovery of the Tunnel
Appendix B - Recapitulation of the Intelligence Derived
Appendix C - Typical American Press Comment
Appendix D - East German Press Comment

PREFACE
the Berlin Tunnel project) came into being sometime in 1952 (the exact date cannot be established) and ceased as an active operation in the summer of 1956. The writer served as Headquarters case officer on the project from the winter of 1952-1953 until the summer of 1954 and then as the field case officer until February 1955.
REDACTED were intimately associated with the planning and implementation of the project at the policy level and very kindly offered suggestions for the preparation of this manuscript. Their comments have been incorporated and are greatly appreciated. Several other individuals, including
REDACTED who were in a position to offer valuable advice were absent from Headquarters during the period the paper was being prepared and thus unavailable to assist.
When this project was first discussed with the then Director of CIA, Mr. Allen Welsh Dulles, he ordered that, in the interests of security, as little as possible concerning the project would be reduced to writing. It is probable that few orders have been so conscientiously obeyed, and yet there are a great many cubic feet of files connected with this project. These files mainly concern technical and administrative matters. Only those details which, in the opinion of the writer, are necessary to a broad understanding of the manner in which the project's objectives were accomplished have been included in this paper. Those interested in additional data may wish to consult the files.
In addition to setting forth significant developments, the writer has attempted to provide insight into the reasons for certain courses of action. At times this required a speculative approach. The judgments derived from such speculation were shared by all those actively concerned in the management of the project, and it is the writer's hope that they are accurately expressed in the following paper. Any error in this respect, however, is the sole responsibility of the writer REDACTED.
Detail ﬂap of Rudow Section, Berlin
Aerial View of Rudow Section, Berlin
Dirt in the Basement
Vopos Studying the Installation
East German View of the Compound
Blinds on the Shield
Excavating Using the Blinds
View of the Completed Tunnel
Construction of the Vertical Shaft
Completed Vertical Shaft
View of Cables and Taps
Shaft and Tunnel Entrance in Warehouse Basement
Converted Fork Lift and Dirt Box
Target Cables Exposed
Schematic View of Tunnel
Initial Stage of Construction of Pre-AmpAChamber
Pre-Amp Chamber
Tapping Bridle
Lead-Away Lines
Soviet Press Briefing

I. INTRODUCTION
The exact moment when the idea emerged of digging a tunnel to intercept Soviet and East German communications is somewhat obscure. A number of factors must be considered, among them the following: As early as 1948 U.S. Intelligence Officers became interested in the benefits to be derived from tapping Soviet and Satellite landlines on a scale not previously considered necessary. The loss of certain) sources during this period created gaps in our intelligence coverage which were particularly unfortunate during this period of Cold War_esca1ation. It became evident that the tapping of certain selected landlines might produce the information needed to fill a number of the gaps in our overall intelligence picture. In the late 1940's and early 1950's the 0.8., through the briefings of "returnee" German scientists (those who were taken by the Soviets after World War II to work in Russia) and other sources, became aware of a new channel. In the late 1940's the Office of Communications, in the course of its continuing efforts to provide secure communications for the Agency, became aware of a principle which, when applied to target communications, offered certain possibilities. Plans to exploit this technique were immediately formulated. These factors then served as additional incentives (above and beyond our normal collection requirements) to focus attention on Soviet landline targets. In mid-1951 exploratory discussions were held in Washington to plan the mounting of an attack on Soviet landlines in East Germany with special emphasis to be placed on the Berlin area. Vital information on the SOMETHING first became available during the latter part of 1951, and by March 1952 all of the pertinent technical material had been assembled and sufficiently analyzed to permit the pinpointing of the most important Soviet circuits. Subsequent events proved this information to be completely correct. Various methods of tapping these circuits were explored and one sampling operation was run in the East Zone, unfortunately with negative results. By January 1953, however, the REDACTED had become such that a 15-minute sample was obtained of the prime target circuit. The longest continuous sample obtained was 29 minutes and most samples were of two to three minutes duration. Special mention should be made of the fact that it was necessary to maintain a 24-hour watch over a six month period on "our" end of the cable to record these communications systems involved. At this point (mid-1953) we knew it could be done - the next step was the problem of installing a permanent tap on the target lines. Precisely at what point the idea of a tunnel for the purpose of tapping the target cables began to come into focus cannot be pinpointed.
While it should perhaps be possible to credit one individual with the initial concept, it appears to be a bit difficult to do so. At any rate the idea of a tunnel to tap the target cables began to take definite shape.

II. PLANNING
Inspection of all sites from which it might be possible served to narrow the choices to two spots: REDACTED was selected after careful deliberation which included, but was not limited to, the following factors:
a. The location of the permanent water table (which is normally relatively high in Berlin) was ascertained to be 32 feet below ground surface. It was considered that this fact would obviate the necessity for the use of compressed air, watertight locks, and watertight construction with a corresponding reduction in the attendant engineering problems.
b. The length of the tunnel was considered to be not impractical although it far exceeded anything which was done before.
c. Land was available on which to construct an installation from which to begin the tunnel.
d. Complete collateral information on the area was available. 
At this point the following major questions remained unanswered:
a. Was it indeed possible to dig a tunnel of this magnitude (approximately 1500 feet) in such a remote area (this portion of Berlin was at that time a "squattersville" of shacks and hovels constructed from rubble by refugees from the East German Zone)? clandestinely, considering the fact that the border at this point was heavily and constantly patrolled by the East Germans, and hit the targets?
b. If the answer to the above was favorable, what was to be done with the spoil (reckoned at approximately 3,000 tons of sand)?
In retrospect the first question, "Could the tunnel be dug?", was never really a debatable one---those concerned more or less decided that given sufficient money and personnel the Job could be done. (This Judgment fortunately proved sound.)
The second question, "Where do we put the dirt?", haunted the minds of project personnel for many weeks and a great many ingenious ideas were brought forth and discarded for one rea-
son or another until the suggestion was made facetiously that we "dig a hole and put the dirt in it." This in effect was the solution.' At this time no convincing REDACTED planning for the project continued throughout 1953 and in December of that year the Director of Central Intelligence approved the terms of reference which initation of the project. A series of conferences in late 1953 and early 1954 led to the following decisions:
a. The U.S. would:
(1) procure a site, erect the necessary structures, and drive a tunnel to a point beneath the target cables;
(2) be responsible for the recording of all 
(3) process in Washington all of the telegraphic material received from the project.
(4) drive a vertical shaft from the tunnel end to the targets;
(5) effect the cable taps and deliver a usable signal to the head of the tunnel for recording; and REDACTED to process the voice recordings from the site. 
Activity thus proceeded on three fronts - in Berlin stepswere taken to lease the necessary land and right-of—way easements for the site and a contract was let with a German contractor. The compound, which was roughly the size of an average city block, was fenced with chain-type high security fencing and contained the main operations building (the one story with basement type warehouse previously described), combined kitchen-dining facilities and barracks, and another building which housed three diesel driven generators to provide power for all facilities. (The logical placement of the cesspool was such that it was situated only a few feet from the tunnel site. It later developed when the tunnel was dug that this was quite unfortunate because working conditions in the sector adjacent to the cesspool were, to say the least, highly unpleasant.) Planning called for the completion of this work on 27 August 1954.
For assistance in actually digging the tunnel it was decided to request help from the
REDACTED were briefed on the project. The initial contact with REDACTED was made personally by Dr. Allen Dulles to trained engineer, had just been appointed REDACTED.
From the first moment he learned of the operation, General Trudeau was an enthusiastic supporter of the concept. REDACTED member of the REDACTED with any experience in tunneling to head the project. This proved to be an excellent choice for REDACTED turned in an outstanding job. By mid-summer of 1954 he had firmed up the engineering plans, selected a crew of engineering personnel, and actually constructed a mock-up tunnel some 150 yards long working under operational conditions at a high security base in REDACTED.
Some mention should be made of the actual method of constructing the tunnel. Studies of the soil structure in the Berlin area showed a high percentage of sand. For this reason it was decided that the tunnel should be lined with steel. The same sand content contributed greatly to the danger of cave-ins at the face of the tunnel, and to eliminate this risk a shield was devised REDACTED with horizontal "blinds" so arranged across its face that should even dry sand be encountered the danger of cave-ins was virtually eliminated. The tunnel liner was formed of sections of heavy steel plate so constructed that, when bolted together, five sections formed a steel ring approximately six feet in diameter and 15 inches long. Provision was made for bolting these rings together to form a continuous tube of solid steel. The men worked under cover of the shield described above (which was slightly larger in diameter than the steel liner) and when sufficient material had been excavated, the shield was forced forward with hydraulic Jacks and a new section of liner was bolted in place. Since this method left a void of approximately one and one half inches around the liner (remembering that the diameter of the shield was greater than that of the liner), screw-type removable plugs were built into every third section of tunnel liner. This permitted removal of the plugs and the forcing of grouting material under high pressure to fill the void after the liner was in place. It was calculated (and subsequently proven to be true) that this method of construction would not permit settling of the soil and detection of the tunnel from the surface. Meantime engineers constructed a mock-up of the tunnel's terminal end. Available plans indicated that the cables were buried some 27 inches deep along the side of a heavily traveled highway. The top of the vertical shaft then needed to be approximately 12 to 14 inches below the surface of the highway in order to give the tapping crew room to work below the ceiling of the shaft, and the whole structure had to be capable of supporting the weight of heavy trucks since the tunnel and tap chamber lay directly beneath the highway. Considerable care was devoted to insulating the tap chamber to prevent its acting like a huge drum. Considerable thought was given to the quantity and content of the material available from the target and the
manner in which it was to be processed. It was in this field, perhaps, that we experienced some of our greatest problems. It had been decided very early in the project's planning stages to maintain the strictest possible security measures. As a minimum precaution security checks were made on each individual who in any way became knowledgeable of the project's mission, and the same standards in force for clearances were utilized. A list of briefed personnel was maintained, special secrecy agreements were executed, and special briefings were given to all knowledgeable personnel. It was in the assemblage of a processing team that we experienced our greatest problem in maintaining security standards. Since the material to be processed was largely Russian voice, it was thought that we would need linguists with near native fluency in Russian. It is axiomatic  that native fluency is usually available only in natives, and in spite of the insulation, it was a weird sensation to be in the chamber when an iron-shod horse trotted across it. We also suffered some anxious moments one foggy morning when the microphone in the tap chamber gave forth with a continuous series of dull thuds. After the sun burned away the fog, visual observation showed that the East German police had set up a temporary automobile checkpoint directly over the chamber. The "thuds" the microphone picked up were caused by the police officer in charge stomping his feet on
the road surface to keep warm.

III. IMPLEMENTATION
By 17 August 1954 things were beginning to take shape and the situation was as follows:
a. The German contractors had completed the compound and we were in possession.
b. All of the basic supplies, equipment, and personnel were in Berlin ready to start construction on the tunnel. This in itself involved transporting 125 tons of steel tunnel liner from the 21 to Berlin. The initial shipment across the East Zone to Berlin consisted of one and one-half freight trains, the loss of any package of which could have blown the project. For security purposes all sensitive items, such as the tunnel liner, were double crated and handed and subjected to severe
drop tests before they left the 21. Similar items were differently packaged for deception purposes.
c. Space at Headquarters was secured and the REDACTED had assembled a crew and was well under way in fabricating the unique equipment necessary to process the anticipated telegraphic traffic. 
d. Initial personnel had been selected and were REDACTED It should be noted that personnel and equipment were programmed initially to exploit approximately REDACTED percent of the anticipated take. In retrospect, perhaps this could be considered overly cautious. In justification of this decision it should be said that no one had ever tunneled 1,476 feet under clandestine conditions with the expectation of hitting a target two inches in diameter and 27 inches below a main German/Soviet highway. There were those who manifested certain reservations on the feasibility of so doing, and it is greatly to the credit of those senior officials, both civilian and military, that, in spite of these reservations, the project was permitted to proceed. In late August a vertical shaft some 16 feet in diameter was started in the warehouse basement floor and ground water was encountered at 16 feet instead of at the predicted 32 feet. Such examination as could be safely undertaken under the steady observation of East German border guards and Soviet officials indicated that a clay lens existed in this particular spot, creating a "perched water table" the magnitude of which was unknown. Available information indicated that the clay lens possibly sloped down in the direction of the target and it was decided to proceed with the tunnel even though the
top cover was to be less than half what had been anticipated.
Careful visual observation was maintained and tunneling operations stopped each time the German guards walked over the tunnel on their regular patrols. Pumps were installed to take care of the excess water. Observation logs were maintained, and since the highway under observation was the
main road from East Berlin to the Schoenfeld Airport, considerable Order of Battle information was obtained. It was also possible to estimate quite accurately the relative importance' of individuals visiting East Berlin by observing the security precautions taken by the East Germans and the Soviets.
Both sides of the tunnel were lined with sand in bags as the tunnel proceeded and the excess spoil was hauled back to the basement of the warehouse. To facilitate movement, a wooden track was laid on the floor of the tunnel and a converted electric fork lift was used to pull a string of rubber-tired trailers back and forth in the tunnel. Cool air was supplied to the face of the tunnel through duct-work from an air conditioning unit located in the warehouse. The tunnel was completed on 28 February 1955. Construction of the tap chamber commenced 10 March 1955 and was completed,
with the three target cables exposed, on 28 March 1955. To appreciate this accomplishment it is necessary to remember that the tunnel was 1,476 feet long (roughly the length of the Lincoln Memorial reflecting pool) and that the first half sloped down and the second half sloped up. The lack of an adequate base line made the surveying problem especially difficult. The engineers decided at one point that an object of known size in the East Zone would be useful as a reference point, so a baseball game was organized with the objective of knocking a baseball as far into the East Zone as possible. This scheme was frustrated by the friendliness of the East German guards who kept returning the baseball. Nonetheless, the engineers expressed confidence that they knew their position when the tunnel was completed to a point which could be contained in a six-inch cube. They were correct. Excess humidity is probably one of the greatest enemies of electronic equipment. To guard against this problem the section of the tunnel immediately adjacent to the tap chamber was insulated and sealed with marine-type plywood to form, in effect, a closed room. Vapor barriers were erected and, in addition, a heavy "anti-personnel" door of steel and concrete was constructed to seal off the tunnel some 15 yards from its terminal end. From the beginning it was realized that the duration of this operation was finite. Considerable thought was given to the posture the U.S. Government would adopt upon the tunnel's discovery and to those measures which would be taken at the site. The following position was finally approved:
a. The posture of the U.S. would be one of flat denial of any knowledge of the tunnel.
b. The tunnel was mined at the point it crossed the East-West Zone border with demolition charges capable of caving in the tunnel liner should the Soviets attempt forcible entry into the cover installation.
c. The "anti-Personnel" door described above was installed.
d. It was agreed that the installation would be defended against forcible entry with all means at hand.
All equipment for isolating and preamplifying the signals and passing them down the tunnel for recording was in place before each tap was made so that monitoring of each pair could begin as soon as it was tapped. Careful check was kept of the temperature and this door bore the following inscription neatly lettered in German and Cyrillic: "Entry is forbidden by order of the Commanding General." It was reasoned that this sign might give pause to Soviet and/or German officials and gain time. As a matter of fact, there were those Communist individuals who considered the posting of this sign as one of the most audacious aspects of the entire undertaking.
REDACTED humidity in the tap chamber to prevent the possibility of the introduction of moisture into the target cables thus causing faults. The moisture in the air caused by the breathing and
perspiration of the technicians doing the tapping operation forced the suspension of the operation several times to permit the air conditioning equipment to dehumidify the chamber. All the components in the electrical isolation networks were individually selected and subjected to rigorous tests to insure maximum reliability, and the lead-away cables were constructed of the best available materials, sheathed in lead, and handled in accordance with the highest telephone company standards. The strictest possible visual watch was maintained with the tap crew. In short, in this, as in all aspects of the operation, every effort was made to guarantee success even though in many instances it meant delay in achieving the objective.

IV. TERMINATION
The tunnel was discovered (see fig. 21) 21 April 1956, after 11 months and 11 days of operation. A memorandum prepared on 15 August 1956 (reproduced in its entirety as Appendix A) examines in detail all evidence available as of that date on the reasons for the discovery. The conclusion reached was that the loss of this source was purely the result of unfortunate circumstances beyond our control - a combination of the fact that one of the cables was in very poor physical condition (this was known from the beginning) and a long period of unusually heavy rainfall. It appeared that water entered the cable in sufficient quantity to make it inoperative, thus necessitating digging up sections of the cable and causing discovery of the tap.
V. PRODUCTION
Statistics may be of interest in evaluating the following of the project:
a.REDACTED
d.A Small processing unit was maintained at the Berlin site to permit on-the-spot
monitoring of engineering circuits for the protection of the project and scanning of the more productive circuits for the "hot" intelligence. Daily reports of sufficient
value to warrant electrical transmission to Washington REDACTED were produced.
e. Processing of the backlogged material continued until 30 September 1958:
The information from this material was disseminated in a closely controlled system REDACTED. Appendix B consists of a summary of the value of the material received together with typical customer comments.

VI . AFTERMATH
As previously noted, considerable thought was given during the entire life of the project on the result its discovery would bring. In retrospect it is probably correct to say that, among those most actively concerned with the project's management, a consensus developed that the Soviets would probably suppress knowledge of the tunnel's existence rather than admit to the world that Free World intelligence organs had the capability of successfully mounting an operation of this magnitude. In other words, it was felt that for the Soviets to admit that the U.S. had been reading their high level communications circuits would cause the Soviets to lose face. Perhaps fortunately, fate intervened, and as a possible consequence the Soviet course of action was exactly contrary to expectation. The Commandant of the Soviet Berlin Garrison, who would normally have controlled the handling of the situation when the tunnel was discovered, was absent from Berlin and the Acting Commandant, Colonel Ivan A. Kotsyuba, was in charge. There is some reason to believe that he (for whatever reason) was forced to make a personal decision on a course of action
without benefit of advice from Moscow. At any rate his reaction was unexpected in that he invited the entire Berlin press corps to a briefing and tour of the tunnel and its facilities. As a result the tunnel was undoubtedly the most highly publicized peacetime espionage enterprise in modern times prior to the "U-2 incident." Worldwide reaction was outstandingly favorable in terms of enhancement of prestige. Non-Soviet Bloc sentiment can be generally summarized as follows:
a. There was universal admiration (and this included informed Soviets) on the technical excellence of the installation and the imaginative nature of the undertaking.
b. The non-Communist world reacted with surprise and unconcealed delight to this indication that the 0.8., almost universally regarded as a stumbling neophyte in espionage matters, was capable of a coup against the Soviet Union, which had long been the acknowledged master in such matters.
c. Coupled with regret that the Cold War necessitated such measures, thoughtful editorial comment
applauded this indication that the U.S. was capable of fulfilling its role of Free World leadership in the struggle. Appendix C contains a sampling of typical U.S. press accounts and editorial comment on the tunnel. Predictably the Communist press treated the tunnel as an outrage and an intolerable indecency. Appendix D consists of a study of East German press reaction to the incident.
For their contributions to Project REDACTED awards were made to the following individuals:
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit
After the project went into the production phase it was necessary to brief a great many people to properly utilize the product. In all almost REDACTED personnel were cleared. Unfortunately the writer has been unable to locate an exact record of those persons who received other recognition
from the Agency for their participation in this project and any omissions are regretted. It should also be noted that approximately people participated wittingly or unwittingly in this undertaking. In fact there are very few, if any, of the elements of CIA that were not called upon for assistance, either directly or indirectly (such as providing manpower), during the life of the project.

APPENDIX A
NOTE: This assessment was prepared by the REDACTED staff immediately after the discovery of the tunnel and based on pertinent information available.
15 August 1956
DISCOVERY BY THE SOVIETS
Analysis of all available evidence - traffic passing on the target cables, conversations recorded from a microphone installed in the tap chamber, and vital observations from the site - indicates that the Soviet discovery of REDACTED was purely fortuitous. A description of the events leading to these conclusions is contained in this paper. Following heavy rains in the Berlin area a number of telephone and telegraph cables were flooded and began to fault between Karlshorst and Mahlow on the night of 16 April 1956. The first major fault was discovered on cable REDACTED on 17 April. The fault was repaired by cutting the defective stretch of cable and replacing a 3000 meter length with a temporary replacement cable. Between 17 and 22 REDACTED.

APPENDIX B
RECAPITULATION OF THE INTELLIGENCE DERIVED
Set forth below are a recapitulation of intelligence derived from the material and some typical consumer comments.

APPENDIX C
TYPICAL AMERICAN PRESS COMMENT
WASHINGTON 9057
1 May 1950

The Tunnel of Love

The United states Government has not yet made any oflicial reply to the Soviet and East German allegations and protests concerning the REDACTED yard tunnel that American intelligence operatives are said to have built underneath the border between West and East Berlin for espionage purposes.
Meanwhile, assuming the story to be correct, we cannot help thinking the Communists have made a grievous mistake to raise so much fuss about their discovery. They are even said to (have conducted
special propaganda tours through the tunnel and to have exhibited the wiretapping and other recording apparatus that the Americans are supposed to have installed inside it.
The probable result of all this has been to give the anti-Communist resistance in East Germany a good deal of amusement and encouragement. Certainly it must have served to strengthen the impression of American resourcefulness and thereby to restore some measure or our prestige--which
apparently had been deteriorating since the equivocal attitude taken by the American authorities in the East German uprisings of June 1954 among the captive population. The reaction of their kinsmen in West Germany is probably a pretty good index to their own. In West Germany the story has been accepted at face value with astonishment and delights an evidence that the tradition of Yankee resourcefulness and ingenuity is not a myth after all. Espionage is one game in which the Communists were deemed, even by their enemies to be particularly expert and our own side to be dismally inept. Very few Germans, as the Frankfurter Neue Presse exultantly observed, even suspected that the Americans "were capable at so much cleverness"; and it would be even more devastating to Communist prestige if it were disclosed that the espionage tunnel had been in operation for some time before the Communists became aware of it. Indeed, if the tunnel episode turns out to have been the product at Yankee ingenuity, there is an interesting parallel in American history. During the siege of Petersburg in 1864, an enterprising Union oflicer from the Pennsylvania coal fields conceived the idea of mining the Confederate positions tram a tunnel under them. The tunnel was dug and the mines were finally set oil; and though the operation was a ﬁasco in part because of the failure of Union commanders to execute orders, the boldness of the stroke has compelled admiration ever since.

APPENDIX D
NOTE: This analysis was prepared by the REDACTED staff as part of the wrap—up of the operation.
ROUND-UP OF EAST GERMAN PRESS
REACTION TO THE DISCOVERY OF THE
WIRETAP TUNNEL AT THE BERLIN SECTOR BORDER

(Sources as Indicated)

The following is an analysis of the East German press reaction to the discovery of the wiretap tunnel at the sector border between West and East Berlin. During the period under review - 24 to 26 April 1956 - a total of 31 dailies per day and four weeklies were available for scrutiny; however, only the dailies reported and commented on the incident. Mostly concerned with reporting and commenting on the incident were the East Berlin papers which, in some instances, devoted full pages of their local sections to reports and pictures on the tunnel in addition to their front page or second page accounts of developments. The provincial press gave front page treatment to the matter only in few instances, generally refrained from large articles or commentaries, and often carried pictorial material with only brief explanations. The least coverage was noted in the provincial press of other than SED (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands - Communist Party Germany) affiliation; none of these papers published any commentary, or any cartoon of their own, on the subject up to 26 April, in fact.
Describing the tunnel as inspected by the Journalists after the Soviet press conference, the papers pointed out that the installation was well designed and constructed, that the installation was costly and equivalent to a modern teler phone exchange, and that the material - of British and American origin - used in the installation was of such quality as to guarantee long service.
The East Berlin papers, which were leading in the reports on the issue, treated the matter as a "bitterly serious incident" which represents an "international scandal" and a "breach of the norms of international law." The papers, in their commentaries, addressed the West Berlin Senat, demanding an all-Berlin understanding and stressing the necessity for united action, and insinuated that Berlin is being kept divided merely for the purpose of providing the espionage centers in West Berlin with a base for launching provocations against the GDR. Other commentaries by central and provincial papers contained calls for vigilance and for defense preparedness. Only one paper printed an editorial on the incident.
In commenting on the incident the press did not draw a line between the different developments, such as the press conference, the Soviet protest, the GDR Government protest, etc., but, as a rule, the commentaries dealt with the incident as a whole. Later, when the first reaction of the West Berlin press was available, the central press swooped down upon the West Berlin press for attempting to belittle the incident and to divert attention from the "seriousness of the matter." The few caricatures published by the papers were designed to slander the Americans.
On 24 April 1956 six East Berlin papers printed the ADN (Allegemeines Deutsches Nachrichten Bureau - General German News Office) release of individual reports on the Soviet press conference, reported on the inspection of the tunnel by the journalists, and carried excerpts from General Zarenko's letter of protest. DER MORGEN and BERLINER ZEITUNG (5 and 6) printed only the abbreviated version of the ADN release. Six provincial SED papers (7 - 12) carried announcements of the discovery, brief reports on the press conference, and merely an announcement to the effect that a letter of protest has been sent to the American Chief of Staff. Only NEUER TAG, Frankfurt/Oder, printed the long version of the ADN release.
Provincial papers of other party affiliations carried no reports.
On 25 April 22 provincial papers came out with the ADN version of the report on the discovery of the tunnel (13 - 34); the six provincial SED papers which had carried a brief announcement the day before followed up their reports by more extensive accounts of the press conference, the letter of protest, and the inspection of the tunnel (l3 - 18). Papers of other party affiliations joined in the reporting campaign on this day. Only MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIHME, of all provincial papers, published an "eye-witness" report containing a description of the tunnel and quoting individuals who had voiced their "outrage at such a thing" which produces new material for conflicts in foreign policy (16). SCHWERINEB VOLKSZEITUNG, which printed the long version of the ADN release, reproduced the first picture of the tunnel (22).
Meanwhile the central press, in addition to supplementary reports on the discovery of the tunnel, descriptions of the tunnel, and pictorial material showing sections of the tunnel such as the amplifier station, etc., came out with the first commentaries. A total of five commentaries appeared on this day. The press treated the matter as a "bitterly serious affair" which represents an finternational scandal" and a "breach of the norms of international law," pointing out that the United States violated the Buenos Aires Treaty on Telecommunications on the one hand and the GDR's sovereignty on the other hand (35 - 39). NEUEB DEUTSCHLAND spoke of a new, hit here to unsurpassed "gangster act" of the 0.8. secret service (35), NATIONAL ZEITUNG termed the incident as a "sensational international scandal" (36), NEUE ZEIT stressed that there is no word "strong enough to brand such wickedness“ (38), and JUNGE WELT declared that "this had to happen just to those who always babble about Communist infiltration but can never prove it" (39). All commentaries were addressed to the West Berlin Senat, demanding an all—Berlin understanding for the purpose of discontinuing the "stubborn adherence to NATO policy," achieving the withdrawal of the "cold war experts of all shades," dissolving the espionage centers in the frontier city," and achieving a "normalization in the situation in Berlin." Three papers reported on a meeting held by the National Front at Alt-Glienicke, at which the population adopted a resolution protesting against this "provocation." Franz Fischer, First Secretary of the Kreis Treptow SED Executive Board, was reported to have said at the meeting that the people of West Germany and West Berlin have to pay for this installation through the occupation costs and to have termed the tunnel as "an appendix of the cold war" (38, 40, and 41). TRIBUENE, moreover, referred to a report by the HAHBURGER ANZEIGER to underscore the fact that the installations in the tunnel were not of provisional nature but designed for long service (40). DER MORGEN, describing the tunnel, added that West German correspondents who inspected the tunnel noted with satisfaction the declaration of the Soviet Lieutenant Colonel that "quite obviously, German quarters have no part in this", (41), while NATIONAL ZEITUNG briefly referred to an announcement made at the Alt—Glienicke meeting to the effect that the tunnel was open for public inspection (36). NEUES DEUTSCHLAND reproduced the first caricature on the issue. The cartoon showed a garden which is divided into two parts by a sign indicating the "Democratic Sector" - full of flowers, and the opposite side - a barren piece of land with a molehill topped by a flag with the dollar sign.’ A strong arm is pulling out of a hole in the Democratic Sector a mole wearing "U.S."-marked earphones, some sort of Army trousers with plugs and pliers showing from the pocket, and a 0.8. Army cap bearing the legend "Espionage.” ”The cartoon is captioned, "Do Not Burrow in Other People's Yards" (35).
On 26 April 1956 27 papers continued reporting on the issue (42 - 68). In 17 instances the reports were supplemented with pictures as outlined above. A total of 15 papers printed the text of, or large excerpts from, the press release on the GDR Government protest (42 - 56). Six papers reported on the inspection of the tunnel by the population, the press, and representatives of the diplomatic corps (42, 49, 59, 60, 65, and 67). Four papers referred to a report carried by the West Berlin TAGESSPIEGEL according to which Western Journalists were prohibited from inspecting the mouth of the tunnel on the Western side (42, 43, 51, and 58), and four papers referred to FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which had spoken of an "eloquent silence" about the affair on the part of the Americans (42, 51, 55, and 58). A total of four papers reported on the AltGlienicke meeting (51, 60, 61, and 67). NEUES DEUTSCHLAND gave excerpts from Fisher's speech, quoting him to the effect that the people of West Berlin, in particular the SPD members, will be invited to inspect the tunnel (51). Three papers reproduced caricatures (51, 52, and 56), six papers carried commentaries (51, 52, 53, 54, 57, and 58), and one paper came out with an editorial (55). Three East Berlin papers, through their commentaries, swooped down upon the West Berlin press for its attitude toward the incident. NEUES DEUTSCHLAND accused the West Berlin papers of attempting to belittle the incident and of lauding the efficiency of the American "goblins" adding that the West Berlin press is thus making vain attempts to divert attention from the seriousness of the matter (51).
JUNGE WELT lashed out at the West Berlin DER TAG, saying that, by its opinion, the West Berlin paper manifests its total loss of any sense of decency. Besides, DER TAG is not in the least disturbed about the violation also of West Berlin's territory (52). NATIONAL ZEITUNG held that DER TAG now admitted what it has been denying at all times, namely that West Berlin is a de facto part of NATO, adding that DER TAG now regards as "customary" the military espionage of the United States on GDR territory in addition to the "customary frontier-city policy," the "customary" partition, and the "customary" diversionist activities of the KGU and other underworld organizations. The paper stressed that all Berliners fully agree with the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which said that the people must demand the discontinuation of "such things" (58). NEUE ZEIT, carrying the only editorial, said that the wiretapping post is a feature of West Berlin's misuse as a NATO base. The paper emphasized that GDR policy will continue to serve all-German understanding and relaxation of international tensions. "But it must be kept in mind that the success of this policy will not only depend on the volume of the appeal for peace but also on our preparedness to defend our homeland as well as on our vigilance regarding the prevention of dangers resulting from the fact that one part of Berlin has become a frontier city against peace," the paper added. "What we need are contact points above the ground and in full
light, namely all-German talks, and not underground trenches in the cold war" (55).
The first commentaries carried by provincial papers dealt with the incident as an example of proof for East German press reports on hostile espionage. VOLKSSTIIME, Karl-Marx-Stadt, pointed out that the tunnel represents "a document" which is quite apt to dispel all doubts of those who have hitherto been inclined to regard East German press reports about the underground activities of Western espionage services as "exaggerated" (57). MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME quoted several workers who voiced their indignation over "such a vileness" which makes German unity more difficult to demonstrate that the "Western side" is just as quiet about this "unpleasant affair" as the population is outraged (53). And LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG stressed that anyone reading about the discovery of the tunnel will inevitably weigh the Soviet attempts at maintaining peace against the efforts made by the U.S. espionage service, adding that this "breach of international law" also places the West Berlin administration "in a peculiar light." The paper reminded its readers that war preparation, which formerly marched on Prussian Army boots," is now marching on "American rubber soles, chewing gum, and tapping telephone lines" (54).
NEUES DEUTSCHLAND's caricature showed an American soldier trying in vain to "milk" a disconnected, oversized telephone receiver into a bucket marked "CIC" while another soldier is thoughtfully standing by (5i). JUNGE WELT reproduced a cartoon showing a mole wearing a 0.8. Army cap on its head and a telephone receiver on its back halting before a sign which warns that "spies are now facing danger." The cartoon is captioned, "The Underworld that Shuns the Light," and footnoted, "Damned, we did not put up that sign" (52). FREIESWORT showed rats wearing U.S. Army caps being disturbed by a Russian soldier in the operation of what looks like a communication center. Two rats are shown facing the soldier in surprise, another standing with arms raised, and still another escaping through an opening in the wall. The caricature is entitled, "Unpleasant Surprise," and footnoted, "It is an Effrontery of the Russians to Disturb Us in Our (Burrowing) Work" (56).

BERLINER ZEITUNG
SAECHSISCHE ZEITUNG
DAS VOLK, Erfurt
NEUER TAG
FREIHEIT

DER MORGEN

TRIBUENE

BAUERN ECHO

DER NEUE WEG

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND
JUNGE WELT

MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME
LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
NEUE ZEIT

FREIES WORT
VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-Marx-Stadt
NATIONAL ZEITUNG
VOLKSSTIMME, Magdeburg
MAERKISCHE UNION

FREIE ERDE

LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
VOLKSWACHT
SAECHSISCHES TAGEBLATT
OSTSEE ZEITUNG
LAUSITZER RUNDSCHAU
DIE UNION

SCHWERINER VOLKSZEITUNG
