FUR (WHOM. USE ONLY

JPFIS L/10216
24 December 1981

Translation

THERMOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF WORKING MEDIA

OF THE GAS-PHASE NUCLEAR REACTOR

By

I V.K. Gryaznov. et al.

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR omcm; use ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itcz, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCSD “EREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10216

24 December 1981

THERMOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF WORKING MEDIA
OF THE GAS-PHASE NUCLEAR REACTOR

Moscow TEPLOPIZICHESKIYE SVOYSTVA RABOCHIKH SRBD GAZOFAZNOGO YADBRNOGO
REAKTORA in Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 6-63

[Chapter 1 from the book “Thermophysical Properties of Working Media
of the Gas-Phase Nuclear Reactor”, by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov,
Igor'L'vovich Iosilevskiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna
Kuznetsova, Vladimir Ivanovich Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Lappo,
Boris Nikolayevich Lomakin, Georgiy Alekseyevich Pavlov, Eduard
Yevgen'yevichson and Vladimir Yevgen'yevich Portov and edited by

V.M. Iyevlev, Atomizdat. 1,800 copies, 304 pages]

mint"; Prefaceeaeeaeee. ...... aeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeo 1

mptCI 1o memwymic Proportieﬂoo..u.................................. 6
1.1. General characteristics of the behavior of thermodynamic
functions of working media....................................... I.
1.2. Asymptotic methods of describing the thermodynamics of a
weakly imperfect plasma 1’:
13- memvnamics of a strongly imperfect plasma.................... 19
1.4. Component mosition of partially ionized imperfect plasma...... 31

1-5- Consideration of the effect of the medium on the state of

atom: Model calculations by the ﬂartree-Pock and Thomas-
P.mi utmeeeeeeeeoeoteIeeeooeeleeeeeeeoeeeeeeooeeeeeeeeeeeeeee 38

1.6. Method of calculating the composition and thermodynamic

functions of a multicemponent imperfect plasma. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . 45
l. 7 . Discussion of the results of calculation. Comparison to

data of other calculations....................................... 55

Chapter 2. Transfer Coefficients of Imperfect Plasma .... .... ..... .......... 63
2.1. Qualitative description of heat. mass, pulse and charge
transfer processes in a gas-phase nuclear reactor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

2.2. Kinetic theory of weakly iuperfect plasma 69
2.3. Theory of nonequilibrium processes in imperfect media . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
2.4. Model approaches to determination of electron transfer

CoefficientB Of 1mrfect pm06eeeeeeelaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeloeee 89
Chapter 4.
4. l.

h h Orb

.0.

Uluhun
O.

4.6.

4.7.

Chapter 5.

FOR (ll-'FK‘IAI. NSF. ONLY

Effect of transfer coefficients of a multicomponent imperfect

plasma eeoeoeeoeeeeeooeaeeoeea.eeaeeeeeeeeceoeeeaeaoeooeeeeooeeea

Method of calculating transfer coefficients of imperfect
plasma. Discussion of results of calculation... ... .. .. . . . . nu , ,

optical Properties of Gas.‘ and Plasma eeeeeeoeeeeeeoeeaoeoeteot
Radiation transfer in a gas-phase nuclear reactor. Ble-

mentary absorption processes in a plasma of working media........
o‘celeration absorption on 1°“. .nd atonﬂ......o.................
Photoionization of atoms, ions and uolecules.............oc..-...
momim in awe lines.....OOOOOOOOOOOCCOOIOO.COOOO10.0.00...
Molecular absorption............................................o
Effect of imperfection on optical properties of plasma,..........
Discussion of method and results of calculating optical

Characteristics of working media..................n..........oo.o

Generation and Diagnosis of Imperfect Plam....................
Characteristics of experimental investigation of imperfect
plague000.00.00.00.0II.IO.CO0.0......OOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOIOICOOO.DO.
Electric methods of producing an imperfect plasma................
Dynamic methods in physics of inperfect plasma.................u
Ch condensation Of an 1mPCrfoct P1..n.eeeeoeeseeeeeee oteeeoooeeo
Comparison of experimental and calculated data on
thermodynamics..........................o.......ooo.............o

Comparison of experimental and calculated data by
tran5£er coefficients...neoeeeeeofieeeeeeeo-assesses-000000.000.-

comparison of experimental and calculated data by
optical properties

oesoseaoeeoaeeeeeeoeeaee-veeoeaaOIeoeaaeeeoeeoe

Thermophysical Properties of Working Media of Gas-Phase
Nuclear “actoroeOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOIOOO. OOOOOOOOOOODOOOIOICOIO

BibliogratheeeeoenoseIaoeeeoIooooceseeeoees00"eooeeeeeeeeeaeoeeoeoeeeeloo.

The present state of the theory of estimation of thermodynamic transfer and
optical properties of gases at high pressures and temperatures and the state
of experimental investigations in the physics of non-ideal plasma, completely
or partially ionized, is analyzed. Numerical calculations are made of the
thermophysical properties of plasma of working media used in gas-phase nuclear--

alkali metals. uranium, hydrogen and mixtures of them--over a wide temperature
and pressure range are made.

105

117

117
119
120
127
130
135

1‘1
1‘5
165
159
157
165

171

177

180

186
288

The hook is: survey and reference in nature and will be useful both to specialists
involved directly in the gas-phase nuclear reactor and to engineers and scien-

tific workers specializing in various fields of the physics of low-temperature

plasma.

1)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EDITOR' S FOREVER!)

Moscow TEPIDPIZICHESKI‘E SVOYSTVA MRI!!! SEED GAZOPAZNOGO YADERNOGO NORA in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 3-5

[Preface by Corresponding Member of USSR Academy of Sciences V. H. Iyevlev from
the book "Thermophysical Properties of Working Media of the Gas-Phase Nuclear Re-
actor", by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor' L‘v0vich Iosilevskiy, Yuriy
Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna Kuznetsova, Vladimir Ivanovich Kucherenko,
Galina Borisovna Lappo, Boris Nikolayevich Win, Georgiy Alekseyevich Pavlov,
Eduard Yevgen'yevich son and Vladimir Yevgen'yevich Fortov, Atomizdat, 1,800 copies,
304 pages]

[Text] The proposed book is survey in nature on the thermophysical properties of
materials and contains reference material 0n the thermodynamic, transport and op-
tical properties of vapors of alkali metals, uranium, hydrogen and mixtures of
them over a wide temperature and pressure range. The indicated survey and refer-
ence material were compiled with respect to interests related to investigating the
possibility of development and the anticipated characteristics of a nuclear reactor
of an essentially new type-~the gas-phase nuclear reactor (can) and also of power
plants with this type of reactor. Interest in investigations of the gas-phase nu-
clear reactor, including study of the properties of the working media, is deter-
mined by the assumed unique properties of this reactor, useful for many applica-
tions. It can be used both in large electric power plants and high-tanperature
production systems and in space power plants, engines and so on. Electric power
plants with GYaR have a number of advantages which include (1-4] 2 high efficiency.
increased heat dissipation temperature, i.e., the capability of discharging heat
into the air rather than into water without significant deterioration of efficien-
cy, an increase of the nuclear fuel conversion ratio with low uranium charge in the
reactor, low accmnulation of nuclear materials and so on. In this regard the gas-
phase nuclear reactor will possibly be the future basis for extensive development
of nuclear power engineering and technology. The contents of the book are not re-
lated directly to processes in the gas-phase nuclear reactor. However, it is
feasible in the preface to dwell briefly on the schematic diagram and some dis-
tinguishing features of (Wall that determine the characteristics of the approach to
study of the thermophysical properties of working media.

Different schemes of our. are now being investigated [1-4]. According to one of

the most promising of them, substantantiated by theoretical investigations and
model experiments, a GYaR is a cavity-type device. The fissionable material--

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uranim in a gaseous stateuis located in the center of the cavity surrounded by a
reflector-moderator. The working substance heated by thermal radiation from the
uraniun plasma passes between the uranium and the cavity walls. Special measures
are employeduprofiling of the velocity field, suppression of disturbances at the
inlet of working media into the cavity, stabilization by a magnetic field and so
on [3]--to reduce mixing of the uranium and working substance.

The principal advantage of the can is the capability of heating the working sub-
stance to very high temperatures. The restriction here is only the need to have

a temperature permitted by the structural materials of the walls on the periphery
of the working substance. The teuperature may reach tens of thousands of degrees
in some schemes far from the walls and also in the zone of the uraniua plasma.
Therefore, one of the central problems in development of (Walk is that of establish-
ing the necessary temperature fields and concentration profiles in the reactor
cavity. Complex problems of magnetic hydrodynamics, diffusion and radiation and
convective heat transfer. solution of which is impossible without a detailed knowl-
edge of all the transport characteristics of the plasma, arise in solution of this
problem. A knowledge of the critical properties of uranium and working substances
is of special importance since the main mechanism of heat transfer is radiant en-
ergy transfer.

The high tenperatures of the uranium and working substance and the requirement of
the criticality of the GYaR make it necessary to have a pressure at the level of
hundreds of atmospheres in the reactor cavity. with these pressures and tempera-
tures of tens of thousands of degrees, the uraniun and working substances, among
which alkali metals that provide high conductivity and absorption of radiation

play the important role, are in a state of a so-called strongly imperfect plasma,
i.e. , in a state of single- or multiply ionized gas with intensive interparticle
interaction that significantly affects all the thermophysical properties of the
medium. The theory of this state of matter is extremely complex and now contains

a number of unresolved problems, while the experimental information is very limited.
Therefore, unlike problems of traditional thermophysics, not only proper sampling
of all the input data but, which is no less important, critical selection of the
most reliable methods now available of calculating the thermophysical properties
of the working media in a strongly imperfect plasma are required to calculate the
thermodynamic and transfer properties. This circumstance has been reflected in the
fact that a considerable part of this book is allocated to analysis of the princi-
pal problems of the theory and current state of generation and diagnosis of a non-
ideal plasma.

It should be noted that experimental investigations of an imperfect plasma have not
yet been conducted adequately and this is related to the complexity of generation
and diagnosis of this plasma. Theoretical investigations of animperfect plasma are
also far from complete and the collective of authors hopes that the outlined re-
sults will be used in further development of investigations on the physics of a
nonideal plasma.

The book is constructed in the following manner. The first three chapters are
devoted to a survey of the current state of the theory and selecting the method of
calculating the the modynamic. kinetic and optical properties of an imperfect
General problems of the thermophysics of an iuperfect plasma are considered in these

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chapters: therefore, the outlined material may also be used in other fields of
physics of high-temperature gases and plasma. These fields include the thermo-
physics of. strong shock waves, powerful mm generators, heavy-current discharges,
the hydrodynamics of scattering of dense vapors in laser thermonuclear fusion and
so on. The fourth chapter is devoted to a survey of experimental methods and re-
sults obtained on the thermophysics ofm inperfect plasma. Finally, chapter 5
contains specific results of calculations of the thermophysical properties of the
plasma of working media: gaseous alkali metals, uranium and also mixtures of al-
kali metals with uranium and hydrogen.

The participation of the authors in direct writing of the material was as follows:
V. K. Gryaznov--sections 1.5 and 1.6, I. 1.. Iosilevskiy--sections 1.1, 1.3-1.7 and
4.5, Yu. G. Krasnikov--section 1.2, N. I. Kuznetsova--sections 3.1-3.5, V. I.
Kucherenko--sections 2.5 and 2.6, G. B. Iappo--sections 3.1-3.5 and 3.7, B. :e.
Lomakinnsections 4.1-4.7, G. A. Pavlow-sections 2.1 and 2.3-2.6, E. Ye. Son--
sections 2.1-2.6, 3.6 and 4.6 and V. Ye. Porto'P-sections 1.5 and 4.1-4.7. The
numerical calculations were made by V. K. Gryaznov, I. 1.. Iosilevskiy, V. I. Ku-
cherenko and G. B. Lappo.

since the book is mainly survey and reference in nature, one should turn to the
cited bibliography for more detailed study of the theoretical problems and exper-
imental methods of the generation and diagnosis of m imperfectplasma. This book
on the thermophysics of m inperfect plasma is appearing for the first time: there-
fore the authors will be grateful for responses and critical comments.

The proposed book will be useful to specialists working not only on development of
the gas-phase nuclear reactor, but also in other fields of plasma physics, 148D
generators, the physics of shock waves, some schemes of thermonuclear fusion and
so on.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 001‘“ IAI. use. UNIJ

'I'HBBMODYNMIC PROPERTIES

Moscow TEPIDPIZICHESKIYESVOYSTVA mam! SEED Gnmrnzuoco YADERNOGO am in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 6-63

[chapter 1 from the book "'lheruophysical Properties of Working Media of the Gas-
Phase Nuclear Reactor", by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor‘ L'vovich Iosilev-
skiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna mnetsova. Vladimir Ivanovich
Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Lappo. Boris Nikolayevich lonakin, Georgiy Alekseye-
vich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevich Son and Vladimir Yevgen'yevich Portov. Atomizdat.
1,800 copies. 304 pages)

(Text) 1.1. General Characteristics of the Behavior of the memodynanic functions
of Working Media

has approaches, which have become called the chemical and physical models [2).' are
usually esployed to calculate the thermodynamic functions of high-teaperature nedia
in the range of parameters typical for the gas-phase nuclear reactor [1).

In most cases the simpler chemical nodal is considered where the presence of par-
ticles of specific varieties having a continuous energy spectra: is assmed before-
hand. ‘rhe effect of the internal structure of the particles (bound states) on
thermodynamic functions is taken into account by introducing individual statistical
suns (abbreviated statsums) [5]. This is the source of known difficulties related
to the conditional nature of dividing all degrees of freedom of the system into
translational and internal. In the practice of calculating thermodynamic values.
these difficulties are gotten around by vari‘ us types of "cuts" of the statsus on
the basis of one or another physical concepts.

A subsequent, but more complex approach to determination of thermdynanic functions
is based on the physical nodal where nuclei and electrons are considered and
coulomb interaction between then is taken into account on the basis of quantum-
statistical theory. In this case contributions to thermodynamic functions from
continuous and discontinuous spectra occur simultaneously and are finite. 'Ihese
problems are considered in section 1.2. when discussing the qualitative behavior

 

O
The names methods of initial atone and method of mixture are used for similar ap-
proaches in the theory of neutral chemically reacting gases [3, 4].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the thermodynamic characteristics of working substances of complex composition,
it is more convenient to use the traditional chanical model.

The problem of thermodynamic calculation can be conditionally divided into two
parts. rirst, purely thermodynamic calculation with given, for example, pressure
p and temperature '1' of the remaining thermodynamic values such as density a, in-
ternal energy 1!, enthalpy H. entropy s and so on and also of differential charac~
teristicsuspecific heats Cp and CV, the isentropic index Ya- (0 '0 17/17 ‘II Ma and

so on. Second, calculation of some important auxiliary values such as the composi-
tion and individual contributions of different subsystems. for example, free char-
gss, atoms, molecules and so on. A knowledge of these values is in principle not
compulsory for calculation of the thermophysical properties, but the existing ap-
proximate methods of calculating these properties rely in most cases on using them.

It follows from the results of numerous approximate calculations that the general
behavior of the thermodynamic characteristics for working media in the range of
parameters p - 0.l~lo2 HE: and 'r - 103-105 K [1] is determined first by processes
of ionization and recombination of atoms and ions and second by formation and dis-
sociation of different molecules, while at low temperatures it is determined by the
gas-liquid phase transition. The effect of the nonic'eal nature on the behavior of
the total thermodynamic values of working substances is not felt as strongly as on
their composition. Although all the indicated processes may actually proceed si-
nultaneously. it is useful to judge separately the effect of each of them on the
course of thermodynamic functions.

 

4 unm :1) mm mu I,I0"I(

Figure 1.1. Thermodynamic Equation of state of Lithiun Plasma. Results
of calculation (the possibility of condensation and formation
of molecules was not taken into account)

A specific band in the plane of thermodynamic parameters, for example, p, v or

p, 'r and so on, can be set into agreement to each of these processes. The posi-
tion and slope of this hand are dependent on such parameters as ionization energy,
energy of dissociation and so on. As an illustration, let us consider the process
of ionization of lithium. Like all alkali metals, secondary ionization in lithium
proceeds with a filled electron shell; therefore, the first and second ionization
potentials differ significantly (see Table 1.1, section 1.6), while the primary
and secondary ionization bands are clearly distinguished.

The dependence of the dimensionless value-~the lithium compressability factor
2 E pV/R'l‘ (R is the gas constant and V is the molar volume) on temperature is

 

e
The thermodynamic calculations presented in the given book were made by using a
special program described in [6).

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presented in Figure 1.1. The range of an ideal gas behavior (2 = coast) and the
range of transition separating them corresponding to primary, secondary and ter-
tiary ionization, can be clearly distinguished in the low-pressure range, i.e.,

at low densities. As pressure increases, these processes shift toward the higher
temperature range and in this case both ionization bands are split and superimposed
on each other so that, for example, the section corresponding to ideal singly ion-
ized lithium essentially disappears.

Thu foregoing on the thermal equation of state p(V. T) is also valid with respect
to the caloric equation of state U(p, T). this is illustrated in Figure 1.2 on
the example of hydrogen. The value pv 5 pr)’1 is used as the independent variable
here, which permits clearer determination of sections of ideal gas behavior, where

3
U ‘=-;-PV'| 0”“L The constant constained in this relation is dependent on selec-

tion of the point of reference and is expressed by dissociation and ionization
energy.

 

Figure 1.2. Caloric Equation of State of Hydrogen U(p, V). Results of

calculation. Lines corresponding to ideal gas behavior

II 2 pVIrunsI are noted

Key:
l. Ideal gas

The behavior illustrated in Figures 1.1 and 1.2 on the isobars is qualitatively
preserved upon intersection ofthe dissociation or ionization band along the iso-
chor, isotherm, isoenthalpy or isoentropy. Specifically, such differential char-
acteristics as, for example, specific heat, have a characteristic burst in this
case (Figure 1.3). The ionization band and general course of lines T, H, U and

s - const intersection this band are depicted schematically in Figure 1.4 in co-

ordinates p, V.

The enthalpy-entropy diagram on which dissociation or ionization bands can also be
distinguished is important for practical purposes (Figure 1.5).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘0FFMJAL.USE(NVLV

 

Figure 1.3. Specific that of Hydrogen [114]

 

Figure l.4. Qualitative Behavior of Lines x - const (x - T. H. U. s and
so on) Upon Intersection of Isolated Ionization Band

Key:

1. Ionization band

The general course of thermodynamic functions presented above is correctly de-
scribed qualitatively within the chemical model [5], based on solution of the known
system of equations of chemical and ionization equilibrium using heats of dissocia-
tion, ionization and excitation energy. It is important to know with this approach
how sensitive the total thermodynamic values are to selection of the method of tak-
ing the internal degrees of freedom and the effect of imperfection into account.
This is shown in Figures 1.6-1.10 on the example of the thermal and caloric equa-
tions of state of cesium. It is obvious from the figures that the ambiguity re-
lated to the differences between the methods suggested in the literature [7] of
taking the contribution of excited states of an atom into account is not reflected
in the qualitative behavior of the curves within the ionization band (this conclu-
sion is retained for dissociation). The effect of this intersection is felt to a
greater degree with an increase of press when. as already noted, the ionization
and dissociation bands are shifted to the higher temperature range.

If quantum effects are not taken into account, the interaction between charged

particles can be characterized by the dimensionless parameter y or by parameter r
more convenient in problems of theory.

FOR¢0FFNJA1.USElNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, (1)
mum -
70

10

  

(2)___

--_——_--Q——a .. _

9 '0 b 5.AK/¢~|(

Figure 1.5. mthalpy-Entropy Diagram for Hydrogen-Potassium Hixture
(H2 «9 3 percent K): solid linesnisobars; dashed lines--
isotherms

1. 3/9 2. J/g-K
‘ _‘_'_ "'Is . I' __ "_ .
y ('1') "" 'W'n' (1.1)

I, 3 r-z x}, .— 4n gn‘eflk'l'.

Here e is charge, it is Boltzmann‘s constant, to is the Debye radius and um and

zgr is the total concentration and sun for charged particles.

when calculating the total thermodynamic functions. the effect of coulomb interac-
tion is doubly manifested. 0n the one hand, it is present in the form of direct
corrections to the values of internal energy and pressure. On the other hand. it
is indirectly reflected in thermodynamic properties due to a shift of ionization
equilibrium because of effective variation of the ionization potential. In the
range of weak ispcrfection r << 1, the corresponding corrections are given by the
known Debye-Bueckel approximately [8]. In this case corrections to the values of
energy and pressure are negative and proportional to the first power of parameter
I‘, while the degree of ionization increases. According to this, the typical trans-
ition in the ionization range is smoothed over in the thermal and caloric equations
of state (see Figures 1.6-1.10) and the corresponding peak is also smoothed as a
function of the specific heat or compressability on temperature. let us emphasize
that the “inclusion“ of charge-charge interaction monotonically increases the in-
ternal energy or enthalpy in a considerable part of the ionization band in the
caloric equation of state U - U (p, v) important for some gas-dynamic problems
(adiabatic flows) (see Figure 1.9).

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

"I
in
I,”

{6

1,4

1.?

  

1,0 - .
0r, 1 2 milk:

Figure 1.6. Thermal Equation of state of Cesium in Ionization Band (iso-
core v - 500 cm3/g). Calculation in ideal gas approximation
with regard to different number of excited states of cesium
in statsun (1.71): l--ground state: 2--

3..-

 

Figure 1.7. Caloric Equation of state of Cesium Plasma on Isochor v -
= 500 cm3/g. See Figure 1.6 for notations.

Key:
1 . kJ/kg 2 . HPa

When the ionization band intersects. for example, along the isochor (V = const),
the parameter of imperfection i‘ does not behave monotonical‘» and reaches a specif-
ic maximum value [7]. This value increases with a shift to tne higher density
range. The effect which charge-charge interaction has on the general course of
thermodynamic functions also increases in this case within the given band. The
range where parameter r z 1 can be conditionally called the range of strong imper-
fection. The forms and specifically the characters of correction for imperfection
in this range was discussed by many authors (see, for example surveys [9-12]). It
is now clear that the given problem is closely related to the role of excited states
of the atom and other particles and with the sequential approach the contributions
from discontinuous and continuous energy spectra of particles should be interrelat-
ed, as occurs, for example, in the physical model of a plasma where both contribu-
tions are calculated simultaneously (see section 1.2).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0’5 ’ 2 Ame

Figure 1.8. Isochor of Cesium v - 500 cm3/g. Calculation of system of
ions, electrons and atoms (in ground state) with different
corrections for imperfection: l--ideal gas; 2--ring (Debye)
approximation in large canonical ensemble (1.84, 1.85); 3--
correction as in single-component model [43] (see also Fig-

ures 1.16 and 1.17)

(u' ’9”:

”f% (l)

  
  
     

0 I 2 linnu(2,

Figure 1.9. Caloric Equation of State of Cesium Plasma on Isochor v -
- 500 cud/g. See Figure 1.8 for notations

Key:
1. kJ/kg

A large number of papers [13-16) is also devoted to the problem of the role of

interaction of changed and neutral particles. The effect of this interaction is
manifested differently according to existing concepts. First, bound conplemes of
neutral and charged particles which are regarded as a separate variety of parti-
cles, for example, H', H3 and "3, Li‘, Li", 1.15 and so on. are formed in the case
of sufficiently strong attraction at close distances. The calculations show that
inclusion of these particles in the calculation is weakly reflected in the total
thermodynamic characteristics. Second, there is the effect of charge-neutral in-
teraction unrelated to formation of an individual variety of particles. The fol-
lowing dimensionless parameter is used for the characteristic of this part of the

contribution of interaction .

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non OFFICIAL use only

 

—_—h

0,"

-L— . __A_

'm' ro’ 10' v,cM’/c (2)

 

Figure 1.10. Position in p, v-Plane of Isoentropy of Cesium s . 1.9 kJ/(kg'K)
When Using Different Corrections for Imperfection: l, 2 and 3--
as in figure 1.8: during (Dabye) approximation in (N, V, ‘1‘]-
group. Summation of intra-atomic states in 1-4 to energy 2}; 1
< I - RT

1. kJ/kg 2. cm3/g

€~%J"l'(tldr. (1.2)

where no is the neutral particle concentration and Mr) is the potential or charge-
neutral interaction. The equality of this parameter to unity conditionally limits
the range where charge-neutral interaction appreciably shifts the ionization equi-
librium. Different estimates made for alkali mtczs [16] yield a typical figure
on the order of approximately -0.S010’21 even3 for the value I ¢(r)dr contained in
expression (1.2). Calculations using this value show that consideration of the in-
teraction of charged and neutral particles in the greater part of the range of in-
terest to us weakly affects the general course of the total thermodynamic functions,
leading to some smoothing of the course of these functions discussed above in the
low-temperature part of the primary ionization band. The diagrams of state of hy-
drogen, lithium, cesium and uranium with the range of strong imperfection noted on
them due to charge-charge and charge-neutral interaction are presented in Figures
1.11-1.14. The give diagrams were plotted on the basis of calculations (see Chap-
ter 5) where the indicated interactions were already taken into account. However,
in view of the approximate nature of our knowledge of the potential 0(r) itself in
[1.2) and also due to the approximate nature of the corrections that describe these
interactions, the above estimate of the role of these interactions may be
inaccurate.

The interaction between neutral particles can also be described within two mechan-
isms. Formation of a new variety of neutral particles, for exanple, molecules. may
have a significant effect on the general course of the thermodynamic functions in
the low-temperature range. This is primarily related to hydrogen (see Figures 1.2
and 1.11) and to a lesser degree to the alkali metals and is related directly to

the values of the dissociation energy of 112. Liz, Naz molecules and so on (see
Table 1.1).

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.11. Diagram of state of hydrogen. ‘lhe range of strong imperfection
is noted (I‘ 1 1). Dashed zone considered in this paper (p i 50
MPa): solid liner-isotherm in approximation of ideal gas 8*,
e and H; dashed liner-additional consideration of formation of

"2' “5 and H-

Besides this effect, an interaction not leading to formation of bound states (the
term "imperfection" is usually applied to this latter part) is considered separ-
ately in the chemical model. Estimates and calculations show that, being limited
only by consideration of molecule formation, we introduce an error to the equation
of state in the low-temperature range (5 4,000 K) in the range of pressures of in-
terest to us.

A qualitatively inportant manifestation of particle interaction, primarily of neu-
tral particles, is the gas-liquid phase transition. According to existing esti-
mates [17, 18] and according to experimental data, the critical parameters of alka-
li metals are located in the range of parameters: '11“ = 2,000-3,500 K, V)“. a 50-
300 cm3/mo1e, p)“. = 10-60 We and 2,“ : pkrVkr/Rl‘k: = 0.1-0.2. Statistical
measurements of the equation of state of cesiun vapors in the sub- and near-critical
range '1' s 'I‘kr = 2,050 K have now been made [19, 20]. There are no static experi-
ments in neutral cesium vapors at supercritical tenperatures, but comparison of
recent experimental data at 'r s '1‘)“. (20] to the generalized diagram of compressabil-
ity for nonmetals [21, 22] shows satisfactory agreement (Figure 1.15). If one as-
sumes that the noted agreement is retained at '1' > '1)“- with accuracy sufficient for
estimates in the temperature range where thermal ionization is low, one can direct-
ly compare the equation of state characterized by the diagram of compressability
indicated above to the results of thermodynamic calculation that do not take into
account interatomic interaction (except for formation of biatomic molecules). The
boundary where the difference becoms sufficiently large can be conditionally taken
as the boundary of the range of strong imperfection due to neutral-neutral inter-
action. '1‘his comparison was made for isotherms '1' a 2,000 and 3,000 K in Figure

1.15 and for isobars P - 10 and 20 ups in Figure 1.13.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAL USE ONLY

    

-L—_I'—

.L.. -
2 J 5 to 20mm

Figure 1.12. 9-? Diagram of Lithium. Saturation boundary and range of
strong charge-charge interaction (dashed line) and charge-
neutral interaction (wavy line)-8n.g,0° - 0.5 (1.2)) are
noted

Key:
1. g/cm3 3. Gas
2. Two-phase zone

It follows from diagrams 1.12 and 1.13 that the high-temperature part of the
boundary of the two-phase zone, including the vicinity of the critical point, is

in the zone where, besides neutral particle interaction, charge-neutral and charge-
charge interactions are also strong. The hypothesis has frequently been advanced
in the literature (9, 14] that there may be an appreciable difference of the gas-
1iquid phase transition in alkali metals from the phase transition in nonmetals
due to this and, moreover, that there exists an independent ”plasma“ phase transi-
tion. The presently available experimental information does not yet indicate the
presence of any qualitative anomalies in this range (see section 4.3 for more
detail).

compared to the alkali metals, uranium has a higher boiling point (approximately
4,000 K). The critical parameters of uranium, according to existing estimates.

are such that (pk, = 600 MPa, TR, : 11,500 K and pkg = 5.3 g/cn3 [18, 23, 24]).

the entire range of pressures of interest to us is subcritical. In this regard

the overall pattern of thermodynamic functions in the temperature range of

13

FOR 0511C1A1.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gamma. am;
\ zl sm "-7-

     

' 10 '20 1,153}

 

J65

Figure 1.13. o-‘r-Diagram of Cesium. The notations are the same as in Figure
1.12: l--calculation by method of section 1.6: 2-s1nooth ap-
proximation of experimental results [20]; 3--generalized equa-
tion of state for nonnetals [21, 22] ('Obert and Nelson diagram')

1. g/cm3 3. Gas
2. 'No-phase zone

'1' s 10‘ K is divided into two sections: a gas behavior range limited by the curve
of equilibrium and a gas-liquid transition range. The condensation boundary separ-
ating them is experimentally known in a limited temperature range ('1‘ s 2,500 K).
due to which the results of approximate extrapolation are used in practical calcu-
lations related to higher tenperatures [23, 25]. The validity of this extrapola-
tion in the case of uranium is especially needed in substantiation and experimental
check since, as can be seen from Figure 1.14, the high-temperature part of the
curve of equilibrium is located in the range of a strongly iuperfect plasma. which
according to existing concepts, may lead to violation 0! the known enpirical rules
which are the basis of the extrapolation indicated above.

1.2. Asyuptotic Methods of Describing the Thermodynamics of a Weakly Imperfect
Plasma

Unlike ordinary gases, the forces of interaction between particles are long-range
in a plasma, due to which the effects related to interaction may be significant at

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”'m 7 "'Z-IMIJIIINmen commas.

 

Figure 1.14. p-T—Disgram of Uranium. Solid lines--ca1cu1ation by method of
section 1.6; dashed lines--ca1cu1ation using fewer known levels

([105]) and with regard to imperfection according to (1.24-1.30,
1.33); dash-dot line--calculation from [106]: the wavy lines
denote passage through secondary and tertiary ionization (I--

xUH/xm - 0.5: II--xu+++/xo++ - 0.5)

Key :
1. Nuclei/c1113 3. g/cm3
2 . mac-phase zone 4. Gas

low temperatures ('1‘ ~ 104 K) even at charged particle concentrations of n ~ 10]-8
cm‘3. Moreover, quantum-mechanics effects are manifested in an imperfect plasma:
first, effects of electron generation may occur and second, when the particles in-
teracting by coulomb's law are at short distances, their relative notion should be
described quantum mechanically rather than by using laws of classical mechanics.

The degree of iuperfection and quantum effects in a two-couponent plasma can be
characterized by two independent dimensionless parameters

1; c'IEn "‘; Apt", (1.3)

where B is some mean energy, If“3 is the average distance between particles,

r-.(2n".lk1""l).h is the average de Broglie wavelength of the electron and "D is the
-3.-.” ways radius (1.1). A set of these parameters, dependent on the particle
mass and the sizes of the charges, occurs in a multicomponent plasma.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.15. Equation of State of Cesim Vapors in Low-Teeperature Range:
I--smooth approximation of experimental results [20]: 11--
generalized equation of state for nometals [21. 22] (”wart
and Nelson diagram“): III--calculation by uthod of section

1.6; Iv-«ca condensation boundary

If the temperature is high. then E ~ k? and condition << 1 can be written in the
form n1/3 << k‘r/ez. Assuming, for example, that '1‘ - 10 It, we find that this con-
dition is fulfilled at concentrations less than 103° cn'a. At low tmeratures
15 ~_n,[2m (pr.— -h (amnfh is the Fermi pulse) and the condition 1 << 1 reduces to
the following:

11'” )> 2 (l/Jn‘)"'m,¢"lh'. -

It is fulfilled at electron concentrations greater than 1023 cn'3.

If kT< Ry (Ry --II!/‘/2’l", then conditions are initially achieved with an increase of
plasna density when 7 << 1 then (kelp = l and the electrons are then degenerate.

One can consider the thermodynamics of a weakly imperfect. strongly ilperfect non-
degenerate and then degenerate plasma according to this sequence. The inverse
pattern is observed with an increase of density at It? >>Ry: the plasma is initial-
ly degenerate and coulomb interaction then becomes significant. Provided that
Ry/k‘r >>l, the particle notion is quasi-classical. However. bound states may make
an appreciable contribution to the thermodynamic functions. In the inverse limit-
ing case Ry/k‘r << 1 (the Born case), the interaction between particles is consider-
ably quantum in nature and can be described by means of perturbation theory.

The degree of electron degeneration is described by the known parameter M3. If
nA3 «1, then degeneration can be disregarded. We note that if parameterse (l. 3)
are taken as independent, then Ry/k'r and m3 will be functions of then:

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ry/k'l' .—. in‘f/(Apmr; M}: - (A,x,.)‘l(4ny)"'. (1-0

Let us consider the themgynamic properties of a plasma with charged particle con-
centrations up to 102° «31' at comparatively low temperatures (a roximately 10‘-
105 :0. mac: these conditions the parameter of degeneration will be small and
the plasma can be regarded as Boltzman. Parameters (1.3) may be less or on the
order of unity. however the first of them (where one should assume 2 - It?) plays
the main role since it achieves values of approximately 1 more quickly with an im-
crease of charged particle density [9]. Moreover, since the first of parameters
(1.4) can be greater than mity, the contribution from bound states must be taken
into account. The existing results in oguilibriua theory of this plasma lead to
an expression for the coulomb part of the thermodynamic potential on in the form
of an expansion by the value {-.-. A"’exp(u/&I) ['26--35|

—- Asa/W = M’- + 00 Inc 4- cc' 4- 06" Inc -I- 156". (1.5)

where V is the volume of the system. u is the chemical potential of the particle
and A, B, c. D and I; are the coefficients of expansion by value c dependent on tem-
perature. The two first and the fourth terms of this expansion describe the con-
tribution from the continuous spectra to M2. The third and fifth terms contain
the contribution from the discontinuous spectral. Strictly speaking. this contri-
bution was calculated for a hydrogen plasm. However, the results may also be
applicable for two-couponent systems where hydrogen-like ions are present. More-

nethod of Green functions and the diagram technique were used. more is now an
extensive literature on this problem [37-39]. The quanta-statistical approach was
first used in Vedenov and Iarkin's investigations [26, 27) to determine the thermo-
dynamic functions of a plasma. Let us dwell below on the main results found within
the indicated formalism.

It is convenient to use the large Gibbs statistical group, where the thermodynamic
potential 9 is a function of variables '1', u, and v to construct the complete
thermodynamics of a system of many particles in quantum mechanics. The expression
for the value of 9, where the couch!) part M! is contained in the form of (1.5),
was found in [29, 35] . Formulas for a two-component plasma have the sisplest form.
since these formulas are required for further considerations, let us write them:

_ mm w = c. +— c. + (c. 4- 0%! + I.) —

.1. .51 ’ _;_l_+_-ﬂ a ,
-I- ﬁntnioumw—m: '
a}. . 1‘ _ __38_ __ 9 . (1.7)
I. a I" l- , 1"(204 Inai‘ '2 Tit.”
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0 ,, 218.9100- 3.1mm. "’ ((I —f:.)m'|; (1.8)
=0 '2‘ e.ezp(— EJmo. "’ ((1 — 5.1m; (1.9)
r = 9' (k1)_';b'; 71-) E is a: 4“ (kn-I {‘02: _'_ c.) C'. (1.10)

The following functions are contained in expressions (1. 8) and (1.9) in the suns
tor the discontinuous spectrum

‘" (x): l—- exp(—x) —xexp (—x) (x = _."i) (1.11).

and

(09(1): Ti" - exp(— x)|——;3'--1F(l: IIM; —x)—-;-xexp(—x).

having the meaning of weight functions and which ensure the convergence of these
sun. The value of 9", which plays the role of the statistical weight of an iso-
lated ion (9n - 2n2 for hydrogen, where n is the main quantum umber), is intro-
duced under the sign of the sum in expressions (1.8) and (1.9) to use formula (1.6)
not only for a hydrogen plasma. Formula (1.6) can be used in some approximation in
this form for calculation of a non-hydrogen plasma as well. In this case the ex-
perimental or approximately calculated values must be taken for the energy levels.

The V81“. F“; b; _z)_(b—l)ie e""(l—x)’ ’dx at (b>l) is a hypergecmetric degen-

erate function, I is the ionization potential, 2,, is the excitation energy of an
isolated particle and C - 0.5772 is an Euler constant: the exchange corrections
were taken into account in (1.6) with accuracy up to terns approxieately “in
inclusively.

If the equations for charged particle concentrations are added to (1.6)

“a = _.ﬁ"7;¢(oola(¢)r v (a—l. e). (1.12)

then we find the equation of state of a plasma in mrametric form. The internal
energy 0 is found from the relation

iliév" 35"(1‘ {7(3)ng 73W LR.('£'”) ' (1.13)

(1.41

we note that the number of ions and electrons determined from relation (1.3) char-
acterizes the total number of particles both free and bound into pairs in the con-
aidered physical model of a plasma. The chemical model is usually employed in
practice where the ions and electrons are regarded as free. and. moreover, there
is the concept of atone whose nunber is determined as the sum or the numbers of

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bound ion-electron pairs. The question of how to go from the physical to the
chemical model of a plasma is discussed in [2, 32, 34, 36].

Let us describe the expressions for charged particle densities both for the in-
ternal energy ensuing from relations (1.12) and (1.13):

 

n,=n,"'l7(CI'|'U[l I--:7(l-I.f.)_.'_(l + ""2 )i‘n in]...

 

‘2 Vi" (1.14)
I a 6 a _
+ -; (.LA.Oexv(IIkT— 7 up).
i‘ 20 ' - I63 I5
I. "T " 57' f (”3' ""' '66) ””47 I“ (1.15)
u 3 I -. I l-I In2
ﬁnal—(C: I L)[| I "6-H! «31.1 41.) -—-9;(I I- -V,. )x
I ., - I r
x HM Mm -l--- I l ---u +1.) I
(2 ) " “Tl 2 u (1.16)

l-—'—(.€.A;‘chp(mr - i'~,)l--?....,,( 14.?) ‘

'I1.dl__l__DQ '_ Tr‘P("9'"' r111;'_1_ [#7)].

12 Min <1, then the exchange corrections in the described relations can be omitted
due to their smallness. It is also easy to note that functions (1.7) and (1.15)
describe deviations of the correcting terms in expressions (1.6). (1.14) and (1.16)
from their Debye values. Numerical calculations show that functions (1.7) and
(1.15) are small compared to unity (approximately 0.03) at I‘ s 1. Hence, it fol-
lows that the main correction in the positive spectra: up to values of f ~ 1 is the
Debye term

-_ 1L“. .— _. . -- _ 1
"1’ m soggy” ”‘17)

This circumstance permits considerable simplification of the ca.culations of the
thermodynamic properties of an imperfect plasma, especially when we are talking
about a nulticomponent plasma.

1.3. m Thermodynamics of a Strongly Imperfect Plasma

As follows from the preliminary analysis made in section 1.1, an appreciable part
of the range of parameters of interest to us (see Figures 1.11-1.14) falls in the
range of a strongly imperfect plasma. Working out the theoretical description of
this plasma is related to a number of complex and unresolved problems. Before
turning to description of what we know about a strongly imperfect plasma, let us
note sane qualitative characteristics of the substances inherent to a specific
strongly imperfect plasma of interest to us in the range of parameters important
from the applied viewpoint [1).

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The typical length: can be introduced in

characteristics of the second mechanism of shielding. The first is the Ito-called

shielding radius re)“. There is the statmnt (40, 41] that the main ter- in the
charge-charge correlation function at long distances has the form

the general case for the quantitative

I (ze’lr) q (t) dr a z'e'lr”.

In a strongly imperfect plasma (r
the Detye radius r0 of (1.1) and in
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

above. First, at l' 2 l interactions at short distances r ~ ez/k'r begin to play
the determining role in a formation of the second, collective part of the shielding
could. It is known from study of a similar situation in simplified coulomb models
[41-43] that the charge-charge correlation function is no longer described by the
simplest expression of (1.18) as the imperfection increases. Additional terms of
type (1.18) with parameters dependent on the behavior of interaction potential at
short distances initially appeared in it and, beginning at some moment, it acquires
an oscillating nature. The shielding and interaction radii (1.18, 1.19) are al-
ready otherwise dependent on the thermodynamic parameters than the Debye radius
(1.1) in the range of strong imperfection (1‘ 2 1).

In a single-component model the analytical approximations developed to the present
time permit one, despite the absence of a small parameter, to describe rather ef-
fectively the range not only of weak, but of strong imperfection as well. However,
in the more complex case of a system with charges of different signs, for example,
in the model of charged solid spheres [44, 45] when the depth of the attraction
potential appreciably exceeds the value It?

nu)» 11),,(r) << — tr. (1 .21)

A significant part of the charges, combining into pairs, no longer participates in
collective shielding. In this situation the methods suitable for a single-compon-
ent plasma become hardly effective. One of the procedures that permit one to take
this fallout into account qualitatively consists in additional introduction of a
new variety of composite neutral and charged particles. Hutually impermissible
sections of the phase space appear for charges remaining in the discharge of free
charges at short distances [46, 47]. This is necessary so as to exclude the physi-
cally identical states and can be taken into account by effective correction of the
coulomb potential at short distances [46, 48] . It must be emphasized that, first,
this correction depends on the selected method of separating the atoms and com-
posite ions and thus depends on the thermodynamic parameters. Second, this cor-
rection is not paired, i.e., the interaction in a system of fme charges ceases to
be binary-additive. One can estimate the dimensions of the corresponding correc-
tion. Let, for example, states of the electron-ion pair with binding energy ex-
ceeding the value k’l‘ be related to the atomic charge. In this case the radius of
effective correction of the caulomb potential for free ions and electrons corre-
sponds by an order of magnetude to the dimension of the range where on], (r) <_ -k'r:

“140) I ‘l'...(r) at r .; r‘ ~rr'lk7‘. (1.22)

In a strongly imperfect plasma correction at these distances leads to the appear-
ance of small terms compared to Debye on the order of I'r*/rD and hurl-"3o i.e.,
approximately r2. When we then turn to the range of a strongly imperfect plasma,
then as already noted, interaction at these distances becomes determinate. There-
fore, the distinguishing feature of a strongly imperfect plasma is the considerable
dependence of the thermodynamic properties of the subsystem of free charges on se-
lection of the position of the boundary that separates the free and bound states.
In turn, the contribution of the subsystem of atoms also reveals sensitivity to the
position of this boundary in the range of a strongly imperfect plasma [6}.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Besides the difficulties which arise even in classical models at sufficiently low
temperatures of (1.21), the quantum effects are significant in a real strongly im-
perfect plasma. The correlation between the mean potential (P) and the mean kinetic
(K) energy of the system can be called one of the main manifestations of quantum ef-
fects from the viewpoint of thermodynamics. Unlike the classical system where the
value of K is clearly determined by temperature, isothermal inclusion of interac-
tion in a quantum system leads to variation of the mean kinetic energy. The known
general result [49, 50] consists in the fact that the mean kinetic energy in a quan-
tun system is not lower than its mm classical range ~k‘r/2 by a degree of freedom.
Moreover, in View of the homogeneity of coloumb potential, the values It and P, as

is known [8, 21), are related to pressure and to the total internal energy by the
relations:

U ,_ K 1.". (1.23)

Quantum effects are most significant upon formation of deeply bound electron states
.in molecules, atoms and ions. Thus an electron in the ground state of an isolated
atom makes a contribution equal to the ionization potential to the mean kinetic
energy according to (1.23) and (1.24). which considerably exceeds the classical
value 3/2 M“ in the range of a partially ionized plasma. At distances of rsA. the
quantun effects are also felt in interaction of free charges primarily in forma-
tion of the shielding cloud. The result of this effect increases as imperfection
increases when the role of interaction at short distances (~ eZ/k'r) becomes deter-
minate. Let us note that the lengths A3 and eZ/k'r are comparable to each other in
a considerable part of the temperature range '1' ~ 103-5-104 x of interest to us:

A ."..~ _ .
./" 0| I, (125)

The last distinguishing feature of a strongly imperfect plasma of specific inter-
est to us is related to the role of neutral particles. It was assumed in the
idealized pattern described at the beginning of this section, corresponding to a
strongly imperfect plasma, that neutral particles are an ideal subsystem and do
not participate in shielding of free charges. This hypothesis is invalid [13-16]
in the range of high densities (o ‘ pkg) and low temperatures ('1' ~ 103-10‘I K) for
atoms of alkali metals, distinguished by high polarizebility u (o ‘ loo-400 atomic
units). Due to interaction with the charges, the atoms acquire an induced dipole
moment and at sufficiently high concentration (n, ‘ 1020-1021) their presence
considerably distorts the pattern of mutual shielding of free charges. In turn,
the disturbing effect of the micropoles [11] and the limitation of volume in a
dense plasma permissible for realization of excited states of atoms, molecules and
so on (see section 1.5) leads to distortion of the contribution of bound states to
the total thermodynamic functions.

As follows from the foregoing, the complexity of the strongly imperfect plasma of
interest to us is related to simultaneous superposition of several effects immedi-
ately one on the other, each of which makes description of the remaining effects
difficult. 'merefore, study of simplified models plays an important role in the
problem of a strongly imperfect plasma. The greatest progress has been achieved

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the simplest plasma model-~a classical system of charges of one sign on a com-
pensating background [41-43]. Satisfactory description of the equation of state
is found here in the range I‘ ‘ 1 even within the framework of asymptotic approxi-
mations developed for the case 1‘ << 1 if those of them in which some general re-

strictions valid at any degrees of imperfection are fulfilled are selected for
extrapolation to the range F ' 1.

The following relations were used in [6) to analyze this problem:

1) the condition of a positive binary correlation function (8hr) P2(r):

FW) 9 0? (1.26)
2) the condition of exponentiality that linits the value of BKP at r “ O:

I",(I)—— cxp{-_ (1'00”; r -a 0; (1.27)
3) the condition of loeal electron neutrality (51, 52]:

- :' __ a _ _ ‘ . .
£II,(x) llx dz .I (XE/I'D), (1.28)

4) the condition of shielding [51]:

f'I-',m..nx'dx-- -6l' (war/r0) (1.29)

0

The simplest correction of the approximations used at r << 1 appreciably exceeds
their accuracy (in the part of the equation of state) in the range I‘ 2 l with re-
gard to (l.26)-(l.29) [6, 52] (Figure 1.16). Fulfillment of the essentially same
condition comprises the basis of the so-called Mall-approximation [53]. An even
more accurate description (up to T ~ 50) not only of the equation of state but of
the BK? is found within the framework of (also asymptotic) integral approximations
[54, SS): "hyperchain' (CHNC) and BBC! equation [56]. Let us emphasize that con-
ditions (1.28) and (1.29) in the Cline-approximation should be fulfilled automatic-
ally,’ while fulfillment of (1.28) is controlled specially in [55]. Finally, in
view of the simplicity of the model. the use of the direct Monte-Carlo method, al-
though cunmersome in the nmerica' sense, is acceptable for it at any values of I‘
[43, 58]. Ccnparison of the results of the approaches enumerated above is made in
Figure 1.17. Thus, the correction for imperfection, for example, in interaction
energy for one particle AU/N‘k‘r, being negative, increases monotonically in abso-
lute value over the entire range of parameter I‘ initially as NP «1) and then as
[2/3“- >> 1) in this model in the range of a strongly imperfect plasma. The single
phase transition-~crystal1ization--occurs at I‘ = 3.103. At 1‘ 2 l, the typical cor-
relation radii rekr (1.18) and rvz (1.19) no longer coincide with r1) and at I‘ >> 1,
rvz behaves like rs: ‘ n'1/3, i.e., rzv >> ro. At 1‘ = S, the BIG becomes oscillat-
ing and in this case no anomalies of any kind are observed in the equation of
state.

7—...—
Violation of condition (1.28) in (57) was apparently the reason for the invalid
results in the equation of state (see [52] and Figure 1.17).

2'!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

___i..._-\. _-l..._.—-l..7—

n 2 4 6 ,.,_«,'_

 

Figure 1.16. Equation of State of single-Component Model of Plasma. Asymp-
totic approximations before (a) and after (b) correction to
fulfill relations (1.26)-(1.29) simultaneously: 1 and 2-ring
(Debye) approximation in (N, v, 'i‘}- and (u. V, 'rl-groups; 3--

nonlinearized Debye approximation 1 4--
approximation of [41]; HK--calculation by Monte-Carlo method
[43]

The classical tun-component plasma with attraction of different-charge particles
has been studied less. let us note three versions of the modelq with Glauberman-
Yukhnovskiy potential (1.30) [59] and a system of soft (1.31) [60) and hard (1.32)
charged spheres (a is an arbitrary parameter)

3? f—cxpo— (In);
I

«9.0) i —-I- (Mr;

G) (‘t ' < 0).

Yet another determining parameter appears in this model, as which let us take the
relation xapzlun-o that characterizes the depth of attraction.‘I At high taper-
atures (x S i). the model is subject to study both by asymptotic methods [61} and
by means of the Monte-Carlo method [44, 45]. On the whole smooth transition from
universal behavior at 1‘ << 1, when the difference (1.30) - (1.32) from the coulomb
potential is reflected as a weak disturbance, to completely different behavior for
different versions of the model at I‘ >> 1 when the disturbance, on the other hand,

is coulomb potential is observed at these temperatures in the equation of stats.
hem the methodical viewpoint the indicated model is most interesting at low tem-

peratures (x >> 1). The range x ~ 10, 2nd3 = 0.1-0.7 (l‘ a 35-100), where the crit-
ical range of phase transition is located whose properties are determined by a

I
It is more convenient in some cases to use the parameters no3 or o/rD (o is an
arbitrary parameter).

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

1, 2, 3 and 4--see Figure 1.16: S--appmxination with oscillat-
ing shape of Pztr) [6, 52]; onnsu approxiuation [53]: V and 15--
came approximation 01‘ 1963 and 1973, respectively [54. 571; 0--
solution of [55] of 3861 equation [56] -

ntmber of features rather by "packed" effects of a system of solid spheres than by
the specifics of the coulomb system. was investigated in [44] by the Monte-Carlo
method for mdel (1.32). No phase transition was found at the same parameters for

rat us turn to a real strongly imperfect plasma. One can distinguish two approach‘
as among a large number of papers devoted to a real plasma (see surveys [9-121).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe first is extrapolation of asymptotic approximations similar to that described

in section 1.2. In this case no cosposite particles of any kind are introduced a

priorily into the consideration except nuclei and electrons interacting by Coloumb
law. The second is the initial determination of new varieties of composite parti-
cles and effective interaction potentials between them and solution of the problem
of imperfection for a system with this effective interaction.

The first approach has practical restrictions with all rigorousness. Real calcula-
tion of the terms of the initial expansion is very difficult and essentially limited
by the limits of pair approximation. This means that the results of this approach
are, strictly speaking, related to description of only one ionization band unique
for hydrogen and of the ionization band oldest for other elements. The next step--
sequential consideration of formation, for examle, of a He atom or H2 molecule has
not yet been taken [62).'

Such approximations as hyperchain cane and others that have given a good account of
themselves when describing the classical strongly imperfect plasma cannot be real-
ized in the physical model of a real plasma due to the mentioned calculating diffi-
culties. Extrapolation based only on several terms of expansion, as is known, is
significantly ambiguous. It is known in classical theory of strongly imperfect
systems [64. 65] that the extrapolation properties of asylptotic approximations

are determined not so much by the abundance of older expansion terms taken into ac-
count but by how successful the mutual compensation of contributions among omitted
terms is.

Let us note two papers where extrapolation to the range of a strongly imperfect
plasma is assumed on the basis of approximations developed for the physical model
of a plasma. 'rhus, relying on the approximation described in section 1.2 [35], a
method of thermodynamic calculation of a strongly imperfect plasma of elements dif-
ferent from hydrogen was proposed in [36] . To do this, the transition is made to
the chemical model of the plasma, using the statsum in the single-electron Planck-
larkin approximation (1.8) with empirical weights and energy levels for multielec-
tron atoms and ions [66]. The composite ions figure as point charge particles 21
in subsequent relations (1.14) and (1.16).

The most significant difference of the described approximation (1.6) from others
[7] is the presence of a new term, interpreted as a distortion of the contribution
of the discontinuous spectrum due to interaction with free charges. Unlike the
polarization charge-atom attraction, this term corresponds in sign to repulsion
and is proportional in value to the concentration of atoms and composite ions mul-
tiplied by the parameter of imperfection l‘. Approximation is recomnded for ap-
plication in the range of sufficiently high tempentures where the contribution of
molecules and also of molecular and negative ions can be disregarded.

An estimate of the range of applicability of the given approximation by comparison
with the results of shock-wave experiment in cesium and noble gases (see Chapter 4)

Q
The complexes H3, H” and H2 were introduced in [62, 63], but not correctly, out-
side any connection with the physical model of the plasma model employed.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

. I. . .J_._.|__ 1)

0 2 4'_6 n 17 a,

Figure 1.18. lsochor of Strongly Imperfect Hydrogen Plasma [63] v - 100 cm3/9
(rmaks ~ 1.5): solid line-~result of approximation of [63);
dashed line-~approximation of ideal gas (H2, H, H+ and e)

Key:
1. Electron volts

shows that the best agreement compared to a number of approximations proposed in
the literature [7] is achieved primarily in the range of a strongly imperfect plas-
ma with lou_degree of ionization due to the "repulsive" term oinor (1.6) indicated
above. At r ~ 1 and ne/no <<l, the presence of this repulsion appreciably reduces
the enthalpy H as a function of pressure and volume p and V (see Figures 4.12 and
4.13). uhich corresponds qualitatively to the main experimentally recorded result
both in cesium and in argon and xenon (Figure 4.18).

gr

  

L5

Figure 1.19. Results of Asymptotic Approximations for strongly Imperfect
Hydrogen Plasma: l--resulte of [63]; 2~-results of (62]; 3--
calculation by method of section 1.6 (the points indicate the
moment parameter r achieves values of 0.5, l, 2, 3 and 5 from
right to left)

1. cm3/9

27

FOR‘OFEKJA1.US£IDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Another approach was developed in the papers of Dewitt and Rogers [62, 63), where
plasma expansion consisting of the shielded potential dependent on thermodynamic
parameters* is used directly, as a result of which the group coefficients are de-
pendent on activity. Partial summation of so-called "trees" from "ring“ and
”staircase“ diagrams leads to an approximation which was calculated numerically
due to its cumbersomeness. It must be noted that the asymptotic error of this
approximation in equation of state (1.5) is approximately cs/z, whereas the terms
that describe the contribution of the molecule, for example, H2, have an order of
c4 and above [Hi and H” of c3 and above, respectively). For the reasons discussed
above, the given approximation does not logically transfer to other elements except
hydrogen without losing rigorousness. Moreover, an anomaly (the arrow in Figure
1.18) appears in the range of a strongly imperfect plasma in the equation of state
of [63] due to transition to a shielded potential and replacement of the coulomb
spectrum in the atom by the Debye spectrum. The anomaly is smoothed somewhat, but
does not disappear when the more correct form of the shielded potential is used
(62]. One can assume that this anomaly does not correspond to any physical effect,
but is only the result of incorrect extrapolation in the range T 2 1. Comparison
of the approximations discussed above is illustrated in Figure 1.19.

when a strongly imperfect plasma is described in the framework of the chemical
model, the main difficulty is in correct determination of the effective interaction
potentials between the particles as a function of the adopted method of division
into subsystems. Along with pair interaction, three-, four- and older s-particle
effective interactions figure in this model [48, 67, 68] but they are usually dis-
regarded in real calculations. It is suggested in some papers [2, 48, 67, 681 that
the pair pseudopotential be introduced, formally dividing it into the so-cslled
electron-ion Slater sum [67, 68]. The method of canonical transformations is used
in [34]. There are also other approximations [69]. In all cases the electron-ion
pseudopotential differs from the coulomb potential by finite depth dependant on
temperature and on the method of charge separation.

since only a real plasma is replaced by a classical system of charges with suffi-
ciently "small" (mine;1 (r) ~ -kT) binary-additive interaction, calculation of its
thermodynamic properties presents no principal difficulties and can be carried out
both by means of asymptotic approximations [54, 59, 61, 70] and by using the Monte-
Carlo method [44, 45, 48, 68]. The approach suggested in [6, 52], when the approx-
imate description of the properties of a strongly imperfect plasma relies on fulw
fillment of a number of general conditions presented above ((1.24), (1.26)-(l.29)ln
also yields satisfactory results. The results of this approximation are compared
in Figure 1.20 for a two-component plasma [S9] with pseudopotential differing
somewhat from that suggested in [48] (Figure 1,20, b).

A practical application of the schemes proposed in [67-70] is difficult for ele-
ments except hydrogen since it requires a knowledge of the complete set of wave
functions of atoms, ions and molecules. Use of hydrogen wave functions [67-69] is
a source of error whose value can be established for each specific element by com-

parison with experiment. It is of interest to determine which pair pseudopotential

 

.This potential differs somewhat from the Debye potential at close distances due to
quantum effects [62].

28

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
POI OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

 

Figure 1.20. Dimensionless Energy (a) and Interaction Potential of Free
charges (b): l--Debye approximation; 2--'configurational"
energy of [48] (calculation by Monte-Carlo method for “zero”
pseudopotential with 8931 (0) I -3); 3--linearized approxi-
mation 1.24-1.30 and 1.33 [74] with different depth of pseudo-
potential (1.30); 4--nonlinearized approximation [52] with
depth of pseudopotential (1.30) equal to 80' (O) - -6x 5-
pseudopotential for hydrogen at T I 105 K [3%]; 6--coulomb
potential

permits one to achieve good agreement. for example, with the results of shock-wave
experiment in a strongly imperfect cesium plasma [72, 73] (see chapter 4). we
answer this question, it is convenient to make use of the already mentioned approx-
imation [74) that rather simply links the corrections for imperfection to given
interaction potential. In this approximation the interaction of identically
charged particles is described by coulomb potential while that of differently
charged particles is described by pseudopotential (1.30) suggested in [59]. Cor-
rections for imperfection are expressed by distribution of the shielding charge
whose functional shape is selected as corresponding to ring approximation valid in
the range of r << 1 [59]

p”: rum! a I 7F A w-«d-ﬂ-ﬂ (,1 = w)- p —
I v

F.a(') " (1.33)

= 00'): 0 9 0(0)-
Parameters A, p and q, following the approach of [6], are determined from two
shielding conditions (1.28) and (1.29) and the approximate analog of condition

29

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1.27) that links the amplitude of the indicated distribution to the effective
intensity of electron-ion attraction. The distinguishing feature of approximation
is the use of relation (1.24) and the presence of a correction in the mean kinetic
energy of the subsystem of free charges. Comparison of the results of calculation
to the caloric U(p, V) and thermal NV, '1‘) equations of state of cesium found ex-
perimentally (see Figures 4.12-4.14) [72-73] shows [74] that the electron-ion
pseudopotential should have appreciably lower effective intensity than that recom-
mended for alkali metals in [68] to achieve the best agmement with experiments.
The intensity of the indicated pseudopotential [48, 68] exceeds somewhat the value
of the boundary energy with the traditional limitation of the bound and free states
for energy, whereas this intensity should be equal to or even less than the latter
for cesiua to improve agreement with experiment. A similar conclusion is found on
the basis of comparison to the experimentally measured caloric equation of state
of a strongly imperfect xenon plasma [74].

In approximation (l.24)-(l.30) and (1.33) the atoms were assumed to be ncninteract-
ing: therefore, variation of the pseudopotential intensity was felt in the equa-
tion of state only in the range of developed ionization. Extrapolation of the ap-
proximation described in section 1.2 [36], on the other hand, permits one to improve
agreement with experimental results in the range with low degrees of ionization.
When the degree of ionization is not low, this approximation yields results that do
not differ strongly both from the results of a whole series of simple approxima-
tions analyzed in [7] and from results found on the basis of the so-called ”zero“
approximation of the pseudopotential model [48, 68]." Il.‘he given fact is possibly
explained by the circmstance that expressions that rely significantly on the use
of hydrogen wave functions are used both within the framework of approximation [35]
and within the framework of the pseudopotential model [48, 68] for the correction
for interaction in the continuous spectrum. If the conclusions made on the basis
of approximation (l.24)-(1.29) and (1.33) are valid, one should conclude that the
corrections indicated above depend to a much greater degree on the individuality of
the chemical element than was assumed until now.

It should be said in conclusion of this section that construction of the theoreti-
cal description of the thermodynamics of a real, strongly imperfect plasma is now

 

0

Detailed calculations were made in this paper for methodical purposes by using the
corrections recounended by the authors of [48, 68] for imperfection, corresponding
to the indicated “zero approximation”:

. . AU
mm" +0.1“ I an"; —- =hH-‘n’ +0.17%

”#7
AI‘ +4)“:
_!F— "' 2(V’T7 I ‘IVLI' (if 'l‘reY"
(a. -- ‘—‘ 0.66; a, r.- 0.69; 0,: -- 0.2; b, n. '0‘”; a, a... 0.45;
a,” 0.54: c. “0.526; r, —. 0.31; c... . -l).2l).

The results of calculation were very similar to those found when using ring approxi-
mation (1.17) in combination with statistical sun (1.8) and (1.11) for atm.

 

AP
«’1‘

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

far from complete. Definite success has been achieved in this method within the
framework of the most diverse approaches, which permits, although with limited
accuracy, practical calculations required in engineering applications. Intensive
development of experimental (see Chapter 4) and theoretical investigations during
the past decade, directed taward solution of this problem, permits one to hope for
rapid progress in this direction.

1.4. The Component Composition of a Partially Ionized Imperfect Plasma

As already indicated above, the method of dividing the composite particles into an
individual variety is arbitrary in the chemical model of describing the plasma.

One can distinguish two approaches among the papers devoted to substantiation of
the chemical model. In both cases the reference point is the system of nuclei and
electrons, i.e., the physical model. Clear separation in phase space of the ini-
tial system of ranges, mutual impingement of two, three or more particles into
which is determined as formation of a new variety of particle consisting of two,
three and so on initial particles, comprises the basis of the first approach. This
separation can be made both by the coordinate feature, i.e., by the mutual arrange-
ment (for example, the model of a ”restricted atom" {75, 76]) and by the value of
the relative energy of the pair, troika and so on of particles (for example, [46,
47]) and by other features.

The next step is calculation of the free energy as a function of the scattering of
nuclei and electrons through the separate regions of the phase space, that is, on
the composition that is regarded as fixed. And, finally, the last step is to find
an equilibrium composition corresponding to the minimum calculated free energy.
Substantiation of this procedure as a whole is the variational principle of sta-
tistical mechanics [77, 39], according to which the free energy of the system in,
considered as a functional of the test distribution function on on the equilibrium
function on is minimum with given interaction between particles:

It.” ”WWW” I IzT "IN, > sway ...k1-|m.u)} m p”; (1.34)
It” '0 |"W5? 'lo-‘N “ﬁlm; 5'4"”, '- l' .

The condition of the extreme value in cemposition yields known conditions of chem-
ical and ionization equilibrium. i.e., conditions of the equality of the chemical
potentials of initial and final reaction products upon transition of particles be-
tween subsystems. In this case the chemical potentials are dependent on the method
of separation into subsystems. In practice the benefit of the approach indicated
above is dependent on the possibility of calculating the second term in the right
side of (1.34), i.e., on entropy. This calculation is simplified in the approxima-
tion when the subsystems are assumed to be statistically independent. In this

case entropy is additive and the interaction between subsystems is replaced by a
mean interaction which can be very simple, for example, due to the electron neutral
ity of the atom, equal to zero. Therefore, from the viewpoint of thermodynamic
calculation the states for which the hypothesis of correlation with the surrounding
plasma is a good initial approximation can be divided into an individual variety.
Many of the great number of criteria proposed in the literature (usually talking
about separation of atoms) proceed from comparison of the total bonding energy of

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an atom with some value that characterizes the disturbing effect of the surround-
ing medium, for example: the mean energy of the bombarding particle approximately
kT, the energy of coulomb interaction with the closest free charge approximately
e2/ru- or by a reduction of the work function of the electron from an atom or ion
(effective reduction of the ionization potential A!) and also with typical value of
the breakdown microfield in the plasma [78]. We note that these values are close
to each other in a strongly imperfect plasma (r 2 l).

The described procedure of separating the new variety corresponds to intuitive un-
derstanding of a composite particle as an aggregate of quite specific states whose

population is given by the Boltzman formula, which leads to the statistical sun of
traditional form

r (l. 35)
Q = ‘ 3. "N- ”5.)-

as.

Further use of this composition in calculation of transient properties causes no
confusion related to the sense contained in the concept of the atom, composite ion,
molecule and so on. The disadvantage of this approach is the need to take into
account that the phase volume permissible for internal and external degrees of
freedom of each variety has accepted zones whose shape and value are dependent on
the adopted method of separation and on the position of the corresponding boundary
[46, 47). The latter is necessary so that physically identical states do not oc-
cur upon rearrangement of atoms of different varieties. Accurate consideration of
accepted zones is a complex problem when the dimensions of these zones are not
small compared to the average distance between particles; therefore, one of the
methods of limiting the atomic statsum used in practice [5] links the maximum main
quantum number of the intra-atomic states to the mean interparticle distance.

Unlike the clear method of separation into smasystems described above, the second
method is more formal. We shall outline it briefly below, following some varia-
tions of [4, 69].

The reference point is group expansion by degrees of activity or modification of
it (1.5). let us consider for simplicity a classical systu of particles of one
variety with brief-acting forces. not us divide each group coefficient bk of the
initial expansion arbitrarily into parts, combinations of which we shall subse-
quently interpret as new effective group coefficients for a system consisting of
new varieties of particles:

l’jrblfl‘l but; balahul'l‘bllrl'blllll - . .3 (1.36).

W’”¥”AL.?=EC'I'(M|U l bn.L'-+-b...c-I- . . .
. .l-anL'J bllfc."‘bllJC"I"bII2v . . v}- (1‘37)

wheat-Adam... ‘l (’HIHC' I bmuC"l-bluulaC'4-01|212§‘-l- . . ..

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us formally introduce the activity P and fugitiveness ft of new varieties

C; .—1 (t - I};
c; - ew’m: - «“‘m ”-‘m: = 6' (WM); 1: ab. 2: c: a (1.38)

- -c;(A; "Mb. n); c; =e’”3m: n Wm: - 6' (MW);
I3— amt? « ammo...)

One can give a form to the initial expansion (1.37) that completely imitates the
expansion for a multivariety system:

”piggy; ‘bl.f.+ .8bIc-IJJ'+ -- (1.39)

where b.‘..=-= 0...»; '14 5mm 1. b;,,=b. "a. '53,); gram». '5. 'b,‘ and so on.

Determining the effective densities n3, we find

. . a
"a" L 0!; ﬁn ”I. a].

 

“I, 40!?!" +2”;' +3"; “I (1.40)

The ratios between n5, n5 and so on and n! have the standard form of ordinary
equations of chemical equilibriu with corrections for interaction.

'lhe method of separation (1.36) was arbitrary in the formal scheme presented above.
Specifically, one can turn to clear separation into zones of two, three and so on
eluentery particles in the phase space. which leads to separation into parts of

the statsums z for two, three or more particles (ZN "- 71.7er ”N dp"dg"):

Z,EZm-p-Z.,.; Z-E'Izm +2”: I- Zum. . . .
Vblfi- " Atl|2ln Vb”. 1A. :(z'l'—.—".zl');

(1.41)

Vb.” .—A.(zm -2i'z.z,..); you, mAgzm;

VbHSH"A:(zl|lll_z'74||-l-%Z|3) . . ..

with this separation (1.39) is transformed into a formally accurate group expansion
for a multivariety system with traditional determination of composite particles.
Usually the contribution of part of the bound states of an isolated system of 1:
particles is separated into terms 2 kl (k - 2, 3, 4...) that subsequently play the
role of internal statsums (1.35) [51. However, a similar but essentially different
procedure is frequently used [4] when the contribution of some part of the phase
space is separated into an individual term blgl (1.36), but not to statsum 2k! but
directly into the group coefficient bk or in its analog (1.5), which leads to a
shift of bk upon rosummation in the initial group expansion:

(1.42)

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. - NIB!) MW. 9‘)d«'dv‘ '= ml [0! Wid‘l'dv‘ +

"£10,", 'd“"’|"}=°m -I- . . . (1.43)

Different compensation terns whose number increases sharply upon transition to
particles consisting of more than two elmnentary particles appear with this deter-
mination of the composite particles in the expression for statsum blkl (1.43),
besides the ordinary exponent of (1.35). These are disadvantages in calculation
of such multiatomic systms as U175 [79] and so on. more significant is the fact
that the composition obtained determination of ”atoms” and "molecules" sieilar to
(1.43) cannot be used directly in calculation of the transient properties since the
values "Mg", 5:") contained in (1.43) no longer have the meaning of populations.
The latter must be predetermined separately. Moreover, the number of properties
of these “molecules“ makes it inconvenient to apply this term itself to them. For
example, when using the traditional determination by the internal statsul Q(‘1‘)

of the mean excitation energy e(T) - -aan('r)/a (1/T), the latter beca'aes negative
at high tenperatures, which differs from the ordinary intuitive concepts.

let us turn to a plasma. In this case, as is known, partial resunation must be
carried out in expansion (1.37) (section 1.2) so that the coefficients become fin-
ite in the newly found expansion. Let us emphasize that in this case there are
essentially two equivalent possibilities. 'me first, when resulnation precedes
the procedure of separation of stuns, ions, molecules and so on, and the second
when resumation is carried out after the new varieties have almady been deter-
mined. A number of papers [26-32, 62, 63] corresponds to the first version. The
pseudopotential model proposed in [48, 68], on the contrary, corresponds to the
second model.‘ In both cases the result of the indicated resmation is a new
expansion consisting of brief-acting shielded potentials. But in the first case
this is a shielded coulomb potential whereas in the second case it is a shielded
pseudopotential [48]. Let us recall that the difference of the latter from coulomb
potential is related to a significant degree to the separation of atoms.

Instead of the second group coefficient b2(T), modified coefficients 5... 511 and
bei. which are the sum of “staircase“ diagrams from shielded potentials. participate
in plasma decomposition, for example, for hydrogen. Unlike b2(T). coefficients

5 1 and so on begin with third-order rather than first-order terms with respect to
e3 and are dependent on temperature and density in a complex manner through the
shielded potential. In [62. 63] these coefficients are calculated nmerically,
using the results of solving the Schroedinger equation with shielded potential.

In this case the electron-ion coefficient breaks down into a sum by the distentin-
uous and continuous spectrum. The number of continuous levels is finite and dev
pends on density. The energy of all the levels, including the round level, is also
dependent on density. It is shifted upwards by the value approximately inc2 com-
pared to levels in the coulomb field. Related to temperature, this value coincides
with the parameter of imperfection i‘ (1.10). Upon extrapolation to the range of

 

O
The scheme of separation of atoms corresponds to (1.41) in [48] and this proce-
dure is close to (1.43) in (68, 78].

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strong imperfection l‘ 2 1, the presence of this shift leads to a sharp decrease of
the contribution of the discontinuous spectrum. This is apparently explained by
the anolmaly found in [63] in the behavior of the compressability factor (the arrow
in Figure 1.18). In reality the Debye shift by the value ‘Rbez to b.1(n, '1‘)
should be compensated for to a significant degree upon consideration of the remain-
ing terms 15/2 in expansion (1.5). In [62] these compensating terms are partially
taken into account and as a result the anomaly was less marked (Figure 1.19). Ac-
cording to the statement of [80], the ground state of a hydrogen atom, due to its
compactness and electron neutrality, can be shifted only by value ‘(ioao)2. This
means that the contribution of the ground state in the expansion by activity should
have the form mm; X exp {Sky 4» const (aoip)2}. 'me statsun corresponding to this
requirement is suggested in [69].

The approach to determining the contribution of the discontinuous spectrum differs
from that described above [62, 63] (also see [69]) in the well-known paper [26] and
in those succeeding it [27-35] and the final result is expressed by the undisturbed
hydrogen spectrum. This is achieved due to the fact that a third-order term with
respect to e2 (or rather a term corresponding to the staircase diagram with three
shielded potentials) is additionally separated from coefficient bu (1‘, n). The
main part not dependent on density, which has already been separated by sum with
respect to the continuous and discontinuous spectra, is determined in that which
remained. This is equivalent to the fact [31] that the part beginning with dia-
grams of order (e2)4 that does notyield divergences is determined even before plas-
ma resummation in the initial coefficient be: ('1'). The latter, being separated into
the contribution of the continuous and discontinuous spectrum, leads to the known
convergent expression (1.8) and (1.11). Differing somewhat from [27], the proce-
dure of (33] leads to a more complex analytical expression [9].

Although atoms are clearly not introduced within the framework, for example, of
scheme (1.36)-(1.40) directly in [26-29], this can easily be done [32, 69} and ex-
pressions (1.8), (1.11) are understood in many papers [2, 7, 32, 68, 81) as the
statsum of the atom and are used not only for hydrogen in the range r «1, but for
other elements as well. Let us emphasize once again that expressions (1.8) and
(1.11) were found as a result of partial compensation of the contributions of
electron interactions on the one hand and ion-ion and electron-electron interac-
tions on the other so that the terms in (1.8) and (1.11) do not have the sense of
populations.

The approximation (1.6)-(1.16) described in section 1.2 [29] is a development of
approach [26-32] . The same method of separating the contribution of the discontin-
uous spectrum is used in it, but the additional consideration of terms (5/2 led to
an additional term, according to calculations of (35] , containing a sum by discrete
levels. Let us consider a hydrogen plasma. Following (1.38). let us introduce the
atoms

to if: I‘m ‘ QXP (ﬂue) = A:3 ('me ("r 4' ”In -'”A Lt'A3/2 2 CAM. (1 044)

Using this relation, one can replace the variable Ce by Ca in part of terms (1.6).
Different methods of this replacement are possible. It is usually done only in the
multiplier of the last term of (1.6). Moreover, using the simplifications in (1.6)
recommended in section 1.2 for practical calculations of a weakly imperfect nonde-
generate plasma. one can write the equivalent expression in the form:

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

 

 

pp -. 2a) I ?13)+'-L3u(i(ﬂkv -le: (1.45)
mil WWII. — mummy — (if); n.., a 2;,(1 + I72) -.-n.9)'/2; (1.45)
m. = unln,.(:m| —m + or; (1...,
pm In["“:]+a(Au:+Au.')=In["‘:]—.
_'”(' + T) '" "‘0. F " f (1.43)
n' 2 : (1.49)

__‘_ ._- ZQ—A- expl-ﬁW-M’ + 9r—2MM-

Compared to the ring approximation (1.17) which yields a reduction of the ioniza-
tion potential 2A1); in the Sacha equation (1.49), approximation (1.45) leads to
two additional term of different signs. At 7‘ << 1. their sign is equal to

1.)“ 2Iu(ll |"1-3-r-)='wr(|---ﬁ) (1.50)

Let us emphasize that, unlike the charge-neutr.1 polarization attraction propor-
tional to 11.x... the action of term of in (1.45) is proportional to Mal/2 and is
equivalent in sign to repulsion. At (ha/n.) >>1, this term reduces the degree of
ionization and at (ha/n.) << 1, on the contrary, it increases it.

The corresponding expressions for pressure and energy in the chemical model have
the form:

IV):- (‘2!) I n.)--2Il —EL “Mn-1?“ (ﬂ).

lufn ' ’ I l-i‘lz (1.51)
. din-Q-
MI‘ 7' 2". I ng)l 1(W—I’Ry)_ _
r12 - 3-)? J 5"") (1.52)
2 _._.-.. ,r -._————..
ll. '1 fr) I"? (2'? 2 0|",

Besides the ordinary coulomb correction, the repulsion term hang/2 is also de-
termined here.

Expressions (l.45)-(1.49) were found for hydrogen. It is suggested in [36] that
an expression similar to (1.45) be used to calculate the properties of a plasma of
other elements. Strictly speaking, this conversion is invalid since the structure
of the terms that describe the contribution from the discontinuous spectrum of
multielectron atoms and ions in plasma decomposition should ditter from that found
in single-electron approximation of expressions (1.8) and (1.11). A principle

36

.1,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

step forward in the strict approach in section 1.2 could be. application of it to
the systems following in complexity such as a He atom and H2 molecule. In both
cases we are talking about consideration of terms ‘(3 and ‘64 in (1.5), i.e.,
about calculation of coefficients 5.91 ('r. n) and 53,11 ('1', n) in plasma decomposi-
tion. The logical continuation of the approach used in (62, 63] would be direct
calculation, for example, by the liartree-POch method (see section 1.5) of the heli-
um or hydrogen spectrum as system; e + e 4- He“ or e + e + p + p that interact with
each other by means of the Debye potential. The "convergent” expression for the
contribution of the discontinuous helium or hydrogen spectrum can be found within
the approach described in section 1.2, following for example the procedure of [31),
by removing the divergent diagrams from the group coefficients beei ('1‘) and bun“)
and subsequent division of the remainder, having an order of (e2)6 in the case of
b“; ('1‘) and (oz)8 in the case of begin”, by the contribution of the discontinu-
ous and continuous spectra. As already indicated above, this problem has not yet
been solved due to its complexity (62).

The essence of the approximation proposed in [36] for a nonhydrogen plasma con-
sists in the final analysis in the fact that all the multielectron ions and atoms
are described by a statsum of form (1.8) within the framework of the chemical model
by analogy with (1.45) and are dependent on the charge of the nucleus 2 by correc-
tion 02 of form (1.9) using empirical weights and energies for discontinuous
levels [5, 66] and using the generalized expression (21) from (35] for multiplier
egg. The most significant from the viewpoint of the final results is the fact
that, to avoid logical contradictions, the shift ’Oyr should be assigned to all
the composite charges. Since the weight function ,‘2’ in (1.9) approaches a
finite value for such particles as he, Li“, Na" and so on at 83,, - no, we are
actually talking about a shift of the ground state (0 w”; (an). we note that
the shift determined by relation (1.9) changes sign as th

e charge multiplicity
factor increases and increases in absolute value

I I 3 I9
mfﬂ’mn-o 4" ;: --—,-: "-3-:

n z-J); l;2;-'l. . .

. at I” -* 0° (1.53)

Due to the presence of this shift, the results of thermodynamic calculation of an
imperfect nonhydrogen plasma will differ appreciably from the results given by
traditional approximations (7!.

Let us note in concluding the section that, as described at the beginning of the
section, an explicit method, like the formal. method of the behavior of the chemical
model given by relations (l.36)-(1.40) are actually equivalent to substitution of
variables and do not in themselves introduce any error. 'Ihe advantage of the ex-
plicit method is that, dividing the entire system into subsystems, we can rely in
subsequent approximations on the variational principle of statistical mechanics.
This advantage can be realized in practice, for example, when there is the possi-
bility of avoiding the procedure of expansion by the small parameter when calculat-
ing the contribution of any of the subsystems, using, for example, the Monte-Carlo
method and others [58).

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Determination of the new variety within the formal schaue (Lam-(1.40) is more
artificial in nature. The newly introduced variety of particles is not determined
as a separate subsystem with clearly stipulated set of permissible states and po-
tentials of interparticle interaction. This ambiguity makes it difficult to use
some approximate apparatus besides group expansions and does not permit the use of
some general relations as, for example, the Gibbs-Bogolyubov inequality [77, 39,
50] and other corollaries (1.34) to check the correctness of the results obtained
for each variety separately.

The method of separation into subsystems is formally arbitrary within the schemes
described above. In practice, one can make use of this arbitrariness to achieve
goals related to some characteristics of approximation adopted for calculation of
transient properties rather than to thermodynunic calculation. For example, sep-
arating free and bound electrons, one can strive to develop the boundary so as to
leave electrons that make a contribution to the optical properties within discon-
tinuous mechanisms in the discharge of intra-atomic particles [82]. Or, bearing in
mind electrical conductivity, one can set as a goal in the first approximation to
roughly separate the conducting electrons from those not participating in conduc-
tivity and so on. It is natural that in the general case different methods of
division and different position of the boundary may be required to calculate the
different properties. lbreover, as is emphasized, for exanple, in [81], separation
into a total of two varieties may be too rough from the viewpoint of calculating
some of the transient properties. It is suggested in (all that one consider two
additional varieties of electron-ion pairs. intermediate between the traditionally
considered atoms and free charges. If the mnclature of the varieties is then
further detailed, than a logical conclusion of this procedure will be transition to
a description by means of Green functions mutually coordinated from the viewipoint .
of thermodynamic and transient properties.

The indicated strict approach has still not been so much developed in order to be
used directly in mass applied calculations carried out in practice. Therefore,
considerable attention is devoted in the given paper to analysis of the character-
istics of less strict approximations used in practice.

1.5. Consideration of the Effect of the Medium on the State of the atom. Model
Calculations by the Hartree-Fock and Thomas-Fermi Method

hhen making thermodynamic calculations of a rarefied plasma, the atoms are re-
garded as an iaal subsystem not interacting with the surrounding medium with an
increase of pressure, the interatomic interaction begins to be manifested upon
violation of the condition

0......b3<< I. (1.54)

where b0 ‘ a0 is the radius of the atom in the ground state. At the sane time
atoms in excited states play an appreciable role in a partially ionized high-pres-
sure plasma. The effect of interparticle interaction and specifically the circus--
stance that the volume accessible for realization of atomic states is finite in a
dense medium is reflected primarily in excited atoms [75, 83] whose size may ap-
preciably exceed the value be. The conditions for application of perturbation

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

theory (section 1.2) [11] when considering the effect of the medium on atoms in
this plasma are violated, with regard to which model approaches must be laid out.

The system of levels of the hydrogen atom was calculated in so-called “restricted
atom" approximation in [76]. A potention of the following form corresponds to
this approximation

«00).. l" "” o< I<r,;
m

f .3 'c-

(1.55)

The results of the calculations are presented in Figure 1.21. It is obvious that
compression begins to affect the energy of the ground state at radii s 2ao. The
energy of the first excited state deviates appreciably from its own undisturbed
value even at rc ~ 10a0, for n - 3 (n is the main quantum number) at 20ao and so
on. This example illustrates the fact that the dependence of the energy of the ex-
cited state on the finiteness of the atomic voluse increases sharply with an in-
crease of the main quantum nunber.‘

mu (1)
a .

  

*

.. .—h‘.—l. _..a._a_. -5...

n 2 ‘ 6 l '0‘

Figure 1.21. Energy Levels of Hydrogen in Limited Atom Approximation
(1.55) [76]

Key:
1. Electron volt

The effect of a finite volume has an even greater influence on atoms of the alkali
metals. The energy spectrun of the restricted lithium atom is presented in Figure
1.22 [85]. The ground state shifts by a value comparable to its binding energy
even at rc ' 10 a0 while the energy of states with n - 3 at re 2 12 a0 exceeds

the ionization limit for an isolated atom. similar calculations for the other

 

 

.Let us note that compression removes the degeneration in orbital element 1, which
occurs in a coulomb field and levels with given values of n are lower, the higher

the value of 1 [84].

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

alkali metals show that the effect under discussion increases with an increase of

atomic number (Figure 1.23). let us emphasize that, for example, the mean inter-

particle distance (approximately equal to 20 A) becomes comparable in value to the
"size" (in the sense indicated above) of the excited state of the atom of the al-

kali metal at pressure of 10 HPa and temperature of 5,000 x.

:5}.

 

Figure 1.22. Energy Levels of Lithiun in Restricted Atom Approximation:
the boundary radius rc (boundary condition 1.61)) is plot-
ted along the x axis and the total energy of the atom is

plotted along the y axis

Key:
1 . Atomic units

Thus, the problem of calculating the energy spectrum of intra-atomic electrons in
the effective potential field that simulates the external effect occurs in a com-
pressed plasma. This multiparticle problem can be solved by approximate methods.
the leading one among which is the Hartree-Pock method, used extensively for cal-
culations of atomic structures [86]. A system of N electrons in the field of a
nucleus with charge 2, the Hamiltonian of which has the following form,‘ is consid-
ered in this method

A N I ' N I
ll:"' 2‘12_ Ac I ‘l’(’a)| H|§;:'

where Mn) is the effective potential, in the case of an isolated atom equal to
z/ri. The multielectron wave function is determined by the condition of the mini-
mum functional [87]:

’5 - I ‘i" (‘1‘) ??V(q”)dq~, (1.57)

 

'Here and further in section 1.5 the atomic system of units is used in which h - l,

me=1ande=1.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where q" is the population of mg" r,§,, , , -. r” §N| coordinates and spin variables
of electrons.

 

Figure 1.23. Energy Levels of Cesium in Restricted Atom Approximation:
the energy of the atom counted from the ground state of a
Cs" ion in an undisturbed state is plotted along the x
axis: the calculation was made in the "frozen skeleton"
approximation, i.e., without regard to the effect of the
external electron on the internal electron

A determinate consisting of single-electron wave functions is selected as the ap-
proximate wave function of the atom in the Hartree-Fock method. Assuming that each
electron is in a central-symmetrical field of the nucleus and of the remaining
electrons and noting that the Hamiltonian (1.56) is not dependent on thin variables,
one can represent a single-electron wave function in the form

No) +1..“ (I) Yr; (0. m. (s) (1-58)

(n, 1, m and a are the quantum numbers in ordinary notations corresponding to this
approximation). As is known [87], there are two (21 + 1) electron states corre-
sponding to different values of m and s for given values of n and 1. It is assutaed
that all electrons with given values of n and l have identical radial parts fn1(r).
In the absence of spin-orbital interaction, the state of the atom is characterized
by complete orbital L and spin 5 moments equal to zero if an the nl-shells are
filled. If there are unfilled shells, the wave function of the atom is found in
the form of a linear combination of determinates whose coefficients are found from
the condition of equality of the complete orbital and spin wants to given values.
condition (1.57) leads to a system of nonlinear integrodifferential equations
(Hertree-Pock equations) [86] :

l"! .. . «.1. a) 111.13....“ [mm-r

('1' ‘ l' (1.59)
I L "ulna,” ’"1'a(’) — (in-.1. V).
III/N.
41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 41,111 (r) is the coulomb potential of electron interaction with the nucleus
and with each other, chili“) is the nonlocal part of the potential or the exchange
term [86] and n1 and 11 run through all values corresponding to the configuration of
the atom. 'me eigen-values chili and the nondiagonal Lagrangian multipliers
‘nilinjli are determined from the condition of the orthonormal nature of radial
functions 911111“) and fnjli (r)

{Iu'l‘(,),n‘l‘(”d’ u 6'4" (1.60)

and the boundary conditions. one of which is the result of the finiteness of the
wave functiOn at the origin of the coordinates 5111(0) - O and the second is se-
lected as a function of the postulation of the problem. For example. the wave
function of an electron in approximation of an isolated atom should decrease ex-
ponentially at long distances. In the restricted atom approximation (1.55). the
second boundary condition has the form

I.,.‘(') | = 0. (1.61)
C

(5’

let us make use of this approximation to explain the extent to which the nonisolated
nature of the atom in a dense plasma has a significant effect in the total thermo-
dynamic characteristics. net us consider the case of a three-component plasma con-
sisting of atoms, single-charge ions and electrons. Let us represent the subsystem
of atoms as a system of solid spheres of radius rc. Let us disregard the electron
and ion dimensions. The free energy of this model can be written in the form

F(‘Nl,' V! T) :‘: F-l'.‘ AF1.¢ 4‘ AF.’.. (1062)

The first term is the free energy of an ideal plasma with the difference that the
statsum of the atom is dependent on re according to the boundary condition (1.61).
The second term describes the contribution of repulsion of solid spheres and is al-
so dependent on re. In specific calculations let us make use of the approximate
analytical expression from [88]

Ar” N‘k'l'vwv -4)(v-—l)"; ”Wharf/3). (1.63)

For corrections to pressure and the chemical potential this yields

13.... v--2 , A»... 'nw-ovH' (1.64)

Thus, the free energy in this model is dependent on re on the one hand, due to
compression of atoms and on the other hand, due to their interaction as solid
spheres. The equilibrim value of the atomic radius can be determined from the
condition of the minimum free energy

mar, -- 0. (1.65)

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INJR 0F1WCJAI.USEZ(NULY

The dependence of the statsum of the atom on re is found from solution of the
system of Hartree-Pock equations for the ground and excited states of an atom
with boundary condition (1.61) at different values of re (see Figures 1.21-1.23).

Incomplete consideration of the interelectroh correlations related to single-elec-
tron approximation leads to an error in calculation by the Hartree-Pock method.
However, if a knowledge only of the energy characteristics rather than of the wave
function of an atom is required, then following the method of [89], one can use the
correlation corrections found for a free electron gas [90]. Disregard of the rela-
tivistic effects, which is another source of error of the ﬂartree-Fock method, is
insignificant for light atoms and for external electrons of heavy elements whose
valent shells have a simple structure.

Thermodynamic calculations made for model (l.55)-(l.65) show that effective repul-
sion and deformation of the discontinuous atomic spectrum in the selected potential
are significantly felt both in the thermal and in the caloric equation of state of
a plasma. Compared to the approximation when the atoms are regarded as an ideal
subsystem, calculations using model (l.SS)-(l.65) yield a lower value of density

as a function of pressure and temperature and of enthalpy as a function of pressure
and density (see Figures 4.1? and 4.18). The latter is significant since this is
one of the main qualitative results obtained experimentally up to the present in an
imperfect plasma [72, 73, 74] (see Chapter 4).

The effect of deformation of the energy levels is manifested to a significant de-
gree in the optical properties of the plasma since photoionization of atoms by the
radiation of visible light occurs from highly excited energy levels that are dis-
torted at relatively low compression (see Chapter 4).

The external valent electrons are stripped away as the pressure in the plasma in-
creases and the electron shells of the atoms and ions are rearranged and are broken
down at extremely high pressures. leading to quasi-uniform charge distribution in
the atomic cell [91]. It is possible in this case to turn from the quantum~mechan-
ical dbscription of bound electrons in the language of wave functions and the dis-
continuous ensrgy spectrum to the quasi-classical description by distribution of
the mean electron density n(r). The corresponding approximation is known [87] as
the Thomas-Fermi model. Approximation of a quasi-homogeneous ideal electron gas is
taken as its basis

um .11? 1"" Lhmm; Mr) who/21‘. (1-66)

where p§(r)/2 is the Fermi energy related to the chemical potential by the relation:
ﬂ . p;(ty2 |«D(tL (1.67)

where 9(r) is the potential electron energy in the field of the remaining electrons
and nucleus. The Poisson equation and relations (l.66)-(l.67) lead to the Thomas-
Fermi equation with respect to A(r) in a spherical Wigner-Zeitz cell

AMI) __ _‘ "1/2 1"“ l.,,|l(r)|, (1.68)

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFHOAI. USE ONLY

with boundary conditions

’ll‘ " 10)]... ->2; .932-" -__.0,
so].

an (1.69)

The second condition is placed on the boundary of the cell. Solution of differen-
tial equation (1.68) with condition (1.69) permits one to determine all the thermo-
dynamic characteristics of the model [92. 93] according to the expression for free
energy

E 1:12.?"- fa: [MW (1) —:-I.,, (1)] .1. Iowa (04:.

solution of the mamas-Fermi equation is automodal with respect to the charge of
the nucleus 2. which permits numerical solution of the mamas-Fermi equation once
and permits one to turn to specific chemical elements by means of transformation of
similitude.

  

m 20 wwrm’x

Figure 1.24. Equation of State of Lithium Plasma at p - 0.1 HPa: l--calcu-
lation by method of section 1.6: 2--'l‘homas-f'ermi ('1'?) [93]:
3--'momas-rermi approximation with quantum and exchange cor-
rections (m) [93]

The range of applicability of this electron model is determined by incomplete con-
sideration of the correlation of electrons and disregard of the quantm-mechanical
effects [91]. Correlation corrections were caused on the one hand by exchange ef-
fects and on the other by the force correlation of electrons, which is only partial-
ly taken into account when describing the electron structure by the self-consistent
field method. Quantum-mechanical effects are expressed first in the form of quan-
tum corrections that reflect the inaccuracy of the quasi-classical description of
electron motion within an atom [94] and second in the form of oscillation correc-
tions that reproduce the irregularity of physical values determined by the discon-
tinuous energy spectrum [95].

44

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When applying the Thomas-Fermi model to a plasma [92, 93, 109), one should emphasize
the specific errors introduced by the cellular model itself. In this approach all
correlations are automatically limited by the dimensions of the cell and cannot
exceed the average distance between nuclei, which does not permit one to describe
the range of a weakly imperfect Debye plasma by the given model. Moreover, the de-
grees of freedom and the possibilities of correlation of nuclei should be predeter-
mined in the cellular model. The contribution of the latter is significant in the
range of parameters considered in this paper.

The simplicity and universality of the Thomas-Fermi model, which makes it irreplac-
able in the range of extremely high temperatures and pressures, lead to restriction
of its application at low pressures and temperatures where more detailed information
is required about the electron structure of the chemical elements. Specifically,
this is related to light atoms, in the equation of state of which the "shell” ef-
fects are especially discernible (see Figures 1.1-l.2). Consideration of the quan-
tum and exchange (but not oscillation) corrections [93] plays no principle role in
the given case since it does not change the nature of the thermodynamic functions.
This is illustrated in Figure 1.24 on the example of a lithium p1asma.‘

1.6. Method of Calculating the Composition and Thermodynamic Functions of the
Hulticomponent Imperfect Plasma

A large volume of calculations of the thermophysical and specifically of the ther-
modynamic properties of different working substances was made for calculation-
theoretical study of a wide range of problems occurring when designing a gas-phase
nuclear reactor [1]. The typical results for some of them are presented in this
paper. Taking the mass nature of these calculations, the variety of working sub-
stances and the determining physical processes (section 1.1) and also the need to
calculate a complex of transient properties into account, thermodynamic calculation
was carried out within the framework of the traditional quasi-chemical method of
description (the ”chemical model"). critical discussion of this and other ap-
proaches is contained in sections l.l-l.S.

The calculation was carried out in the temperature range T - 4-103-4-104 K and
pressure range p - 0.1-50 MPa using the special program described in [6].

The following components were taken into account when calculating the equilibrium
composition of working substances (instead of enumerating all the alkali metals
below, one, for example, lithium, will be arbitrarily mentioned)":

a) atoms—~H, Li, U

b) binary molecules-~82, Liz, L1H

 

t

The numerical results related to T? and TPP approximations presented in this book
were obtained by v. K. Gryaznov and I. L. Iosilevskiy by interpolation and subse-
quent recalculation of the tabular data of [93).

Q

‘The main program of (6) used in making these calculations permits one to take in-
to account up to 20 components of arbitrary complexity simultaneously consisting of
not more than four chemical elements.

45

FOR 0FFN]AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c) single and multiple ions—H", 1.1+. n+2, n+3, 0+ ahi
d) negative ions-41’, Li'

e) molecular ions-4t}, Li}

f) electrons--e.

The 02 eolecule [96] and the more complex molecules of alkali metals-4.13, Lia and
so on [WI-were not taken into account since the available data at present on the
characteristics of these molecules are not firmly established and inclusion of them
in mass practical calculations is not now justified. For the same reason complex
molecular ions Li}, Li}, Liz, 1.1; were not used in the calculation. The hy-
pothesis of abnormally high affinity of Csz. Csa, ... Csn molecules to the electron
(2 2 eV) is advanced in [98) to explain the sharp drop of electron conductivity in
cesium vapors recorded by the authors. However, an increase of conductivity. on
the contrary, was recorded in other experiments in cesium vapors close to satura-
tion (see section 4.5 for more detail). Moreover, approximate calculations of af-
finity to the electron of the Csz molecule yielded a value of only a 0.3 eV [99].

Each of the particles indicated above was regarded as a finite population of bound
states identical to the state of an isolated particle. The population of each of
these states was assumed to be proportional to the Boltznan factor and accordingly
the contribution of internal degrees of freedom was described by a statsua in the

traditional form

Q -- Zngpwt-‘IMIIIEo-I (1 71)

= e‘" Zia. exp (— Wows.) -—- do

Here gk, ER and E‘k E (I - 2k) is the weight. binding energy and excitation energy
of the k-th level and mark) is the cutoff factor. The ionization energy of the
atoms and ions. the dissociation energy of molecules and molecular ions and the

energy of affinity to the electron of negative ions were selected from [100-108].

A emery of the values used is presented in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1. Ionization Potentials of Elements and Their Ions (1), Energy of Affin-
ity to Electron (e) and Dissociation 31er of Molecules and Molecular

Ions (Dz . D3)

(1) " ' -' ' ' (2,-4.3;4...»I'

Dunn-I .
I. I. I, I, c I). ”I

-— 0.7M £417 0.618

 

I I 5,19 75,62 I22.” 0.59 L026 L26
If; .1 H 4 7,29 7 l .65 - - 0.34 0.737 U I
I} LI I .‘II .Ol 46.0 —- 0.5.1 0.56 0.92
( s 3.89 25.I 31.6 -- - 0.11 0.495 0.7
U 6J9 I I.6 I95 .16.? - - .. _
KII —- . - . . I.” _

 

[Key on following page]
46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key continued from preceding page] :
1. Elenent 2. Value, ev

The statsuns of binary molecules and solecular ions were calculated in the “flexible
rotator-anharnonic oscillator'I approximation [5]. no energy of electron, vibra-
tional and rotational excitations was selected according to the recomendations of
[5, 103) . for molecular ions the missing para-eters were estimated approximately,
using the known method of [S] by the dissociation energy 05 and the intramolecular
interatwic state r. [104]. Up to four electron states were taken into accOtmt
when calculating the statsums of molecules [103]. A summary of the spectral con-
stants used is presented in Table 1.2 in standard notations.

The statsuns of all the particles were calculated by the direct emotion method.
Smation of the vibrational and rotational states of eolecules was limited by the
condition that the sum of the vibrational G and rotational P excitation energy not
exceed the dissociation energy:

0M+Pw<0. ”J”
The sum for vibrational levels was also limited by the condition

ow+0>0M (Ln)

(v and I are the vibrational and rotational quantum: numbers). It was found in this
case

I < I...,(o); d1...Jd°< 0% leg-:11): 0' (1.74)

When calculating the statsums of the atoms and ions of (1.71). states with the fol-
lowing energy were taken into account

75. < 19..., a I— hr (1.75)

The results obtained when using condition (1.75) are mnerically similar to those
found when using formula (1.11) from section 1.2.

The energy and weights figuring in (1.71) were taken as for an isolated atom and
ion from [66]. In making the summation, the procedure of smoothing by selection of
the specific form of the cutoff factor MEI-m) (1.71) was used.

.. .- .ﬂ’!‘."l!ﬂ£ﬂ-
«0 (Na) .- upMu’) -| upldn.) '

(1.76)
where 11‘ ~70]! - Emmy/'2 I). “(III — 750'": A = = “0““.
The given form was specifically selected so that the contribution of the ground
state did not vary when making the calculations in the range where Kmaks < 0. The

results of smoothing are illustrated in Figure 1.25 on the example of the statsun
of the cesium atom

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I“! 1" H: In In nu \

 

.32“ 9.1638 no 3:52.00 33:

33> .H

    

”h8—

 

 

.-2.§ 72.23 72.3. _ .5738. _ "5:8 _ 12.8». .035 . -23. .u
I _ 1.3:. _ I _ 12...: _ I _ I _ 12.8”. 72.08 .3
I _ 72.:3I 7.2.87“ I2$3I _ I # RSI _ 1: 2 72 8... 5..

_

occuuuuguau 5 van: icoH can nogooao: oaioudun you «use Houuoomm

 

 

.~.H «dash.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V0. (“11¢ 1U I'Sl‘ 0N! \

 

_..2.E.I_?o_.§f_ 72....._ I _ I _ I _ «u

.§.I_ 33...— 9.3.

   

.IO..:. _ In Tub—.8- _ .4

ﬂ 72 .mnn

«no. .8".

  

_ «Io—.2“.

  

 

    

 

 

 

 

I _ I .&_.8..I_12.ﬁ.2 _ I 7.2.3.2; I _ I _ .3
_ I _ 5.3..I— 32f _ that m.-o_.§.lu...2.§.lw I a I u .3
._ 2 _ . _ 8. 788;] n 886. _ 8.. _ Jul _ m3. __ 3.». _ .3
_ a... _ m 3.: _ 33m... _ 5.3... m 823 _ “an... _ 8% _ 3.“... _ .3
. . . . . _
. I _ _ I IS. _ I u I--- n E»... 16: _ I . .
_ _ _ n — . _ _ ccgc — cu _ .l H _ .h
_
n
._

 

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Only the ground state was taken into account in sun (1.71) for negative ions.

The results of calculating the statsums of different cauponents for several temper-
atures are presented in Table 1.3.

Table 1.3. Statistical Suns of Atoms, Ions and lblecules

 

 

    
    
    

(1) . _‘. f. K
Bun-ear
Jul | “In I IMO I 20000 I be."

I I 2.000 2.026 2J9!
l4 2.005 435] (525
N: 2.102 4.662 3.9“
K 2.0!2 5.179
C: 2.0.14 7.61"

  

 

  

 

6,651 '

 

 

 

  
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
     

    
  
  
   
 

    
  
  
   
 

'5' ° ' 0.675 7.111 8.5.“ IN I I256
(5' ' ' __ __§£| .1 am 6.835 7,360 9.16!
U 3%.! l5" £623
U ' 6].! 6.3 I “I
U ° ' 3-H I735 4945
ll’ ' ' ' , :33
u' ~_'_'
ll, 0.2225 lo' 0.6000- I0' 0190- w
I... (”20+ w' «.2753. w 0.791240!
Na, (mm- m' 0.2wtl- ur 0.4530- IO‘
If. o..m2u- Io' 0.6409- “1' 0.1376- Io’
Ls, 0.3110- lo‘ 0,5544 --I0' 0.8!40- l0’
Kll 0,2031- I0' 013(59- IO' 0.26“ - IO’
Key:
1 . Element

One should talk individually about the statsuns of the uranilm atom and ions. Due
to its complexity, the structure of the levels even of an atom and the first ion of
uranium 0", despite the large volume of available infatuation [105-108], has still
not been completely studied. Information about the levels of 0‘2, (#3, ... ions is
even sparscr. This circumstance appreciably reduces the accuracy of thermodynamic
calculations in the temperature range of interest to us. Unlike hydrogen and the
alkali metals, for which a description by means of an individual system of levels
is quite justified, an attcmt at quasi-classical description would apparently be

50

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

feasible when describing uranium. (91]. of special interest in this regard is

the possibility of taking into account shell effects [95], the absence of which in
the known Thomas-Fermi approximation (92. 93, 109] appreciably reduces the accuracy
of the approximation. Calculations by the Hartree-Fock method (section 1.5) are
rote accurate, but due to cwbersomeness. calculation, for example, of the entire
spectrum of the uranium atom, including ~ 104 levels using only Hartreevl’ock approx-
imation, is unrealistic. A combination of both approximations is used in the cal-

culation in [1061 .

 

Figure 1.25. Statsum of Cesium Atom Excitation (1.71). The boundary energy
In,“ a I - Em“ in multiplier mask) (1.76) is plotted along
the y axis: l--restriction at average interparticle distance
(Inks = e2n1/3) at pressure (from left to right) of 0.1, 1 and
10 MPa; 2--r§striction on value of 1m; - kT adopted in these
calculations. The result of the smoothing procedure using nul-

tiplier «new (1.76) is given in the insert

Key 2
l . Electron volts

The statsuns of the uranium atcn and ions were calculated in this paper, as for

all the remaining elements. within the procedure of direct smation (1.71). The
statsums of U and U+ were calculated in this case according to the recommendations
of (105] using the population of known levels, for which the smear-y of levels from
(107] was used which includes approximately 1,000 levels for U and approximately

300 levels for U+ found on the basis of analyzing approximately 25 .000 experimental-
ly recorded spectral lines of U and 0*. For the 0* ion, assuming [105) that the
absence of two 7 s electrons (compared to an atom) in the ground electron configur~
ation does not radically alter the electron spectrum of 0+ , the system of levels

of U was used in calculation of the statsun. The recommended levels of [105] found
on the basis of concepts of electron similarity from the levels of the corresponding
ions of other elements were used for 0+3 and 0+4 ions. The results of this calcu-

lation for some temperatures are presented in Table 1.3.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I’ll)" Li I)". I AP '— gll‘k'r 4' AP ‘0‘}, (1 77)

the equations of chemical and ionization equilibrium (the law of effective mass and
the Sachs equation) for each reaction A3 2 A + B

. .. J .
1‘s“; u. 2‘30! 1"“ exp (-— 3",. -|' Mm. — MP. —‘ MP»!- (1 . 7e)
"‘0 On. A: A:

 

neutrality

Zjnﬁvlulguﬁl’) —-' 0003!; (1. 79)

gn‘t‘ '—" 0. (1.80)

Here 61, A1, v1“) and 21 are the statsum of excitation, de Broglie length, stochio-
metric coefficient and charge of a particle of variety 1, respectively. and Ap and
Au}, are corrections for imperfection to the pressure and chemical potential of a
particle of variety i. The procedure of solving system (LTD-(1.80) consisted in
that an independent "basis," for example, electrons and older ions of chemical ele-
ments, was selected as a function of the pressure and temperature among all the
components. The concentrations of all the components were expressed according to
(1.78) by the concentrations of the basic components and the system which was non-
linear with respect to the logarithms of the basic components was solved in two
iteration cycles. The corrections for imperfection were considered constant in
the internal cycle and the resulting system was solved by the gradient descent
method. ‘lhe composition found in this manner was used in the external cycle to
recalculate the corrections for imperfection, after which the composition was again
found and so on until the complete convergence of the concentrations of all compon-
ents. 'me selected procedure made it possible within the frauewrk of a single un-
iversal program to carry out numerous variant calculations using different approx-
imate dependence of corrections for imperfection and statsums Q; on the composition
and thermodynamic parameters, which is required for calculation in the range of
strong imperfection where there are no generally accepted forms of these functions.

Using the derived equilibrium composition, the total thermodynamic functions, pri-
marily density, enthalpy and entropy (H . U + pv), were calculated for given values
of p and 'l‘

v —- 221M".
1

14.. ,. 13:44} 10' 117"“)4. “"n.I:" a 23" "n. w" 4- I1”) 4-

l l

' ‘ - - E "I“! "‘ 2:."1'11 2:“, "I (11” -- Da')} '1' M

l o l

(1.81)

(1.82)

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFﬁCIAL USE ONLY

73" ' h :NJ‘: ‘ ' I" ' 2“": {‘2' 37‘ i' um." “(01": i')—Am} -I~Ah
l .
' (1.33)
c"’°=T'd|pO/d1‘

According to (1.82), sumaticn is carried out in z“) and 2“”) by one-, two- and
so on multiple ionized ions. in 2' by molecules and in £"and )3" by negative and

molecular ions, due to which the zero enthalpy corresponds to an ideal gas of
atoms at 'r - 0 K.

So-called ring (Debye) approximation in the large canonical group (1.17) [15, 110)
was used in the results of calculation presented in this paper for corrections to
interaction of charged particles, primarily due to the simplicity and universality
of the relations given by it both in the case of single and in the case of multiple
ionization

 

1 (1.84)
Mp‘=—)n(l -|~ 23%); AhaAu+Apo=4Apo

Here 39 is the inverse Debye radius expressed by activity and f‘ :SDeZ/k'r is the
parameter of imperfection ((1.1), (1.10)). In the calculations r was found as the
positive root of the equation

f: (Ti—yrn znﬂilo 'I- 14%)]' (1.85)

The use of approximation (1.84) and (1.85) essentially does not contain the possi-
bility of violating thermodynamic stability. The presently available information

(see section 4.3) justifies the use in engineering applications of the results of
calculation having no anomalies in the range of strong imperfection. Approximation .-
(l.84) and (1.85) coincides with ordinary Debye approximation [8) in the range of

weak imperfection (r << 1) and differs from it by much lower absolute value of

given corrections' in the range of strong imperfection (r 2 l), which on the whole
corresponds to the reconnendations given on the basis of approximations obtained
recently both within the framework of strict asunptotic methods (section 1.2) and

of different model approaches (sections 1.3, 1.5).

 

O . .- -. ~
In the case of single ionization, a simple form MIINhTLJAvInkT-vl‘ﬂ‘ll l‘); I‘M"
(l-I-l'rl) can be given to approximation. hence it is obvious that at
l:- ,w,\,,/nkf..wn,|_ln (see Figure 1.16).

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The interaction of charged and neutral particles was taken into account in calcula-
tion of alkali metals. Some modification of the approximation of the second virial
coefficient 8(1‘) was used for them on the assumption that the stain interaction is
polarization interaction

._--r.H.1£z“_al_'_"" - i =£L=__0’ls

n' I—n(n,|n.)' tr ‘1‘ n—uia,+n,) '
(1.86)

9:113. -_- -— Inll -- 1N". + "I”

Here In, he and n. are the ion, electron and atan concentrations. This for- corre-
sponds to the hypothesis that each charged particle can interact with many neutral
particles, but each neutral particle can interact only with some one charged parti-
cle.“ The following value was used as 8(1') in (1.86)

M") = W. = II WOW. (1.87)

Mr) is the effective charge-neutral interaction potential. It was assumed that
the bound states occurring as a result of this interaction were taken into account
in the form of an individual variety of particles. for example, Li' and Li; ions.
and approximation (1.86) and (1.87) roughly describes the interaction of free
charged and neutral particles. The use of the approximation presented above is
explained by the fact that our knowledge of the interaction potential itself Mr)
is insufficient to construct more complex approximations. When making specific
calculations, Mr) was selected in the form

' A A
“"0 "(T :5)? ""9“ A '-' “”2 “’(0)= “To = —¢- (1.39)

here a and c are the polarisability and electron affinity of an alkali stun. The
values of polarizability [112) and the corresponding values of 00 for alkali atoms
of Li, Na, K and Cs are presented below.

a.s..e(1) IIW'162IMI
0,10 M um.- l n.|u 'ml on2l— 032

- ___—_.————.

1. Atomic units 2. ev'cm3

 

I

In the language of group expansions [lll], approximation (1.86) corresponds to the
sum of diagrams where each neutral particle is joined only to one charged particle
and to not more than one line of interaction.

54

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interaction of neutral particles was taken into account in these calculations

only in the form of formation of H2, Liz, KB and other molecules, i.e., the inter—
action of 'free" atoms and molecules was disregarded. Desnity effects related to
the finiteness of volume permissible for realization of excited states of atoms,
molecules and so on and to the dependence of this volume on thermodynamic param.
eters, discussed in section 1.5, were also not taken into account. Approximate
consideration of these effects in the chemical model of the plasma of section 1.5
is related to complex quantum-mechanical calculation of the energy spectra of the
atom, molecule and so on in the effective potential. The cumbersomeness of this
procedure did not permit its use in mass applied calculations of this paper.

Table 1.4. Condensation Temperature of Uranium. K

..___ ____._ - _.—_.———_

 

mm H
w%U|w%K
um U u 90% K

335 [11919; K

 

 

Key:
1. Composition of mixture 2. MPa

The results presented in this paper are related to the gas phase of matter. As
follows from Figures 1.11-1.14, the considered range of parameters partially en-
compasses the condensation range for uranium alone. The parameters of the high-
temperature part of the condensation boundary were determined by means of the known
approximate rule of linear extrapolation in coordinates lgp , l/T [113] of the
experimentally known lowvtemperature part of this function [251. since uranium is
partially ionized at T - 5,000 K and moreover can be found in a mixture with other
substances, it was assumed that the indicated rule of extrapolation is actually
related to the chemical potential of atoms and in approximation of the perfection
of the latter clearly links their maximum concentration to temperature n333Y3h°h -
a f(T). The condensation boundary found by the method indicated above is pre-
sented in Table 1.4 for pure uranium and for a uranium-potassium mixture. Data
from [23, 25] were used in this case, which yields similar results (i 250 K at

P - 50 MPa) upon extrapolation of the condensation boundary.

1.7. Discussion of the Results of Calculation. Comparison to Data of Other
Calculations

Let us turn to discussion of the results presented in Chapter 5. Since the quali-
tatively general behavior of thermodynamic functions has already been described in
section 1, let us discuss the fact of the accuracy which can be attributed to the
results of calculation. It is obvious that the answer to thee quesion depends on
the specific substance and the range of parameters. The calculations for hydrogen
are apparently most accurate among the substances considered in the given paper.

Due to the high ionization potential in the range of parameters of interest to us,

55

FOR 0F1NC1AI.USE1DNLN
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLV «

hydrogen is everywhere weakly imperfect (see Figure 1.11) . The maximal: value of
the parameter of imperfection l‘ = 0.6 is achieved at p I 50 "Pa and T ' 10-20'103 K.
Inclusion of coulomb correction for imperfection in the calculation changes the
values of the total thermodynamic values, for example, of density and enthalpy, by
not more than 3 percent in this range. At p s 5 are, this difference does not ex-
ceed 1.5 percent over the entire temperature range. since there are no experiment-
al data for hydrogen in the parameters of interest to us, it is reasonable to take
the values indicated above as the characteristic of the order of magnitude of the
accuracy of thermodynamic values calculated by the method described above.

a (
Auk-u
2,4

 
 

2,2

'450' 455

 

Figure 1.26. Entropy of Alkali Metal: 1--idea1 gas of atoms at p - 0.1013
ma [5]; 2--ca1culations of this paper for plasma at p - 0.098
MP3

Key:
1. J/g-K

There is a number of papers in the literature devoted to systematic calculation of
the thermodynamic properties of hydrogen. let us note [114], where calculations
were made using ordinary Debye approacimation for p - 10" to 102 “Pa and T - 102-
105 K [8]. Similar thermodynamic calculations of hydrogen are presented in [115].
since the results of this calculation for hydrogen and the results of [114, 115]
are similar to each other, they are not presented in this book.

The results of [116] (p _<_ 1 MPa and T <_ 12,000 K) are frequently used from thermo-
dynamic calculations of alkali metals in engineering applicatons. Similar tables
of the thermodynamic properties of alkali metals at low temperatures are contained
in [3) (p g 1 an and 'r 1 2,000 x) and [117] (p 31 up. and 133,000 x). The

thermophysical properties of a plasma of a number of substances are calculated in
[119) in the range 1- : 103-106 1: and v - 6-102 to 6-106 cm3/mo1e (p 5 104 pm).

The thermodynamic properties of a plasma of alkali metals were calculated in [119]
in the range T - 4,000-30,000 K and p - l-lOO “Pa. Analysis of different approxi-

mations for thermodynamic description of a strongly imperfect plasma was made on
the example of cesium in [7]. The effect of charge-neutral interaction on plasma

composition was also analyzed on the example of cesium in [120].

The results of the calculations of this paper at low temperatures and low degree of
imperfection can be compared directly to the calculated data of [5), which is the
basis for most applied calculations made in an ideal gas approximation. This com-
parison is presented in Figure 1.26. The difference increasing with temperature
corresponds to ionization of an alkali metal.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

£7 . .. ._.._ .___

 

Figure 1.27. Isotherm of Cesiun '1' - 5.000 x: l--present calculation (sec-
tion 1.6); 2--results of [116). merimental results of [73]
are cross-hatched

Comparison of the results of this paper with those of [116, 118] for the alkali
metals shows that these results are similar in the range of weak imperfection r << 1.
The divergences related to different form of the corrections for imperfection become
appreciable in the range I‘ ‘ 0.1 and (nzurﬁ * 1). The divergences are very high
in the range of strong imperfection l‘ > 1 (figures 1.27 and 1.28). This is mani-
fested to a lesser degree for lithiun and to a greater degree for cesiun. For ex-
ample, the degree of ionization for cesiuz at p - 1 MPa and '1' - 6,000'x and the mean
molecular mass in [116] from it differ by approximately a factor of 1.5 from the
value given by the present calculations. This divergence is explained by the use
of the sicker-weird formula [121] , which strongly exaggerates the value of reduc-
tion of the ionization potential. Corrections which lead to a loss of thermodynamic
stability at I‘ 2 l are actually used in both papers [116, 118]. This is expressed
in a sharp increase in the degree of ionization to total ionization in [118) , where
the ordinary Debye-Huckel correction is used [a]. The calculations were limited by
pressure p - 1 We in [116) in the immediate vicinity for cesima, for example, of
the parameters when this jump should occur. It should be noted that the calcula-
tions are not thermodynamically self-consistent in both papers [116, 118] since the
corrections for imperfection are in chemical potential and consequently in the re-
duction of ionization potential (1.78) and at the same time are absent in the equa-
tion of state (1.77). The isotherms 'r - 5-103 and 104 K for cesium are presented
for illustration in Figures 1.27 and 1.28 (compared to Figures 1.18 and 1.19). The
calculations made in [119] is devoid of this deficiency. True, the form of correc-
tions for inperfection in the range of weak imperfection (1‘ << 1) used in it does
not coincide with Debye approximation, but leads to violation of thermodynamic
stability in the range I‘ >> 1. however, the indicated deficiency is weakly felt in
the emery equation of state NV, 1‘) in the range of parameters of interest to us,
which on the whole is close to that found in this paper. The difference does not
exceed 3.5 percent at 'r i 20,000 K. However. there is an appreciable divergence in
the value of enthalpy and entropy (Figure 1.29) apparently related to an error in
the calculations of (119]. Moreover, only single ionization is taken into account
in [119], due to which the results of this paper for '1' - 25,000 and 30,000 K are
also inaccurate in the characteristic for cesium and potassiun and to a lesser ex-
tent for sodium.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe emu use own

 

’0" '0 '5'???»ch (1)

Figure 1.28. Isotherm of cesium ‘r - 10,000 K: l—present calculation
(section 1.6); 2--results of may, the experimental re-
sults of [73] are cross-hatched

Kay:
1. g/cn3

In all the papers enmerated above. as in the present paper, the chnical nodal or
in other terminology the method of mixture [3. 4], is used in making the thermo-
dynamic calculations. Universal calculations {or all substances [92, 93, 1091.
conducted over a wide range of parameters using nodificatione of the moses-Peru
model, should also be noted. mesa calculations are less accurate than those men-

manifested especially clearly for light elements in the range of large specific
volumes. In this case the error in the caloric equation of state is usually much
greater than in the thermal equation of state. This is illustrated in Figures
1.24 and 1.30 on the example of a lithium plasma. For exnple. the maxim- dif-
ference between the results of calculation in m approximation [93] and in the

can still not convincingly characterize their accuracy. More specific conclusions

calculations at I‘ s 1-2 is at least no worse than 10-15 percent in the thereal
equation of state p(v, '1') and 20-30 percent in the caloric equation of state
H(p, V). Although experimental data on the themdynaaic properties of an imper-

'
See the note on page 47.

58

POI! OFFICIAL USE 0N'.Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   

5 6:10 mo’x

Figure 1.29. Comparison of Results of calculating mthalpy INT) - “GHQ“
of This Paper and That of [1191 (noted by the asterisk) for a
Cesium and Lithium Plasma. The value [8(293) - 3(0)]9ag Of
[5] is added to the enthalpy of [119]: l--p - 1 “Pa; 2--p -

    
 
 
   

- so MPa
(1). .__.. -I, .._,_
20 humus/am / ./
--p-I "ma / ./ '
Io —Ia',Mnn / / -/
‘ “-10 me I /
a! (2) ,/
<1” ..
1“ 5 1,-7gcae/am ./I
. ‘
3 .
‘r J ‘I
5 I
e 2 ' /
M .
I
a
I! .
0. .L 4.».L.-- |.. .I_.a.n. _.%_ _
.1 J 4 5 I 20 104050 100 r,To"K

Figure 1.30. Caloric Equation of State of Lithium Plasma: l--the present
calculation (section 1.6): Zwﬂmas-Permi approximation with
quantum and exchange corrections (m) [93]

Key 2
1 . ev/atom 2 . kJ/kg

All the experimental data discussed in Chapter 4 are related to the total thermody-
namic values and do not permit one to make direct conclusions about the oonposition
of the plasma. It was already mentioned in section 1.1 that charge-neutral inter-
action, iuportant for alkali metals , according to existing concepts, is primarily
felt in variation of the composition of the plasma [13-16, 120]. Let us point out
that the inclusion of a correction to charge-neutral interaction (l.86)-(1.87) in

59

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this paper with selected values of determining parameters (Table 1.4) is felt to

a greater extent at low temperatures and high pressures (see Figures 1.12 and
l.l3). Thus, the degree of ionization increases approximately sevenfold for cesiu
at ‘1' - 4,000 K and p - 50 MPa. The change of the degree of ionization under dis-
cussion is felt prinarily in enthalpy among the total thermodynamic values. Vari-
ation of enthalpy cosprises approximately 7 percent in the example given above.

The experimental information now available is insufficient to characterize the ac-
curacy of thermodynamic calculations in this range. Intensive development of
pulsed methods of generation and diagnosis of an imperfect plea-a (see diapter 4)

pemits one to hope for rapid progress in obtaining information about the proper-
ties ot a plasma in this range.

 

m 20 J0 ‘0 souo’x

Figure 1.31. Thermal Equation of State of Uranium Plasma. Results of
calculation. See Figure 1.30 for notations

IL ‘._-__.__

 

3 m-
to 20 5040 r,Io'K

Figure 1.32. Caloric Equation of State of Uranium Plasna. See Figure
1.30 for notations

Let us now turn to the problem of the accuracy of thermodynamic calculation of
uranium. As already mentioned, this accuracy depends to a significant degree on
ambiguity in the spectral information required to calculate the statsuns. There

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(1)
Mam -

{0

 
   

-h—th—. s_.__l

6

“557010 20 3(1an

l’igure 1.33. Enthalpy of (Iranian at p - 50 HPa. Results of calculation.
See Figure 1.14 for notations

Key:
1. kJ/g

are no experimental data in the range of interest to us: therefore, we can extract
all conclusions about accuracy only from comparison of different versions of calcu-
lation. One should first mention [106] in which both the system of levels for
u-u+4 and the ionization potentials (6.22, 10.6, 18.9 and 32.1 kV) were found as a
result of approximate quasi-mechanical calculation. Comparison to the results of
calculation that uses the Thomas-Fermi model and its modifications is also of spe-
cific interest [92, 93, 109]. The calculations of [93] encompass only part of the
range of parameters of interest to us ('1‘ 2 40,000 K) for uranius and interpolation
of the data of [93] yields results in this range similar in value to those of the
present calculation (Figures 1.31 and 1.32) , although they do have a different
course of functions. The results of [106, 93], as indicated by comparison, agree
well with each other which is apparently quite valid since the mamas-Permi approx-
imation in [106] is used in implicit form when calculating the energy spectrum of
uranium. Cosparison of the results of [106, 93] to those of different versions of
calculation by the method described above, distinguished by selection of approxima-
tion to describe plasma imperfection and to calculate the statsums of uranium and
its ions (Figures 1.14 and 1.33) permits one to advance the hypothesis that the
accuracy of calculating the thermodynamic properties of uranium, presented in this
paper, comprises approximately 20 percent in density at p ~ 50 Hrs and approximate-
ly 30 percent in enthalpy. This error is less at p~ 10 We and comprises approxi-
mately 10 percent in density and approximately 20 percent in enthalpy. As in the
case of alkali metals, a more definite judgment on the problem of the accuracy of

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thermodynamic calculations of uranium could be made in the presence of experimental

results. The possibilities and prospects of. different experimental methods are
discussed in Chapter 4 in this regard.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRANSFER COEFFICIHITS OF AN mam PLASMA

macaw TEPIDPIZICHESKI‘IE SVOYSTVA RABOCHIKH SEED swarm vanmnoco muons in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 65-118

[Chapter 2 from the book 'Thermophysical Properties of working Media of the Gas-
Phase nuclear Reactor", by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor L'vovich Iosilev-
skiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna annetsova, Vladimir Ivanovich
Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Lappo, Boris Nimlayevich remakin, Georgiy Alekseye-
vich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevichSon and Vladimir Yevgea'yevich Portov, Atomizdat,

1,800 copies, 304 pages]

2.1. Qualitative Description of the Processes of wt, Mass, Pulse and Charge
Transfer in a Gas-Phase Nuclear mactor

Heat, mass, pulse and charge transfer in a gas-phase nuclear reactor (GYaR), as
shown by calculations, is significantly felt in functioning of the reactor [1].
The transfer processes determine the different gas-dynamic, electric and thermody-
namic characteristics of the nutter in the working volume of the GYaR-othe mass
velocity, electric current density, tesperature, density, concentration of chemical
elements and so on. A knowledge of the enuuerated characteristics in turn permits
one to estimate the degree of influence of the axial magnetic field on suppression
of turbulence that develops due to tangential discontinuity of the velocities at
the boundary of the uraniln jet with the working swstance, to calculate diffusion
mixing of the central uranium jet with the working substance and to correctly con-

sider the heat transfer processes in the G‘laR.

The matter in the working volume of the gas-phase nuclear reactor is a mixture of
uranium and alkali meals (or hydrogen) at temperature of 2,000-80,000 x and pres-
sure of 10‘1 to 102 “Pa. The transient region where one of the elements of the
mixture (the alkali metal) is at subcritical pressure and near-critical temperature
(see section 2.4) , the condensation zone in which uranium and possibly other ele-
ments of the mixture exist in two phasesuliquid and gaseous (phase transformations
occur uniformly in a gas-phase nuclear reactor) and themost inportant for reactor
operation--the plasma zone, mat be determined in the indicated range of parameters.
since the volumetric fraction of the liquid phase in the working volume of the gas-
phase nuclear reactor is negligible, the transient proprrties in the condensation
zone should be identified with the transient properties of the gaseous phase, while
the hydrodynamic processes should be considered as single-phase [l]. The transient
properties of the plasma are investigated in detail in the given chapter.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When describing a plasma on the basis of concepts of the chemical mdel (see Chap-
ter 1), the following typical times are distinguished: tu--the time between elas-
tic collisions of the plasma particles, ‘kh and tum-the times between inelastic
collisions accospanied and maccompanied by chemical reactions and r-the time of
meroprooeseee (diffusion of plasma components and so on). In approximation of

‘l’ » tu, ‘nu and In... called approximation of local themdynamic equilibrium (1.73)
below, the equilibriun particle distribution: by velocity and energy, chemical
equilibrium at given temperature, concentrations of chemical elements and pressure
at a given point of the volume occupied by the plasma are established rather rapid-
ly conpared to the times of macroprocesses. since the condition 1’ >> ‘l'uo Tnu. no;
is fulfilled during operation of the device, approximation of m is naturally used
to investigate the gas-dynamic processes in a gas-phase nuclear reactor.

Let us present a hydrodynamic system of equations that describes the motion of a
multielement ionized single-phase medium in the presence of electromagnetic fields
and radiation fields in urn [2-4]:

ap/m-I VM)=°‘» (2'1)

Mldel -| vvc‘) 1- VI, _, o; (2.2)

“03/01)- VV;) 1. v, ;_. o; (2.3)

pldv'ldt )- MIN = — VP + vn + (ucnxu; (2.4)

Nah/01 -I- vVh) = tip/0! + va + I]:Vv _ V (q 4. Q0141; (2-5)

Here equation (2.1) is the continuity equation, 9 is plasma density and v is the
mean mass velocity.

Equation (2.2) is the diffusion equation of chemical elemts whose mater is equal
to Na - l, where N. is the hunter of chemical elements forming the plasma. on is
the mass concentration of the chemical element and 1a is the mass flow of the chem-
ical element,

N

N
c. a; 2-9“qu ; L: 2 hum ' (2.6)
I m.
I-‘I

Isl

 

 

where uak is the number of nuclei of element a in component k, In); and m. are the
mass of the particle of component It and element a, ci - ngmi/p, where n1 is the
concentration of the i-th component, N is the matter of cosponents in the plasma
and ik is the mass flow of conponent R (see (2.85)).

Equation (2.3) is the continuity equation for the charge, 1 is electric current
and 02 - p’ is the volumetric density of the electric charge.

Equation (2.4) is the equation of motion of the medium, II is the viscous stress
tensor, p is pressure and IE“... El (Ill-MIX"; Ii. II are the electric and magnetic
fields in the laboratory system of coordinates.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equation (2.5) is the equation of the energy balance, h{p, T,[c.}, z) is the spe-
cific enthalpy of the plasma, q is the convective thermal flux and qn is the radi-
ant energy flux.

The system of equations (2.l)-(2.S) should be supplemented by Maxwell equations
that determine the fields in the plasm, the transfer equation of radiation (see
chapter 3), the equation of state of the plasma and the system of equations for
calculation of the thermodynamic functions of the plasma as a function of

p: T. (cal, and i (see chapter 1), the expressions for i,, q and j by gradients

p, T, {ca} and E, H and by determination of n. The Maxwell. equations that deter-
mine the fields in the plasma of a gas-phase nuclear reactor should be used in mag-
netohydrodynanic approximation in which the displacement current and the force
related to space charge is disregarded. In this approximation the system of ﬂex-
well equations reduces to the equation of magnetic induction au/ac - -c rote, where
the electric field E is expressed from Ohm's law (2.10) in which it is assuued that
j - (c/4n)rotll. Thus, we find a closed equation for magnetic field H, after solu-
tion of which the current density and electric field are determined and equation
(2.3) is superfluous in this case.

The expressions for the thermal fluxes, mass of the chemical element, pulse and
charge in ma have the form [2-4]: ‘

N -I '
‘I - (N- - i')v’l‘+ ‘2‘ kWh-1‘92 (2.7)
u - I (2.8)
I, -_. 2; {)uvc, + DI v'l‘— DfE‘;
h .
"u . -- “Wm/0x, I-twdx,)— -§-6,ﬂu.l01.]~L6UOUII0X13 (2'9)
IzL-= OIEf--(l/¢)Vu‘.|-l-GVT. (L10)

The approximate equality (r.10) reflects the fact that charge transfer in a plasma
under conditions realized in a gas-phase nuclear reactor occurs mainly by electrons.
In expressions (2.7)-(2.10), A' is the coefficient of transport thermal conductiv-
ity, AT, A; and \e are the effective coefficients of thermal conductivity, nab, o'g
and DE are the effective diffusion coefficients, n and C are the coefficients of
shear and volumetric viscosity and o and a are the conductivity and thermoelectro-
motive force of the plasma. Let us note that in the special case of the equality
of mass fluxes of chemical elements and electric current to zero in the median,

the effective coefficients of thermal conductivity should be replaced by a single
effective COEchlGnt--Xx: and the expression for q reduces to the for-

q: -0! 1.1‘)v1‘, (2.11)

In this case q and Ax are not dependent on the level of the energy reading, whereas
the effective coefficients of thermal conductivity and the thermal flux in the form
of (2.7) are dependent. The left side of the equation of conservation of energy in
the indicated special case is also invariant with respect to the level of the ener-
gy reading since terms proportional to (ah/ace) and (ah/31) drop out in the left
side of expression :2.5) [4, S].

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 2.1. Dependence of Coefficient of Electric Conductivity of Cesium
Plasma on Pressure Along Isotherns

 

I .-.__.l._-_..a .

J00 I000 5000 BK

Figure 2.2. Dependence of Coefficient of Electric Conductivity of Cesium
Plasma on Tamerature at Pressure of p - 15 me

The values of the transfer coefficients (a and c) in the range of parameters typi-
cal for a gas-phase nuclear reactor are detanined mainly by the concentration of
free electrons in the matter and their stability. The functions for the transfer
coefficients of a cesium and sodium plasma are presented in Figures 2.1-2.5. The
low-temperature part of the curve in Figure 2.2 was measured in [7] and the high-
temperature part was taken from [8]. The thermal conductivity of cesium and sodi-
un (Figure 2.5) is also dependent mainly on the concentration and nobility of the
free electrons in the high-temperature range. TransitiOn free high values for
molten metal to low values in the transition zone is counon in the behavior of
electric conductivity and thermal conductivity of alkali metals and subcritical
isobar; the transfer coefficients increase in the high-temperature range, which is
related to an increase of the degree of ionization. Variation of the thermal con-
ductivity of metals upon transition from molten metal to a plasma is less than

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
me OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electric conductivity since heat transfer occurs in a weakly ionized plasma mainly
by atoms and molecules. The effect of imperfection on the electron transfer co-
efficients (a. e) is manifested by variation of both the ionization equilibrium in
the plasma due to interaction and of the mobility of the free electrons.

mAAMM

  
     

.4 “-5-..

.-.a.. ,_ ‘ J ,
4 6 a u' 20 Lurk

Figure 2.3. Dependence of Thermoelectromotive Force of Cesium Plasma on
'l‘enpe rature

£8811)?" l0

  
      

5 a m mo'x

Figure 2.4. Dependence of Coefficient of Thermal Conductivity of Cesium
Plasma on Temperature Along Isobars (dashed line--possible
behavior of curve)

Key:
1. w/(m-K)

The effective coefficient of thermal conductivity of uranium "x in the plasma zone
is represented in Figure 2.6 and the peaks on the curves are related to energy
transfer processes due to chemical reactions of dissociation and ionization of
metal vapors; the value of A; decreases with respect to A' as pressure increases.
A sharp decrease of the coefficient of shear viscosity of sodium (Figure 2.7) in
the high-temperature range is caused by ionization of matter. The coefficient of
shear viscosity and the effective coefficient of thermal conductivity (n. Ax) are
determined by the properties of the subsystem heavy particles--molecules, atoms
and ions. The effect of imperfection on *x is manifested qualitatively in a shift
to the high-temperature range and smoothing of the ionization and dissociation

67

FOR 0F}1C1Al.USE(MQLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

peaks: the coefficient of shear viscosity of a plasma is also smoothly dependent
on temperature as interaction increases. The nature of the dependence of effective
transfer coefficients on the plasma parameters is obvious from Figures 2.8-2.10.
The coefficient of volumetric viscosity is not considered in detail in the given
chapter since the corresponding terms, due to the short times of the relaxation

processes, do not make an appreciable contribution to the equations of energy and
motion under conditions of a gas-phase nuclear reactor.

 

—.a__-k_l.._.

'r 3' EV] n 01,101

Figure 2.5. Dependence of Coefficient of ‘mermal Conductivity of Sodiu-
Plasma on Temperature at p - 50 are (dashed linr-possible
behavior of curve)

A . -- -
amid-x) (n

  

Figure 2.6. Dependence of Coefficient of Thermal Conductivity x, of
Uranium on Temperature

Key:
1. Int/(m-K)

Information about the collision characteristics of the plasma particles and its
composition is required to calculate the properties of plasma transfer based on
the chemical model. The first problem is discussed with respect to a plasma of
alkali metals and their mixtures with uranium and hydrogen in section 2.6. The

composition of the plasma is determined in section 1.5.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 ” _....._ -.
u-Slu'
‘5
\
t \

   

0" ha— -a—a.

{157911 mo’u

Pigure 2.7. Dependence of Viscosity of Sodius on ‘Deuperature at p - 50 “Pa
(dashed line--possible behavior of curve)

 

4 s 0 I2 201,th

Figure 2.8. Dependence of Effective Diffusion Coefficient Dm, on Temperature

at Pressure of 10 10a for Mixtures with Different Potassiu-
Content

Key:
10 kg/(ll's)

Let us estimate the electric field and space charge occurring due to the effect of
thermoelectric forces during motion of an inhomogeneous ionized medium in a gas-
phaee nuclear reactor. The value of the ratio (1/0 ~ 102 uV/K: a field a - l V/cm
occurs in the working volume of the reactor at temperature gradients of approximate-
ly 104 Van and the heat and mass transfer in a gas-phase nuclear reactor by the
electric field must be taken into account because of this since the values of the
corresponding terms (approximately 3") in relations (2.7) and (2.8) are on the or-
der of terms approximately VT and Va. The value of the space charge found from
the Poisson equation (0‘ ‘ VB) is low compared to the mean concentration of charged
particles and consequently the dependence of the thermophysical properties of the
plasma in a gas-phase nuclear reactor on 2 can be disregarded. An axial magnetic
field, whose typical value of magnetic induction is 102 1‘, does not lead to any

significant anisotropy in the transfer coefficients: the parameter is m ~ Be/m < 1
since the electron collision frequency is v ‘ 3-1013-10M s'l.

2.2. The Kinetic Theory of a Weakly Imperfect Plasma
the working substance and the fissionable material are partially ionized at temper-

atures of approximately 103-105 1: and pressures of 10-1 to 102 MPa under the oper-
ating conditions of a gas-phase reactor. It is complicated to describe this system

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIOFF'ICIALUSEONLY

  

      

4 co (2 zomu

Figure 2.9. Dependence of Effective Coefficient of ﬁner-ml conductivity in
of Potassium and Hydrogen Mixture (10 percent potassius) on
Wrature Along Isobars

1. ﬁlm

vii -__- —
MAM-K) (1)

{0‘ 50%|!

10"
4 a a :2 zoma'x

Figure 2.10. Dependence of Effective Coefficient of marital Conductivity
of Potassium and Hydrogen Mixture on Tenperaturs at Pressure
of 50 MPa

Key:
1. W/(m-K)

kinetically. The energy thresholds of the different types of transformations (ion-
ization, dissociation and excitation) are conparable to the thermal energy of par-
ticles: therefore, a large number of inelastic processes that affect the transfer
coefficients occur in the plasma. 111m, calculation of the transfer coefficients
of a real plasma may be only model in nature, based on the theory of simpler sys-
tens. One of then is a system of charged structureless particles; therefore, let
us initially consider the kinetic theory and types of collision integrals of a
coupletely ionized plasma. Let us then discuss the collision integrals in a multi-
variety particle system with internal structure and also the effect of excited
particles and inelastic collisions on the transfer coefficients.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(14 )II‘olelpuuueImu mellow!

 

Figure 2.11. Diagram of Finding Kinetic Coefficients of Gases and Plasmas

Key:
‘ 1. Lieuville control
2. BBGKI chain
3. m method
4. Approximation of pair collisions
S. Polarization approximation
6. Control for VIC?
7. Methods of molecular dynamics
8. Boltsnan RU
9. nimntovich KB
10. Lenard-Balescu KU
ll. Iaenard-Balescu KU of imerfect plasma (ninontovich)
12. Landau m
13. Landau ICU of irperfnt plasna (Llinontovich)
14. Transfer coefficients

The literature devoted to different problems of the kinetic theory of structureless
particle systems with short- or long-acting potentials is rather extensive (see,
for example (9-161); therefore, let us limit ourselves here mainly to enumeration
of the results. The sequential stages of calculating the kinetic coefficients in
gases and a plasma are shown schematically in Figure 2.11. the initial point of
kinetic theory is the Lieuville equation, which on the one hand, as a result of
sequential integration by coordinates and pulses of particles. leads to the chain
of BBGKI equations (Bogolyubov, Born, Green, Kirkwood and Ivon) and on the other
yields formal expressions for the transfer coefficients by time correlation func-
tions (VKF) (see section 2.3) for a similar discussion of the latter method).

The chain of equations for s-partial distribution functions is

[.ivaglﬂdxm . . .de, (2.12)

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

where v is the volune of the system and xk - (rk, pk) is the coordinate of the
particle in the phase space of coordinates and pulses having the form

(l.§"—- 2 “uy. "-1.73- 2 Sou-lllmd‘rh- (2.13)

I<I<I<s l<l<s

Operators 613 and 13(0) are determined by the Hamiltonian function R of particles
in the following manner:

II = ”1;” -i- ‘1’” E a (3”:— 'I'U (7‘)) +- 8 0”;
l<l u<1< «I

an.” a an” a (2.14)

 

(2.15)

An expression in which the coronation function of three particles is equal to zero
(93 - 0) is used initially to split the chain of equations (2.13):

MI. '2) =I.(|)I.(2)+g.(|. 2); (2.16)
MI. .2. 3) = I:(|)/.(2)lu (3) +In(l)e.(2. 3)+ new. 3) -l-
-l- I.(3)sa(l. 2)-

The numbers 1, 2 and 3 denote the variables related to the first. second and third
particles. Substituting (2.15) and (2.13), we find

It. '3’ —nI(0.. 1 0..)Mx.lau. 2) =- 0.J.(I. 2) +
+ "non/(”9(3. 2) )- Momma. (2.17)

Further, the integral terms in (2.17) can be disregarded for a gas with short-act-
ing potentials when the gas parameter na3 << 1 is small (n is particle concentra-
tion and a is the radius of the potential action), since the terms are distinct
from zero only with simultaneous approach of three particles. In this case the
collision integral determined by gtl, 2) has an ordinary Boltzman form and consid-
eration of the latter term by a parameter equal to the ratio of collision time to
the time of free motion of the particle yields a correction to the collision inte-
gral [13] which is significant only for thermodynamic functions rather than for
transfer coefficients. similar corrections were found in [13] for other collision
integrals as well that describe a gas or a plasma.

72

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the particle density increases, the collisions occurring with participation

of three, four or sore particles must be taken into account in the collision in-
tegral. The question of the existence of a series for the transfer coefficients
similar to the virial series for thermodynamic functions arises in this regard.
Tertiary collisions were considered in [17], where the first virial ooefficimt in
expansion of transfer coefficients was found, but it was further shown [18] that a
four-particle collision integral is divergent. Smation of the most divergent
terms yields the following expression for the transfer coefficients [l9] s

1:}. l-ﬂk- +(n'lnn)l,+n'1,+ . . .. (2.18)
These results are not compared to experimental data.

Due to the long-acting nature of the coulomb interaction potential, the effect of
density on the transfer coefficients in the presence of charged particles is more
sensitive than that for neutral particles. An additional polarization approxima-
tion, according to which each particle interacts immediately with a larger ntsnber
of particles of the nedium, is made in this case in equation (2.17) , where the
condition 93 - 0 was already used. Therefore, the integral terms in expression
(2.17) corresponding to this interaction should be maintained and f2(l, 2) =

= f(l)f(2). The equation for g (l, 2) can be solved formally and as a result the
collision integral in a completely ionized perfect plasma can be found [13-16]:

0/1"” =' -31.(P.)Iam:

~ alu @(kﬂlbllv —u)6(ﬁv.-—-o)
-- _ ____l—___
Hp.) ”f ”f m... .H. X (2.19)

Here Mk) - areZk-Z is the Fourier transform of the coulomb potential and the di-
electric permeability for a nultivariety system is

2
(0!, m) - I 3- 2 ‘3‘. ——--.—- —-- J?!- d'p.(6 —> 0).

 

05—h, l-ib 0'. (2.20)

There is no shielding of the particles in the plasma in the high-frequency range
C(w, 1:) -~ 1. In this case the collision integral (2.19) has the form found by
Landau [13] and differs logarithmically at short and long distances. Statistical
shielding of particlss on the Debye radius Occurs in the range of low frequencies
c(0, k) e l + (krp)' and the collision integral is convergent at long distances.
close collisions of charged particles must be correctly taken into account to elim-
inate the divergence at short distances. the presence of dielectric permeability
dependent on frequency in the Lenard-Balescu collision integral (2.19) reflects
the fact of dynamic shielding of a moving particle in a plasma. To find the col-
lision integral convergent at short and long distances, it was suggested in [20]
that the following combination be used as the collision integral (Hubbard
approximation) 2

1 1°.— 1" + 1"“. (2.21)

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basis for this suggestion was the concept that the collision integral should be
equal to the Bolthan collision integral (13) with correction for dynamic polariza-
tion of the medium equal to the difference of the Lenard-Balescu integrals 1L3 and
Landau integral 11:. a similar result was also found in [21]. The lack of coordina-
tion of Hubbard approximation (2.21) with the expression for the equilibriu corre-
lation function at long distances, which can be found from the kinetic equation,
was noted in [13]. On the other hand, as will be shown below, it is this analogy
with the method of calculating the thermodynamic potential of the plasna [22] when

finding the collision integral by the method of Green functions leads to approxi-
mation (2.21).

There is yet another correction for interaction, related to the dependence of the
collision integral on the external field, in a strongly imperfect plasma [23]. If
an electric field is superimposed on a plasma, the dependence of a two-particle
correlation function on the field appears and this dependence further leads to the
appearance of an additional term in the collision integral, proportional to the

external field, and as a result the electric conductivity of the plasma varies by
the value

A0 -_- o(l —-}'IJ). (2.22)
where r is the classical parameter of interaction (1.1).

Besides different method of finding the kinetic equation for a gas or a plasma,
based on the BBGKI chain, the method of Green time functions is frequently used
[24] by which the collision integral can be written. The kinetic equation is quan-
tum in this case and therefore is written for the Wigner distribution function
rather than for the ordinary distribution function since the pulse and coordinate
camot be masured simultaneously. The kinetic equation for an inhomogeneous gas
or plasma can be found in the following form [2d] 2

.. , 0 03b 0 an a < =
'.u"' 7.1.“???4' '37—‘10 “UV-0 (2.23)

' "' G. ("o M, 'u 0 2:) (I'D “a '0 I) '|' a) (PI w. '0 021< (Pt (I). t! 0-

Here 6‘ and <3> are the lagging and leading Green functions that determine the par-
ticle density and density of the permissible states of particles with pulse p and
energy m. respectively. The natural energy operators 2’ and 2‘ determine the col-
lision frequency related to exit and arrival of particles to the considered element
of the phase space. Let us note that the natural energy operator in the method of
equilibrium Green temperature functions determines the contribution to thermodynam-
ic functions from bound states. The use of staircase approximation for the preper
energy operator in the expression for the themrdynamic potential leads to Debye
correction in the continuous spectrum and to the Planck-Larkin statistical sun in
the discontinuous spectrum. similar approximation in E’ and L“ for the collision
integral [22] leads to approximation (2.21).

Other approximations for the collision integral are also known in the literature
[25-27] in which the contribution of close collisions is taken into account by the

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Boltzman collision integral and that of far collisions is taken into account by
the lonard-Balescu integral with exponential cutoff of the contributions of far
and near collisions, respectively. It is stated that the results of calculating
the transfer coefficients with this approximation are insensitive to the parameter
that separates the range of near and far collisions. These approximations are
based on heuristic argmnts and are rather qualitative: therefore, they cannot
claim to be accurate numerical results even for a weakly iaperfect plasma.

An important transfer characteristic--the electric conductivity of a plasma without
regard to electron-electron collisions-~can be calculated to compare the different
forms of collision integrals in a plasma since consideration of electron-electron
collisions introduces nonlinearity into the problem of calculation and similar cal-
culation of electric conductivity of a plasma with known collision integral is im-
possible. ‘I‘he electric conductivity of a plasma and the collision frequency of
electrons and ions are equal to, respectively,

-E. _
u— m, 9—. :m $1.“) "(b—‘1: )hA (2.24)

If the collision integral of electrons and ions is selected in Boltzman form with
static Debye interaction potential, the expression for the coulomb logarithm with-
out consideration of quantum effects will have the form (28]

lnA- Inr'— —2C1-%lu2——;-, (2.25)

where r is the interaction parameter and C - 0.5772... is the Euler constant.

Born approximation was used in [29] to calculate scattering on the Debye potential
with regard to exchange quantum corrections. We make the following comment for
this reason. the condition of applicability of Born approximation [48] is ex-
pressed by one of two inequalities: 0(IA'Imr. 0:0«501, . These inequalities
are reduced for Debye potential to the form

ru<<a.; MUM. (2.26)

where rp and so are the Debye and Bohr radii, f - e2/k'l‘ is the coulomb scattering
amplitude and A. is the thermal wavelength of an electron. The parameter in [29]
is the value

. I

. ___= h' A s~
n a 5 0:2,..."- (#)_("A'y' (2.27)

where a! - r51 is the Debye wave vector. The quantum corrections are small in the
range of small values of n. (n" << 1) and should not affect the classical result
(2.25). The thermal wavelength of an electron is greater than the Debye radius
and consequently of the interparticle distance at large values of the quantum
parameter (n‘ >> 1); therefore, the conditions of the applicability of the classi-
cal Boltzman equation are violated. specifically the effects of nonpair scattering
(see section 2.4), electron degeneration and so on should be taken into secount.
at small values of quantum parameter n" it is preferable to use calculations of
the scattering phases on the Debye potential rather than Born approximation [31] .

 

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Calculation of the collision frequency for the lama-Balescu integral (2.19)

 

xld'l wt.» rm (_ %)

with dielectric permeability (2.20) £01. 2):" I + 7’"; (A + ('8),

M(.;)(-..m..( > (:.>"-~-»<—-%>

loads to the following expression for the coulomb logarithm:

(InA).,.= ‘ [W’PL -331‘2. ln—--——+0(n’ Inn‘) (2.28)

i) (c'l'Nif-i?) ‘I’

The transfer coefficients for a plasma with unard-nalescu collision integral were
calculated in [30, 32].

The coulomb logarithm for the Landau collision integral is found at cm. (a) - l:

0’2 ( 'M
Wm] 45:;;1,".'—-’=InT-——+—In2+om. (2.29)

For approximation (2.21) we find [22]:

(2:) A). = In P) — 2c 4. .3. ("2,
"D 9 (2.30)

or with regard to quantum omctions [33]:

(In A)", .- In r-' —- 2C -|- {:— II) 2 -- —;- up(z) E. (z);
.. (2. 31)
(5. (z) -—- jr‘exm—MI. z u + (AL) mm,

therefore, in the nigh-tewerature range It? >>Ry, instead of expression (2.30) we
find [34]:

(In A) -_ In rn/A, —- £1— 7;— In 2. (2.32)

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Approximation with exponential cutoff [25-27] leads to the folloving expression:
(lnA)“'=lnr"—2C-l-ln2. ' (2.33,

let us also note the expression for the coulomb logarithn proposed by witrer and
Haem [35] in which the divergent integrals were out off at short distances corre-
sponding to charged particle scattering by angle 90' and at long distances on the
Debye radius:

(In A)“, _- |n(3 Vfr“). (2.34)

Sometime to avoid formal divergences at large values of parauter r, the transport
scattering cross-section on a shielded potential is calculated in Born approxima-
tion, maintaining the following terms with respect to parameter r:

”wan-c

IA.. . -ﬂ—_~.L .. __ A. e
n ‘ (w I), 2 [ma g A') WM], (2 35)

 

Here parameter A - chum/l is determined by the maximum value of the transmitted
pulse.

Both the collision integral and the results obtained by using it for transfer coef-
ficients are valid only for a weakly imperfect plasma, i.e., at r «l and in this
cats the different values coincide for coulomb logarithms (2.25)-(2.3S). The fol-
lowing expression has the best extrapolation properties in the range I‘ = 1 coin-
ciding with the experimental results discussed in Chapter 4

lnA=-;-ln(|+l\'). (2.36)

A - 3/51“]- which was also used in subseqmnt calculations of the transfer coeffi-
cients (see chapter 5).

Collisions not only with structureless charged particles but with atoms, molecules
and radicals as well in different energy states must be taken into account in a
real partially ionized plasma, which complicates the kinetic equation and makes it
difficult to analyze the effect of different factors on electron transfer coeffi-
cients. The main analytical method of solving the kinet.’ ecuation with respect to
the electron distribution function is the anapmen-Enskog .. . 4‘ no, 36], which is
based on expansion of the anisotropic part of the distribution t» ction determined
by electric and magnetic fields, temperature gradients and concentration. into a
series by orthogonal polynomials. The expansion was carried out by Sonin polynom-
ials with regard to elastic collisions alone. Solution of the kinetic equation for
a completely ionized plasma with electron-ion and electron-electron collisions by
the Chapman-rinsing method is difficult due to the need to retain a large number of
Sonin polynomials when calculating electric conductivity and them-EMF. For a
completely ionized plasma detailed consideration of electron—electron collisions
(corresponding to an infinitely large number of Sonin polynomials in the Chapman-
Enskog method) was carried out by Spitzer and haerm [35], who proceeded from the
Landau collision integral for charged particles. A second-order differential equa-
tion with respect to correction to the equilibriun distribution function was solved

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

numerically and as a result corrections were found to electron transfer coeffi-.
cients of a completely ionized plasma. The corresponding results are presented
in section 2.6.

The electron-atom (molecule) collision integral is added in the kinetic equation
for electrons in the case of a partially ionized plasma. Application of the
Chapman—Enskog method with regard to electron-electron collisions also requires
consideration of a large number of polynomials by which the expansion was carried
out [16]. The variational method [37, 38] in which the extreme properties of
transfer coefficients are used is sometimes applied with increasing dependence of
the electron~atom elastic scattering dependence on the relative particle velocity
for correct consideration of electron-electron collisions. since this method is
less widespread conpared to the Chapman-Enskog method. let us describe it in more
detail.

The kinetic equation for electrons in a steady spatially homogeneous plasma has
the form

v.4. ._..£E%’. a (1(“4- K,, 1 K.)¢. (2.37)

where O is correction to the equilibrium electron distribution function f in elec-
tric field E and K is the collision integrals.

Let us determine the scalar product (‘9‘. 1’) '-‘-I'P(V)¢(V)d’0. The current density is
r
I -'-- 93‘" (U) 'l'(”)“'0 3270?. V?)- Let us introduce into consideration the functional

Hx) —‘(le|¢)--(1~le|1-9)= Hum—(1W1) , which reaches a maximum when
the function x(v) coincides with precise solution of the kinetic equation: at the
same time it is not required to know the precise solution of MV) to calculate the
functional Mx). Let us expand the x function by the basic functions and make use
of the extreme condition:

I -" Xchh 01/0“: "“' 2‘11“»: galuo I K ' XI) = 0'

After solving the system of linear equations, electric conductivity is calculated
with respect to coefficients ap

hr hr 1
o ' F' "lax‘(x) '—'- 5—12,.”‘a’0‘dK'm' (2.38)
l.

The electric conductivity of a partially ionized cesium plasma was calculated in
this manner in [38].

Calculation of the electron transfer properties of a multicomponent medium both by
the drapman-mskog method with a large number of expansion polynomials and by the
variational method is difficult due to their cumbersomeness. Moreover, the use of
these methods is frequmtly unjustified due to the ambiguity in the cross-sections
of the elementary processes. Therefore. calculations by these methods were made

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

only in the simplest models of the three-component plasma type, while the main
part of the calculations was made by the Frost interpolation method (see section
2.6).

As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the transfer coefficients are af-
fected by the presence of excited states of atans and molecules. If excited atoms
are regarded as an individual variety of particles in which electron scattering
occurs, then a signifith contribution to electron transfer can be determined by
the large electron scattering cross-sections is excited states, despite their les-
ser pepulation accor ing to the Boltauan factor giexp(-Bi/k'r). For example, the
theoretically calculated and experimentally measured electron scattering cross-
sections at energy of 4.4 ev on a sodium atom in the excited state 32P3/2 is 3.21-
fold greater than the. scattering cross-section in the grcmd state. This yields
an appreciable correction to the transfer coefficients determined by electrons
(see section 2.4 for more details).

Let us briefly discuss the effect of inelastic collisions on the transfer coeffi-
cients. The kinetic theory and method of calculating the transfer coefficients
were initially developed by Chapman and Enskog for gas particles with central in-
teraction potential without internal degrees of freedom. Formal methods of calcu-
lating the transf' er coefficients with regard to internal degrees of freedom were
developed by van-Chang and Ulenbek and the cannon expressions for the uifxurdon
coefficients, viscosity, thermodiffusion and thermal conductivity were then fOund
in [39]. When these formulas were derived, each excited state of an atom or mole-
cule was assmed an individual variety of particles so that Maxwell distribution
was assumed to be in equilibrium by velocities and Boltsman distribution was as-
sumed by energy states. In the Chapman-Enskog method, expansion of the correction
to a distribution function must be made to a double series of orthogonal polynom-
ials. Sonin by velocities and Waldman-Trubenbacher by quantum energy states. In-
elastic collisions and the related transfer of the internal energy of particles
has a more significant effect on the thermal conductivity of a gas and a consider-
ably lesser effect on other transfer coefficients. To confirm this, fox [40] de-
termined the effect of inelastic collisions on the electron conductivity of an
argon plasma. The corresponding correction was less than 1 percent in the temper-
ature range of 5,000-25,000 K. Another attempt to take into account inelastic
collisions is contained in [41], but the results on the effect of inelastic colli-
sions on the viscosity of partially ionized hydrogen do not agree with the conclu-
sions of [36] about the low effect of these processes on the diffusion and viscos-
ity of a gas. We note that work in this direction is now difficult first due to the
insufficient information about differential cross-sections of inelastic processes,
the course of reactions by different channels, including resonance channels and
second due to the difficulty of finding the integral of inelastic collisions with
regard to dissociation, ionization and other reactions and also problems of con-
vergence by the number of orthogonal polynomials taken into account.

2.3. The Theory of Nonequilibrium Processes in Imperfect Media
Investigation of the transfer properties of a plasma on the basis of kinetic equa-
tions is possible, as is shown in section 2.2, provided there is weak interparticle

interaction. The theory of nonequilibrium processes [4247], to outline of which
the given section is devoted, permits one to formally determine the transfer

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coefficients in systems with strong interaction by time correlation functions and
to find the relationships between the thermodynamic and transfer characteristics

of imperfect systems. These methods and the results of calculating the expressions
for transfer coefficients found theoretically [42-47] for charged and neutral im-
perfect medianimperfect plasma, dense gases and fluids and some model systems--
are also discussed in this section.

Nonequilibrium processes in imperfect media were studied by the methods described
below for time intervals not too small when information about the initial state of
a system becomes insignificant and the number of parameters required to describe it
is reduced. The time of particle interaction is on the order of kinetic time in
iaparfect systems; therefore, there is no kinetic phase of evolution in the given
systems (see section 2.2). Local thermodynamic equilibrim with slowly variable
thermodynamic and hydrodynamic parameters compared to microscopic times is estab-
lished in the hydrodynamic phase of evolution in each small macroscopic value, the
typical dimensions of the inhomogeneities of the system are high comared to micro-
scopic dimensions and variation of the system parameters is described by the equa-
tions of hydrodynamics.

Let us explain the concept of thermal and mechanical perturbations used in the
theory of nonequilibriua processes. Those which are the result of action of ex-
ternal fields are called mechanical perturbations of the system and in this case
the Hamiltonian of the system is the sum of the undisturbed Hamiltonian and the
interaction energy of the system with the external field. Perturbations that do not
permit this description are called thermal perturbations [43].

The theory of nonequilibrium processes caused by external perturbations--the theory
of linear response (Tm)--was developed in [42]. However, it must be noted that
fluxes [2.7)-(2.10) do not contain external fields since the electric field in

(2.7) and (2.8) is generally speaking the average field in the medium. Thus, the
no apparatus can be applied to investigate nonequilibrium processes due to thermal
perturbations: average electric field, temperature gradients, mean mass ve10city
and mass fractions of components or chemical elements if it is based on the concept
of the effects from thermal perturbations in a medium by mechanical perturbations.
Existing incorrect TUO methods were developed in [44, 46], where imaginAry perturbe-
tions that create weakly inhomogeneous states of a medium are conisdered, a system
relaxes by equations of hydrodynamics under the effect of imaginary perturbations.
The mean values of the observed properties of the relaxing system (for example,
space charge density, energy and so on) are expressed according to up by time
correlation functions and are also dc .ermined from hydrodynamic equations, i.e. ,

by phenomenological transfer coefficients. Expressions for transfer coefficients
are found by comparison of the indicated determinations of mean values of the ob-
served values. The validity of macroscopic equations of hydrodynamics is suggested
in the approach of [44, 46]. Let us make use of the methods of [44, 46] to study
some transfer coefficients. Let us briefly formulate the no without being specif-
ic about the type of disturbances but assuming that the latter are variable, adia-
batically included at t . -“ and inhomogeneous. let us write the small correction
to the Hamiltonian of the median in the form [44, 46]:

II"'(!) g}[«::;,«, 007"“. 1)_ (2.39)

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
{engine-swam:

Here B(r, t) is an operator corresponding to some observed property of the medium
(for example, charge density) in Heisenberg presentation [48] and b5“ (2', t) is
the exteer adiabatically superimposed perturbation. Let us write the expression
for A < Bur. t) > of variation of the observed property due to the effect of the
perturbation (<...> denotes averaging by the statistical operator of a disturbed

system) :

aw (r ">124 a" j a: 1%“ r'. I —1')o;"(:'. 1');

W, - M (I — I ) at «B. (r. 0 Mr'. 1'». = 2i0(( — t') x;‘_.,’:

(2.40)

aux; s (a. m)
13.0,“. 2) " S —L—n‘(u__z)

Here x3153. is a reaction function or a lagging two-time Green function, <...>o is
averaging by the undisturbed statistical operator, [8133] - B133 - BjBi: Xi (k, m)
is the Fourier tran.zform Xua, (" -—‘ l’ ) and z is a complex variable. Q'he
properties of 1,. ”I follow from the properties of hermitian operators 81(r, t)
with respect to time inversion (the case without a magnetic field is considered)

[44, 48] x
1;, (r -— f', I—-[') ._ x;‘ (t' .._ r. (I __ I);
l1}, (' ""'- ’--(')j' -= —x},’(r—-r', t-- 1'); (2.41)
I1;,(I—r’. !—-l’)- =ele;‘(t'— r. !--l').

:1 - + 1 if the corresponding operator is even or odd with respect to time inver-
sion.- Thus. x1; (r - r', t - t') is an imaginary function, the part x1j(r - r'. (u)
is a symetrica function with respect to substitution of i for j and r for r" and

a real and odd function with respect to w and the antisynnetrical part of xxj (r - r' ,
w) is imaginary and even. Comparison of equalities (2. 41) shows that 13 (r - r' , m)
is an odd function with respect to w and a real and symtrical function with re—
spect to r and r'. i and j with identical evenness of operators 31 and a; with re-
spect to time inversion and vice versa when :1 - -ej. Let us also note that

Onsager reciprocity relations for transfer coefficients (see (2.53)) follow from

relations (2.41) .

Following the procedure described in [44, 46), we find the phenomenological deter-
mination of conductivity which links electric current with average electric field
in the medium. It is assumed in this case that the medium consists of pesitively
and negatively charged particles and in the case of a plasma the given approach
corresponds to the physical model (see section 1.1). The law of conservation of
electric charge and the phenomenological ohm's law have the form (the temperature
and pressure in the medium are constant and there is no magnetic field) [46):

x I V) -O. l ”115- -'—(-“'~‘— VP... (2.42)

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where u - ui - us is the difference of the chuical potentials of ions and elec-
trons. Having carried out the Fourier transforn in (2.42) and making simple cal-

culations, we find the phenomenological determination of local longitudinal con-
ductivity:

'--= lim limRew (2.43)
U '0 h D. ‘8

Expressions for dielectric permeability cL(k, u) and its reciprocal value l/el'Oc. u)
are required for the calculations [45]:

__,__.'_ ._ I __. ﬂiﬂzﬁ
( (u) III)“, B) (2.44)
2'": (n) ..l-l “_NP'0._ﬂ.
' IF. (LO)

In these formulas Mk, (0) and 1-:(k, m) , the Fourier transforms of the external and
average electric fields are linked to the Fourier transform of external 50:, u)
and induced o‘(k, (a) charge densities:

(kl) (It, (0) -- (lu'l'qk, (a); (180:, u) m lep‘ (It, (0)413“, a)".

It
The relations between "external” longitudinal oondsctivity 030:, w)--the response
of the medium to external electric field, 050:, w), l/cL(k, w) and eL (k, w), are
written in the form [45]

u ”(t a)
-1 no , .
ler, w) -— I __T .
Iqu (In. «I (2.45)
“0.40) 'l l- T'

Let us find external conductivity and 1/514)“ (0) according to (2.39) and (2.40) and
let us write next in the form

”'"(0 ‘— 1 ("Mn 0‘9"“. 00". (2.46)

where c is a low positive value that ensures the adiabatic nature of including the
disturbance o‘m(r, t). From (2.40), (2.44) and (2.46) follows:

(5.0“, m» 1",“, “0‘9““. u.) xv“ “W“. (o) _4‘_I:_ .

(2.47)
1 t. ' .“E‘.
Ime (It, 0)) — I: (II. (o) l‘ x (k, (n) "

Thus, 01' in (2.43) has the form (9* - e0) [44]:

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use any

u‘- .= lim Illa—ﬂ"—
n .o I .3 I"

The given expression is the strict definition of local longitudinal conductivity
of a weakly inhomogeneous medium. The density-density correlation function

x30(k, w) in (2.48) can be replaced by correlation functions xﬁgﬂt. us) (one has in
mind the electric field related to <o'(k, w)>) and xjjﬂt, m), which follows from
(2.42). In the case of a homogeneous medium (k - 0), the formula for conductivity
is found in [42]:

It"(k, u) Pg“. (0). (2.48)

a... (u) -= lim ire"? " (’uiv“ -|- ilal)),dld!. (2.49)

cw.

where B - ()t'l‘)‘1 and j is a current operator. The field related to electric cur-
rent by 0(m) can be high-frequency in opposition to a weakly variable and weakly
inhomogeneous field contained in ohm's law in the form of (2.42).

The them-BIG of the medium is determined similar to 01.. From Ohm's law 3 -
“WU?" Vp/c l-a.v'/'| and at W - 0 we have INK") ;.-, ----a|ik7'(k. m) , i.e.,

"WW". tn) -a.l¢"l'(k, m); u' —u/o (kn-mum" l' (k/cHh/It'l') . The perturbation Hamilton-
ian has the form ”'"W n “In,“ mgr". ”incnwhere q(r, () . - u(r, l)--|(u | p)/n|u(t. 1) I
+ ".l"(f. 0/" 11.0. 0/1.)“. . n is total concentration. u is energy density and
n1 + n2 - n. 111 - n2. Thus, for 01 we find [46]:

“- "152?: 1‘12"”... (k- «W- ‘2'”)

Let us find the expression for the coefficient of shear viscosity. also relying on
linear response theory. The equation of conservation for the tangential conponent
of pulse density p1 in linear approximation has the form

7149.0. t».-—- —'L v'aw. 1».

Having carried out the Fourier-Laplace transformation in this equation, we find
(2 - w + it):

' "Mi. 2) I' ‘3—k'PAk- 1) Pu“);

Rc ﬂﬁﬂ- ._‘ __'E’_

V[(i) -J|(1L.‘_._)’.
‘l

The imaginary perturbation Hamiltonian isllmu) = "(IN-dig \-’.l)i'V(I)¢-" : then from
(2.40) for t > 0 follows:

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Renee [441

I lln ’

=JI’II. “1491'”. (k com. (2.51)
The other transfer coefficients are also presented in a form sinilar to (2.48):
(2.50) and (2.51) [44. 46].

The expressions for the transfer coefficients of iuperfect systems were also
found by the method of the nonequilibriun statistical operator [43, 47] , differing
from the method of indirect linear response theory. The transfer coefficients
were determined in [43] by two-time lagging Green functions: in this case the ex-
pressions for vector, tensor and scalar processes have the form , __ ”. h 5
(compare to (2.7)-(2.9) q --q 24. u

N (2.52)

 

Here “k is the electrochemical potential of component k and the transfer co-Jffi-
cients are. respectively:

a I \
. ' k‘l' ' -" r - I". l’ (It’dldl';
(-00 l": I I 'I t to“ I

o I
lw E‘EL'WJ L l_ e 1w“ "I’ Huc'. mdl’ (2.53)

I...I Ii": It? I I

...-—2 sf
3'

' I
L -.. - limit! L'e 1"" - I”. l') df'dltu .

I. e' '1‘," --l’ l’)dr’ alldl';

I)

I
Sc" 1 (r- ..quamr;

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here the subscripts Q, j, T, and p correspond to operators of thermal flux density,
diffusion flux, the nondivergent part of the stress tensor and the pulse density
[43]. According to the Onsager reciprocity relations, which follow from [2.41),
L91 = L19 and L1) - Lgi. The form of the fluxes (2.52) and determinations (2.53)
does not vary if ik is replaced by mass fluxes of the chemical elements 1. and HR
is replaced by the chemical potentials of chemical elements Ua- Using (2.52) and
(2.53), one can find the determination of effective transfer coefficients by the
corresponding correlation functions. It is natural that the effective transfer
coefficients can be expressed by time correlation functions also by means of in-
direct methods of linear response theory.

The problem of division of ”k into “electric" and “chemical“ parts was considered
in [47, 49] and it was shown in this case that, following the method of the non-
equilibrium statistical operator, division cannot be made in general form. A co-
efficient that distinguishes the electric conductivity in the form of (2.49) from
the local longitudinal electric conductivity of a plasma was faund in explicit
form for a Debye plasma:

0' .u(())ll -- 1—(--t;;)4nr,,;n,z,l|. (2.54)

As can be seen from the given expression, the difference between 0L and 0(0) in a
Debye plasma exists for an asymmetrical plasma.

Microscopic calculation of transverse coefficients of imperfect media, determined
by linear response functions XBiBj by means of different versions of the theory of
nonequilibrium processes, is a complex problem. Therefore, a signiiicant role in
the theory of imperfect systems belongs to common restrictions on the extent of the
response functions which are related to analytical properties, range of variations
and so on. An example of restrictions is Kramers -lkonig relations and the ensuing
sum rules resulting from them. Sum rules can be used in calculating the transfer
coefficients of an imperfect system.

Kramers-Kronig relations for linear response functions are the consequence of the
analytical nature of response functions in the upper hemisphere of the complex
variable 2; the analytical nature in turn follows from the cause of the perturba-
tion. Mechanical perturbations are cause types, but the situation is more compli-
cated in the case of thermal perturbations (see [46, 50] for more detail). Kramers-
Kronig relations are valid in the range R + O for dielectric permeability and
longitudinal conductivity (response functions to an average electric field) [46,
50]; let us also assume the same thing for response functions corresponding to
other thermal perturbations. Let us formulate the Kramers-Kronig relations. If
the Fourier transform of a two-time lagging Green function [translator's note:
pages 86 and 87 of original text are missing).

Let us disregard the second term on the right side of the first of these equations

and [u'(l,-u)|‘ in the second equation since h""(*.«0--«t 3 and i “'(*.«0i"“'
at u > > (see (2.59)). Consequently, the series for li¢"'(k.‘0) found from the

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corresponding Kramers-Kronig relation for w -> 0, coincides up to terms of approxi-
mately W4 with the series for Real“, .9) 3 it makes no sense to carry out more
precise analysis of the series ch' (I. 0,, since the odd moments of the imaginary
part of external conductivity are equal to zero in the absence of a magnetic field.
Thus, the odd mnts of the imaginary part of 030:. m) are also equal to zero.
Prom comparison of the expansion of the first term of the second side of the first

equation of (2.51) at a: -> o and of the Kramers-Kronig expansion for lmol (k, w) .
we find the sum rules for the real part of 0100:, w):

w' a 01 . ,

‘ Rvu‘ (It, mMu ‘ n 1’- —‘-,-‘;"— (It, I) l1..o.

w. '3 0P1". (2.62)
‘ mike"! (It, «ml!» -- u I: .5;— (l, 0".“ |

.. ‘ 3
I III“,- e‘ﬂl ) '
k' W l .s

we can extract in similar fashion the values of the higher even moments from
Real“, to) by frequency. It is easy to write the sum rules from (2.60) and (2.62)
for the real parts of llu‘ (It, (a), 1...“. m)_ ¢'(k,1-I) . and so on. All the even mo-
ments of the real parts of the external and longitudinal conductivity, besides the
zero moment, differ from each other. Thus, analysis by using the sun rules indi-
cates a difference in the value between Re}? (k. 0,) a:.d Reolﬂx, m) . Let us al-

so calculate the first sum rules Raﬁ-(k. w) and Raw-(It, u) for a classical
plasma so as to determine the physical meaning of relations (2.60) and (2.62). m

in the form of (2.58) has the form #9“, a) _ “I” 1-80; w) in the classical range
V .
(h -> 0). Hence, from formulas (2.45) and (2.47) also follows

~1 '3. ﬂ. '
R00 (1;, «ans: p [w v 50!. m). (2.63)

Thus, calculation of the even moments RoJ' (It, a») in the classical range reduces
to calculation of the moments of the dynamic structural factor. The zero frt‘quency

moment of the real parts of external and longitudinal conductivity is equal to
neZN/zvm [42, 46]. Calculation of the fourth moment 50:, o) yields:

N

f m‘SﬂI, whim J k'( - I .-| _.'_..) ._ .91“? .N “envy- ”x

2 lg" ﬂ'lu' ﬂm‘ v
I :":-.*‘_’_ 3" ‘."S'..'"‘.’) ‘.". h {l .. £29191 ' , , _|
'< \ III I k'l' k'l‘ I 3 ||M'V “u“ ) I X
silll'r Jtlnkll- Ill-aunt]. «LI- _I ”Lu'ﬂ_ N X (2.64)
( k! I “I‘ l'l’ ) I II } ﬂmM V

' In .‘I u I» IV 3 sun “I d: I
. | “'3 _ .._.. . I
“mm |( h l W “I, . J

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hence, it is easy to write the second moment of the real parts of external and
true conductivity from equalities (2.62) and (2.63). In (2.64) 911(1’): 9ee(r) and
931 (r) are the equilibrium binary correlation functions of ions and electrons.
Relations (2.63) and (2.64) permit one to conclude that the fourth frequency moment
s(k, u) in the long-wave range - k2 and the second moment of the real part of ex-
ternal conductivity remain finite at k + 0. The integrals from g(r) in (2.64)
reduce at r + °° and the convergence of the first and second integrals in the right
side of (2.64) also occurs at r + 0. The integral containing g“ (r) diverges at

r + O. The indicated divergence should be eliminated by modifying the electron-ion
interaction potential at short distances, i.e., by replacing the electron-ion
classical plasma by a model system which is thermodynamically stable and for which
a thermodynaaic limit exists. Another condition for the modified electron-ion po-
tential is the positive definiteness of the moments of the real parts of external
and longitudinal conductivity since 50:, w) > 0 [45]. when calculating the moments
of higher order from the dynamic structural factor. the exponent r in the numerator
of the subintegral expression increases with 9.1(r) and the model of solid charged
spheres or a model in which g“, (r) ‘ exp (-l/r) will provide, for example, conver-
gence of the corresponding integrals at r + O.

The relationships of the eguilibriun correlation functions to the frequency moments
of time correlation functions of imperfect media, corresponding to different ther-
mal perturbations, can be determined by the methods described above in detail for
a (kl w)e

The integral relations between the linear response functions of the medium and the
derivatives of the thermodynamic values in a form distinct from (2.60) and (2.62)
permit one to find the indirect methods of linear response theory [44]. The main
relation between linear response functions and the derivatives of thermodynamic
values by means of which it is easy to find the specific sum rules was established
in [44] 1

1i": 1,,l,,l(|t. 0) '-‘ (ant/dbl)»,-n; (7.65)

Here 81 is the observed properties and b1 is the thermodynamic parameters of the
medium (compare (2.40)).

Let us turn to discussion of the few results of calculating the expressions for
transfer coefficients by time correlation functions. Data were found mainly by
numerical methods for imperfect media. Numerical investigaton of the electric
conductivrty of a system which simulates a weakly ionized dense plasma with strong
charge-neutral interaction was carried out in (51] by the molecular dynamics me-
thod on the basis of the classical single-electron version of formula (2.49).
which, as indicated above, differs from the correct expression for local longitud-
inal electric conductivity (2.48) and essentially corresponds to the external
electric conductivity of a plasma. Approximations similar to (51) but to calcu-
late the electric conductivity of a completely ionized imperfect plasma was used
in (52) 1 in this case the electron-ion interaction potential was modified at
short distances (see Chapter 1). since the correlation function of the fluxes
rather than the correlation function of velocities must be calculated for complete-
ly ionized media to determine electric conductivity, the accuracy of the calcula-
tions of (52] cannot be controlled. A check of the first sum rules in [51, 52)
was not made.

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The coefficients of shear and volumetric viscosity, the coefficient of self-diffu-
sion and the correlation function of velocities were calculated by the molecular
dynamics method in [S3] for a single-component classical plasma, i.e., a system of
charged particles on a homogeneous background of opposite sign. The same values
were then estimated on the basis of Kramers-Krcnig relations for linear response
functions. known frequency laments of different correlators and PDT. Good agree-
:uent of the estimated and calculated values of the transfer coefficients was found
(54]. The self-diffusion coefficient was investigated in [55] in a classical neu-
tral fluid by means of known even frequency moments of the dynamic structural fac—
tor, For and Kramers-Kronig relations. The correlation function of velocities that
determines the self-diffusion coefficient was approximated by an expression with
several parameters which were found by mmsnts 50:. to) related to the correlation
function of velocities by means of PDT; the value of the self-diffusion coefficient
found in [55] is in satisfactory agreement with the results of numerical experiments
for liquid argon. The coefficients of shear and volumtric viscosity were calcu-
lated in exactly the same manner in [56] for liquid amen, which are in good agree-
ment with experimental data. Thus, the sum rules for linear response functions are
used directly to estimate the transfer coefficients of inerfect media.

Let us consider the analytical methods of calculating the electric conductivity of
a plasma. based on expressions of transfer coefficients by time correlation func-
tions (compared to (2.49)).

_ e1 'P n; n n m '
“MO”, :1? ‘ -%u— IK»’("’) "' Kn' (0“ (:1: ' (2.66)

 

Here R .(w) is the Fourier transfom of a lagging two-part Green function which is
calcul ed by the causal Green function at discrete points of the imaginary axis
and is continued analytically to the real axis [24].

High ‘* quency electric conductivity of a plasma was calculated in [57] by the
Iv“- . Green functions and the statistical conductivity was calculated in [58].
Let us outline the method of calculating the electric conductivity of a completely

ionized plasma. Let us determine the vertex part by the relation MW» ‘0")

'd'n' . . . ..
" ("'25 p Ami”). where "'l""”k' (2"! |‘ |). o-v..='2".aakT . In staircase approximation.

which must no taker. into account when calculating the static electric conductivity,
for the vertex the following equation is valid

‘3 ' ~-
uI-(‘Wn (.1!) " PL'H'WI- "’u) "' 5‘25? hr 23! (“It “1)‘01- ‘P' ("W _
up-
' “’p) "0' (”PH ‘9").

where “I! (“mi-h.) - - (5.0», I c-».12)(i,.(«n,~- (0/2) . This equation plays the role of the
kinetic equatio': in the method of time correlation functions. Let us represent its
solution in the form

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“'3‘ ~ 31:)
"Phi," ”1.)" mu‘z‘p. ”n) .

where function I? satisfies the equation

 

 

 

I'PRP(‘”P- 0’») " “T “239(“9-‘0 0,)‘9, --s' (”p— 0'.) X

«2:?

X "'1“ p' 0),).

Using the approximation RP - pgp( , can) on tho right side and adding with re-
spect to ., we find LA”... «5)-. iv1”-—lv,)l(u-|- iv) , where the "transport"
collision requency is '

y‘qu‘fup( 3"”) VIE—1:22;.- xfll? '

v,--u,———(-i\
(,,

In the spatially homogeneous case, we find for static electric conductivity:

I r’_ _a_P 0] 1" -

V:

here ep -= pz/Zm. Calculatirr. ~f the elect. ‘.c conductivity of a low-teQerature
plasma [58} in staircase .pproxination. which takes into account the multiple
charged particle interactions, yields a result coinciding in accuracy with the
approximation of [20] and correspor. ling to the couloub logarithm.

The method of Green functions was used in [S9] to calculate the corrections to the
electric conductivity of a Lorentz gas and the corresponding diagram technique was
developed in [60].

The effects of nonpair scattering when the electron wavelength he and the scatter-
ing amplitude G (q is the scattering cross-section) are comparable to the distance
between scatterers N'1/3, were taken into account in [S9]. Expansion of the colli- -~
sion frequency was found with respect to parameter E - NAeq as a result

”on '-' V“ 'l- 0.! 1-41.? -I- typing).

2.4. Model Approaches to retermination of Electron Transfer Coefficients of an
Imperfect Plasma

The kinetic theory of gases, valid in the limiting case of locally strong potentials
at M3 << 1 (a is the radius of 'otential action), and of a plasma for integrally
weak potentials (F << 1) was developed in section 2.2. The state of methods of cal-
culating transfe: coefficients expressed by time. correlation functions was analyzed
in section 2.3. For systems with weak inter-particle interaction, both approaches

to determination of the transfer properties are equivalent but in individual cases,

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following the second approach, one can calculate analytically or nunerically the
transfer coefficients for systems with strong interaction. The latter is possible
for a weakly ionized plasma, single-component plasma and dense neutral systems
[51—56] . Strict methods cannot be used to calculate the transfer coefficients of
a multicomponent, chemically reacting, imperfect plasm. Therefore, the electron
properties of transfer of an imperfect completely, partially and weakly ionized
plasma are considered in the given section on the basis of model concepts and the
transfer properties determined by heavy particles are considered in the next
section.

The chauical model, according to which a plasma consists of a specific number of
components: free electrons, ions, atoms, molecules and so on, is usually employed
to calculate the transfer properties of an imperfect plasma. Let us analyse the
influence of different effects on the electron transfer coefficients of a partially
ionized plasma with strong coulomb interaction-«lectric conductivity and thermal
EMF, using Frost formulas (2.97) which should be regarded as model with respect to
an imperfect plasma. The collision frequency of electrons and heavy scatterers is

v” . :72 015' (0)". I) 2, n.1, (2M. {2:- (3-5} y L(I‘). (2.67)

Here L(I‘) is the coulomb logarithm that describes collective effects in a plasma
and ya ,a are the correcting factors (section 2.6). Comparison of data on electric
conductivity, calculated with respect to (2.97) and (2.67) and on the adopted
version of composition (section 1.7) (cm - lnll + (3 x Izmzn to the experi-
mental results of [61-63] shows an excess of theory over experiment. It is diffi-
cult to achieve agreement by varying L(I‘) but since the given procedure has no
definite physical meaning, main attention should be devoted to the contribution
of non-coulomb effects (to electron scattering on excited atoms, to inelastic elec-
tron collisions, to "the finite dimensions" of ions and so on) to crllision fre-
quency. Manifestation of non-coulomb effects distinguishes electron transfer in
an imperfect plasma and is unrelated directly to the long-acting nature of coulomb
forces.

The partially ionized imperfect plasma has a temperature of 1-3 ev in the experi-
ments of (61-63]. If the material of the plasma has low ionization potential (for
example, an alkali metal), then a significant fraction of the neutral atoms in the
plasma is excited. The result of measuring the electron scattering cross-section
on a sodium atom in the first excited state (3 p) is know: for electron energy of
4 eV [64]: a cross-section of e - 3 s is less than that of 3 - 3 p by a factor of
2-3. Such a considerable difference indicates the need to modify expression (2.67)
for a partially ionized plasma of alkali metals:

.. .351. ‘ i!) _. -
v, u 4". gig, ,, cxp( E,/lz1). (2.68)

Here Qn is the statsum of a neutral atom and (29') is the transport cross-section
of elastic electron scattering on an atom in the i-th excited state, the energy
and statistical weight of which is 3;, 91. The fraction of excited atoms is
negligible and their effect on the length of the free path of electrons should be

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

disregarded in a partially ionized plasma of inert gases at teuperatures of 1-3

ev. Let us investigate in more detail the effect of electron scattering by excited
atoms on the collision frequency on the example of a partially ionized cesium and
lithium plasma. Elastic scattering of electrons in the 6 s, 6 p and S d states of
the cesium atom (the energy of these states is O, 1.4 and 1.8 ev, respectively) and
scattering in 2 s and 2 p states of lithium (energy of 0 and 1.8 eV) for a lithium
plasma should be taken into account in the temperature range of 1-3 W when calcu-
lating the electron transfer properties for a partially ionized cesium plasma. The
electron scattering cross sections on excited lithium and cesium atoms were calcu-
lated in Born and Glauber approximations in [65]. The basis for using the indi-
cated approximations is good agreement of calculated and experimental data on
elastic scattering of electrons with energy > 1 ev on lithium. sodium and potassius
atoms in the ground state [66]. The exchange interaction of impinging and valency
electrons and the orbital polarization of the latter are disregarded in Glauber
approximation. Estimates show that these simplifications are valid for E: > 1 ev.
Assuming that the atom of an alkali metal consists of a base with charge +le and a
valency electron, let us write the electron scattering amplitude on the atom ('l’nlm)
in Glauber approximation (in atomic units):

I"... a: fu,._(r)l'(b, r) a,“ (t) e'“”d’bdr; l
[‘03, l’) --= I —cxp|11(b, 3)];

c- (2.69)
xlb. 5) ~vi }‘ m. r. we

 

vs- ' ‘
|'-'|"I I"

“nlm is the wave function of the valency electron. v and k are the velocity and
wave vector of the scattered electron, q - 2): sin 8/2, 6 is the scattering angle
and n, l and m are the quantum numbers. Expression (2.69) is written in a coordin-
ate system whose origin is located in the nucleus of the atom, z k, and r, x" are
the radius vectors of the atomic and scattered electrons. Let us expand them:

r - s + z and r' I b + E, where s and b are projections of r and r' onto the xy-
plane. The wave functions of the valency electron calculated by the Hartree-Fock
method (see section 1.4) were used when calculating the e cross-sections of lithium
and cesium. If the square of the radial part of the wave function is represented
in the form

In -b"’l
'l \ nl ‘ ’7'“ i
R.“ 'Zf‘" r ‘ c: ,

I-

then equalities (2.69) can be simplified since for Fnoo we have

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- .7. _, \
Ii“ .': —:. 20"” (_,.)‘l | ”—l 0" I! (0. O)
la

{-1

I 0
w.»

01‘
"'2 o l” 202 .
i ,x -_ 54 w L_¢;_"¢_“I (2.70)
.(q ) m 6‘40le mwww x

x [I — %(ﬁ)“"3’wbu —sin2ocosm)"J.

Here c; is natural nusbers, n - UV and Pm for l, n f 0 are represented similar
to (2.70) [65]. The total and transport elastic scattering cross-sections are
calculated in the standard wnner by the scattering amplitude [48] . 11:. results
of calculating the total inm and transport 1m elastic scattering cross-sections
of electrons by Born and Glauber methods in t energy range of 1-10 ev on cesiun
and lithium atoms in the ground and excited states are illustrated in Figures 2.12
and 2.13, from which it is obvious that the elastic scattering cross-sections in
the ground state is one-half to one-third those in the excited states. The iso-
therms of electric conductivity (Figures 2.14 and 2.15) were calculated with re-

gard to this effect [65].

  

a mud)

Figure 2.12. Elastic Scattering Cross-Sections of Electrons in 2 s and 2 p
states of Lithium Atom 1 and 4--Born method; 2 and 3--

Glauber method

Key:
1. Electron volts

The next non-coulomb effect which influences the transfer coefficients of the
plasma is the difference of the electron and ion interaction potential (v.1) at

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

8 (,3!) (1)

Figure 2.13. Elastic Scattering Cross-Sections of Electrons in Ge, ép
and 5d States of Cesium Atomdthe Born method)

Key:
1 . Electron volts

short distances from the ion nucleus from the law z1e2/r. Thus, the typical dimen-
sions of ion cores of heavy cesium and xenon ions comprise approximately 5 a0,
which is comparable to the shielding radius of charges in a plasma. The effect of
a finite dimension of an ion on the electron collision frequency was taken into
account in [67] by the quantum defect method [68), which is based on the analogy
of motion of a slaw free electron and a weakly bound electron in the field of an
ion core. The radial part of the wave function of a free electron with pulse 1: and
orbital absent 1 has asymptotic form (r + on) upon scattering on an ion with charge
lie [48]:

‘ 1" "I y ' . —.l_z! ..
R“ _. ."— SIM-kl "-T In!" _T 1- “U (I l I k ) I W]. (2.71)

where Y: ~. limnAm _. WNW“.
I .0

Here the quantum defect A - n - n', n is the main quantum number of state, the
binding energy of the electron in which is equal to (2n'2)'1. Correction to the
transport coulomb cross-section, determined by the quantum defect method, comprises
[67] approximately 25 n2 for cesium and xenon ions at electron energies of 1.5-2
ev. Restrictions of the quantum defect method include the following: relation
(2.71) is valid at E + 0 and the potential v.1 is coulomb far from the ion nucleus.
The effect of a finite dimension of a cesium ion was considered for Q”) in [69] by
the simplified model: Born approximation was used, the potential V“ at short dis-
tances from the ion nucleus was approximated by the exponential potential and in
this case 159(1) ~ 50 32 was found at e ~ 2 ev.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USEONLY

  

.—_L __-

a to 20' 'Jri ' tidbit-I‘m

Figure 2.14. Comparison of Calculated and assured Values of Electric
Conductivity of Cesium Plasma Along Isotherns (experimtal

points are data of [61])

M»_____.._. - .- -

[HIM "
/ m“
’50 b

ﬂ
W
you a

H-
w
50 —l—A__L

' 20 .10 40 Anna

Figure 2.15. Isotherms of Electric Conductivity of Lithium Plasna without
Regard (upper curve) and with Regard to Scattering on Excited
Atoms

Description of a two-particle electron scattering process on an ion, free of the
deficiencies of the quantum defect and nodel method [69], is possible on the basis
of the phase function method [70) which permits accurate calculation of the parti-
cle scattering phase during its notion in a given potential. let us write the
equation for the scattering phase 51(1’):

5“;- 500) " 'i‘ "u WINS“: (0i: (‘0 '— 5‘" 51W": 0")"; 51(0) -"" 9-

In this equation 31m and n1(x) are the known Ricceti-Bessel functions [70] and
the asymptotic expression for the radial part of the wave function is determined
by the scattering phase

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of the phase function method requires that the short-range pert veﬂr)

be given accurately and the long-range part of v91 (r) , according to model concepts,
should be selected in the form of the Debye potential. consideration of the "fin-
ite" dimension of ions leads to a reduction of the calculated values of electron
transfer coefficients and is manifested more strongly, the greater the degree of
ionization and imperfection of the plasma.

Let us discuss the effect of inelastic electron collisions such as excitation and
ionization of atoms by an electron inpact on the collision frequency of electrons
with heavy scatterers. Data on the excitation and ionization cross-sections of
alkali atoms by electron inpact, presented in the literature, permit one to con-
clude that the excitation cross-sections at corresponding energies of the imping-
ing electron are comparable in value to elastic cross-sections of electron scatter-
ing on atoms in the ground state [64]. Thus, because of the high population of
excited levels of neutral atOms in a partially ionized inperfect plasma of alkali
metals under conditions of [61—63). the indicated inelastic process appreciably
increases the electron collision frequency and accordingly reduces the transfer
coefficients. Variation of collision frequencies, based on physical concepts [71],
will be described by addition of a term of the following form to Va

V.~U¥Q~(U)n.. (2.72)

where Qea is the excitation cross-section of a neutral of variety a(the atom in
different excited states belongs to different varieties here) and n. is the concen-
tration of neutrals of variety a.

The next effect of significance in a fully or partially ionized perfect plasma is
the correlation of particles on which electron scattering Occurs. The contribution
of correlation depends on the degree of orderedness of the scatterers. In the lim-
iting case when the scatterers are fully ordered, as occurs in metal, the electron
is scattered simultaneously on the entire chain of atoms; therefore (due to inter-
ference), the length of the electron path increases sharply. The high electric
conductivity of metals both in the solid and molten states is naturally explained
by this effect. There is partial order in a dense gas or plasma and interference
effects should lead to an increase of the length of electron flight and according-
ly to an increase of plasma conductivity. The effects of correlation are taken
into account by the ziman formula for the collision frequency of an electron [78]
with other particles

I 2‘llldl

~ __ m ‘
v. an.“I I Q (k)u(k)k’dk- (2.73)

where the structural factor ant) is determined by the equilibrium correlation
function of ions 911(r) [72]:

 

‘ sh

«(1.) = l -I- m ‘ 'I‘" lg,,(r)— I] Mr.

5 (2.74)
Calculation of the effect of correlation on the coulomb logarithm with nonlinear

Debye correlation function [72] 8:1(’)=“Pl—‘ {cl-expo"). yields a correction to
the coulomb logarithm (see Figure 2.16).

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

When calculating the electron transfer coefficients of a partially ionized imper-
fect plasma, determination of composition [73], different from the traditional
composition (section 1.7), is used. The camosition of the plasma used in [73]

to calculate the electric conductivity of a plasma of inert gases, is based on
specific division of the energy spectrum of electrons in the plasma. The energy
spectrum [73] was found on the basis of the classical expression for the density
of electron states calculated in the “close neighbor“ approximation, when electron
interaction with its surroundings is replaced by interaction with the nearest ion,
while interaction with remaining particles. as weaker interaction. is taken into
account by methods of perturbation theory. Il‘he "atoms'--electron-ion states with
high negative energy ( k?) are determined in the electron energy spectrum, and elec-
tron scattering on them is considered as that on a single particle. The excited
atons (VA) are states with energy from dc? to 62/1?er rat is the average distance
between plasma particles, quasi-bound states (rs) are formations with energy from
-e 2/r5r to zero and collision complexes (SK) are electron-ion pairs with positive
energy. Scattering of free electrons excited atoms, quasi-bound states and colli-
sion complexes is equivalent to scattering on a couloub center. Besides free elec- .
trons. charge transfer in a partially ionized plasma is acconplished, according to
[73], by electrons bound in quasi-bound states and collision complexes by means of
the collision udlanism. Collision transfer occurs due to the fact that the motion
of electrons in the quasi-bound states and collision conplemes, which accordingly
occurs along segments of elliptical and hyperbolic orbits. is infinite since the
nearest ion is replaced during electron motion. In a weakly inperfect plasma the
main contribution to charge transfer is made by free electrons and in an imperfect
plasma by electrons belonging to quasi-bound states and collision complexes. The
disadvantages of the described approach should include some arbitrariness in selec-
tion of the mechanisms of electron scattering on excited atoms. quasi-bound states
and collision complexes; therefore, agreenent of the model to experimental data

in electron conductivity of a weakly imperfect and partially ionized i-perfect
plasma of different materials [73] is conditional.

(.|IIII1)a
"Talia

.m.

  

-0,m —--———

w' w' 7

Figure 2.16. Effect of Ion Correlation on Coulomb Component of Electric
Conductivity of Plasma

The concept of the composition of a partially ionized imperfect plasma, as can be
clearly seen from the previous discussion, is not the only one. For electron
transfer in a partially ionized plasma of inert gases in the range of parameters
considered in the given section. electron scattering on excited atoms and inelas-
tic collisions with plasma particles are insignificant and consequently in this
case a model that does not use the concept of plasma composition can be formulated.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us describe one of the possib‘.e single-electron mdels of this type, based on
concepts of quasi-classical theory of a continual course [74]. let us assume that
a plasma cmsists of electrons and ions. According to the continual course theory
(M), the electron moves in “authorized" paths in a random, effective potential

Wt) created by fluctuations of ion density: the fluctuations of v(r) are not de-

N
pendent on the presence of an electron at a given point V(I) _-.- 2 0..“ --R..).

Here Ru is the radius vector of the ion and sum'eation is carried out for all ions,
and V“ is the electron-ion interaction potential.

According to TKP, the authorized paths satisfy the condition V < B (B is the elec-
tron energy remaining during notion of the constant). For any energy E, the entire
space is divided into authorized and forbidden, the fraction of the authorized

space (we denote it by c(£)) is equal to I NV)“, . PW) is the po-
tential distribution function and by definition [74]:

Irma—Lyn, . . .dRuWﬂl. . . .R~)d(V——V(r)):

w is the probability of a given ion configuration in a random potential and Q is
the volume of the system. PW) has a Gaussian form provided that in the sphere of
influence of potential Vei there are sufficiently many ions and w - l:

l-‘(V) == 1! ""0; 'exp(-- V‘loI); a: = 2n,qu, (I)dl'.

The main contribution to NV) is made by ion fluctuations in a sphere with effec-

tive radius r0; therefore, the condition that the electron moves in Wr) like a
e' , h’

classical particle is the inequality °V~T X n"));.—l-5- , where l a nirg. In
0 o

the left side of the inequality is the depth of the typical potential hole and in
the right side is the energy of the ground state of the electron with respect to
the bottom of the hole. It is qualitatively clear that there is some energy to,
beginning with which at least one authorized path penetrates the entire system of
scatterers, i.e., electrons with E > SC contribute to electric conductivity and
those with 1-: < Re are localized. Determination of 8c and c(Ec) in the given ran-
dom potential is one of the purposes of TKP. Another important value is the per-
colation probability PUB), determined as the conditional probability that the
point belongs to an unrestricted path if it is in an authorized space. At E < Be,
NE) 3 O and P(E) rapidly approaches unity at B > Be: therefore, it is usually
sufficient to assume that 9(a) - 6(3 - Be). It was established in [75] that
c(3c) - 0.17 (i.e., Ec - -0.68 av) for PW) in Gaussian form and is not dependent
on the form of vent) and it is necessary only that sufficiently many ions be lo-
cated in the effective sphere of a two-particle potential.

Let us determine the electric conductivity of the plasma, following simple
concepts:

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘1 e l "
u = 3-7." 37»- e"’ We) ! *(E)P(Q¢XP(—Elk7) ”E. (2.75)

Here 9(3) is single-electron density of states, 1'0!) is the time of the free path
equal to UV (v is electron velocity) [74)

E
‘I(l‘.)=—' dy_2_ _ “Vs a .
“9.5. “(E V) m.
(1)

1 is the ordinary gas-kinetic length of the penal/mgﬂ’ (s - V), 9.1 can be cal-
culated by the phase function method and one can easily take into account the e£~
fect of the finite dimensions of ions, Adescrihes scattering from the edges of
authorized paths, A -> a when 8 + '0. The analysis ME): 1 ~ room) [1 - c(B)]"1 was
made in [74]. Under the conditions considered in the given section, 1 ~A at a < 0.

The single-electron density of states 9(8) is determined in quasi-classical approx-
imation in the following manner [74]:
‘erla I

p(1;)-.- 759.7375” --V(/)|"'|V(R. . . .R~)dR. . . m»

The density of states was calculated provided that It I l and I!» V}:— )) 1 [75] a '
. . . , is
om =65.) "(3&1)“o."exp(— End) 041.0%)-

where D-3/2(x) is the function of a parabolic cylinder. lhe'electric conductivity
of a non-Dehye completely ionized plasma was calculated in [761 by a model similar
to (2.75). In this case He in (2.75) was assused equal to zero and the correction
to the length of the free path related to reflection of electrons from the edges
of authorized zones was not taken into account; nevertheless the results 0: [76]
are in satisfactory agreement with experimental results in the range I‘ < 0.3.

We note that the Poisson distribution function for NV) and the corresponding
variables 9(8) and 3c should be used in some cases (when the condition n >> 1 is
violated) for an imperfect plasma instead of the Gaussian distribution function
of potential and the density of states and the value a: corresponding to it.

In concluding the given section. let us briefly discuss the existing concepts of
electron transfer in vapors of metals at subcritical pressures and near-critical
densities. The indicated range. let us call it the transition range, is character-
ized by qualitative variation of the electron properties of metals upon variation
of density near the critical range. Experimental investigations of the transition
zone were conducted on mercury [77-80] and cesium [7, 81-83]. It is shown that
variation of electron properties and metal-dielectric transition occur rather
smoothly in mercury while a Mott type transition probably occurs in cesium [84].
the transition zone is roughly divided by density into two zones similar in prop-
erties to a metal and to a plasmauthe gaseous zone. Model determination of the

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interface of these zones in cesium vapors was conducted in [84] and in this case
the experimental data of (81-83] were used. The substance is a dense plasma in

the gaseous zone. The use of precise approaches to describe its properties is dif-
ficult since interaction between the plasma components is strong. Minimum values
of conductivity of metal vapors on the subcritical isobar are apparently achieved
in the gaseous zone. The models [85-87] are essentially oriented toward a part of
the gaseous zone sufficiently remote from the critical point (0.10kr < p < 0.4pkx)
with low degree of ionization, where neutral interaction has the main effect on

the thermodynamic properties of the plasma. Interaction of charged particles with
neutral particles and between each other under these conditions without affecting
the thermodynamic characteristics of the medium, significantly shifts the ioniza-
tion equilibrium, i.e., it is reflected in the properties of the electron transfer
in the plasma. Separation of electrons into free electrons, i.e., those partici-
pating in the transport mechanism of charge transfer and localized electrons, is
carried out by different methods in the models of [85-87]. In [85] the localized
electrons are described by “fluctuations'--formations occurring due to localization
of electrons on fluctuations of density; localization is interpreted in the sense
of (2.75) in [87]. Selection between the indicated approaches cannot be made due
to the paucity of experimental data.

2.5. Effective Transfer Ccafficients of a Hulticomponent Imperfect Plasma

When designing devices in which the working substance is in the plasma state, one
must solve the problem of h-at shielding of the surfaces touching the plasma. The
thermal fluxes generated by the plasma are determined by the profiles of component
concentrations in the plasma space. Consequently, when investigating heat trans-
fer of a multicomponent plasma with restricting surfaces in a gas-phase nuclear
reactor, in the channels of MED generators and behind the shock wave trailing af-
ter a spacecraft during its motion at hypersonic velocity in the atmosphere of a
planet, correct consideration of multicomponent diffusion is important. In the
indicated cases the plasma should be considered as a chemically equilibrium and
quasi-neutral plasma, i.e., one should use LTR approximation and turn from inves-
tigation of the diffusion of components to investigation of the diffusion of chem-
ical elements (see (2.8)). Diffusive heat transfer described by effective coeffi-
cients of thermal conductivity in (2.7) has a significant effect on the convective
thermal flux and the gas-dynamic characteristics of plasma flow. The coefficients
of transport thermal conductivity (X') and shear viscosity (n) are also required
to close the system of gas-dynamic equations {2.1)-(2.S).

The definition and general propertis of effective transfer coefficients are dis-
cussed in the given section. A model is suggested for calculation of effective
transfer coefficients, shear viscosity coefficients and transport thermal conduc-
tivity of an imperfect plasma, by means of which the tables of values of the trans-
fer coefficients of a plasma of alkali metals, uranium and their mixtures were
calculated over a broad range of parameters (see chapter 5).

Formal determination of effective transfer coefficients of imperfect media by
phenomenological coefficients and investigation from general properties are pos-
sible by means of linear thermodynamics of irreversible processe by gradients
(88]. Effective transfer coefficients can also be determined by time correlation
functions on the basis of one of the versions of the theory of nonequilibrium

99

FOR*0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
POI Ol-T'ICIAI. USE ONLY

processes discussed in section 2.3. let us use the first approach as the most il-
lustrative and one leading most rapidly to the goal. Let us formulate the ex-
pression for production of entropy (6) of a nulticomponsnt imperfect plasma in mm
approximation, i.e., with respect to chemical elements (2]

| l 2”. |I I 30)
. ' ' ' . _.._‘ _ _ — —--
o _ -.. 7‘. av] _ .; I.(I V 1.8.) T "u 01‘ (2.76)

According to the second principle of thermodynamics ('1 1 0. Expression (2.76) was
found by the standard method [88, 2] when using the ohmomenological laws of con-
servation in the form of (LU-(2.5). u, =(du/ (k)....¢,w, is the specific chemical
potential of the element a, u - u(p, s. {q}. a). For transformation of (2.76) to
a more convenient form, let us substitute the Gibbs-Dyugem relation TV (ll/r) -

...- v,p‘— (IIJT) VT and the symmetrical tensor of viscous stresses in the form of

u
(2.9) into the given expression and let us use the condition 231.: 0 . then
eul

N.-I
6-- ‘ gnu—+3 l..lVr(|A.--n.)-—-ni—h’]-

(2.77)

g-(HVv-r nun.

The chemical element "electrons" whose charge per unit mass is re - -e/n¢ (the
remaining values of r. are equal to zero) is determined in (2.77);

'f -= ”Nam/ax, 1- 50/111,} —-_ll36;,IVV: 4' = ‘l'-.' 11h

.:

ha is the specific enthalpy of the chemical element. Let us rewrite (2.77):

0‘“ 2‘3““) 0 , here ii is fluxes and X1 is thermodynamic forces. The fluxes are
linear functions of thermodynamic fcrcesx 11 - (:1ka and thus:

in- §.a..XuX..‘ (2. 79)

an is the wenomsnological transfer coefficients of (2.78). 'lhe fluxes and ther-
modynamic forces in (2.77) are linearly independent of each other and consequently
a is a positively determined quadratic form that satisfies the silverster criterion,
according to which all the major minors of the matrix compiled from phenomenologi-
cal coefficients are negative. Another property ofaik is the symtrical or anti-
symtrical nature with respect to subscripts i and k in an isotropic medium-wan-
sager reciprocity relations [89]. The symutrical nature of (11* occurs in the

case if the parameters of state demted by subscripts i and k are at the same tine
even or odd functions of the velocities of all particles; the antisymtrical na-
ture occurs when parameters j i and )0; have different evenness [89). The

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reciprocity relations am also valid for linearly dependent fluxes and thermo-
dynamic forces [88].

The phenomenological transfer equations jg - 011mg generally link the fluxes and
thermodynamic forces of different tensor dimensionality. However, if 51 and xx
have different tensor dimensionality, the Descartes coeponents ji and X): are trans-
formed differently during transformations of rotation and reflection of the coor-
dinate system. It may be that the fluxes will not be dependent on all the thermo-
dynamic forces due to the properties of symmetry of the considered system. The
given statement is called the Curie principle [88]. The values of ii and X). of
different tensor dimensionality are unrelated to each other in an isotropic medium.
The result of the isotropic nature of the medium is that the values of an are
scalar; moreover, prediction of entropy in the form of [2.77] can be divided into
three terms--scalar oo, vector 01 and tensor 02, each of which is negative. In an
isotropic medium for case flow of a chemical element and q', we have:

N‘I
C
qt, a 11;”;— ga..[v.on.-—u.)——; '.

(2.79)

It is obvious from the meager reciprocity relations and the positive nature of
the vector term in production of entropy that “aw=“q-- “uh-"11m. ﬂoo>o and

a“ > 0; since ago/PH (see (2.11)), then A > o and the positive definition of
shear and volumetric viscosities follows from 00, 02 > 0.

Let us determine the effective diffusion coefficients and thermal conductivity of
a multicomponent imperfect plasma. Provided that the pressure in the plasma is
constant, let us express (Sq-(ua - un) by the gradients c. (let us disregard terms
of approximately Vi) and, having substituted the derived expression into (2.79).
we will have (Wu. - I'.)/0"Jl-.r...n.3W2):

u -| _
I, . é; D,,\7c.-I-DI vT—D‘EE‘:

I) )‘a p’; I): -— —-— ,
'5 T ”:11 u 7’ (2.30)
N.-—I
l: c 1
I). a: -— -n;:1T z a“.

In similar fashion for thermal flux:

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

N I

a" ' (Xv-MVT-I- 2“. kWh-4:9.

CHI

N '
l,- s 2' (hr-Mu},
N I. (2.81)

Formulas (2.80) and (2.81) are convenient when investigating the properties of
effective transfer coefficients.

Let us consider the consequence of the positive nature of production of entropy _ .
for a two-component mixture and let us introduce the notations ”-1, == “(l/”MIRA."
- - (h.- h.)l)_,.l.-_l. ll.” then ‘I'--' WT |-).;V¢', (the terms approximately 8‘ are
omitted for sinplicity). After substituting q' and i. into the expression for

(2.77) and after simple transformations using the condition of stability with re-
spect to diffusion [as]: ”g >_o, we find 11)., >1.D. . I: obviously follows

from (2.80) and (2.81) that 1.05.- _i,p_ 3 therefore,

(i- it) D. > L01" (2.82)

One can also ascertain the property of having a fixed sign of the effective dif-
fusion coefficient: -Dag > 0; DE has no specific value. The limiting relations
0201‘. p, c.) . o) . 0301‘. p, c, - l) - o are valid for the effective thermo-
diffusion coefficient, the law of the approach of DE to zero at c, + O, 1 depends
on the composition of the mixture, teuperature and pressure.

In the case of a mixture consisting of three or store chemical elements, clear re-
lations between the effect of transfer coefficients fron the condition 01 > 0 can-
not be found in general form. For exawle, for a three-element plasma a syn-latri-

cal positively specific matrix with the elements Mme-$0M”. corresponds
to the vector tern of production of entropy in the form of (2.77):

X n D D
A" -~ -1—,-'. An - = -,f’ "1+ fist: A» *-“ ~19»?!-
,, n' 9' or 0'
("131% I1" - -: I‘: l' ‘7. ll: Au '-* '7. ”1- '7..— P:3 (2.33)
l n n. u D
A“ u --; ( "19.1- It: I- ‘1'."||:+ 7'31: '|- 7.5 )4)

Calculating the determinant or the major minors of matrix (2.83) and the thermo-

dynamics derivatives HR in some approximation, one can find the relations in the
fern of inequalities between the effective diffusion coefficients and therml

conductivity-d. Investigation of a matrix of type (2.83), corresponding to G1

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the form of (2.76). and of the relationships between the effective diffusion
and thermal conductivity coefficients is apparently infeasible since the latter
are expressed by Dab: Dz, D§, "a and u: (cowared (2.81) and (2.80)).

The Onsager reciprocity relations for phenomenological transfer coefficients also
place specific restrictions on the effective diffusion coefficients. The matrices
of phenomenological coefficients cab - a. “b - l and Deb - D are obviously related
to each other (see (2.82)): D . -au, :1 =' -Du’ : since a = 5, then

M." 4; 7:). (2.84)
Calculating the thermodynamic derivatives in the matrix 1: and setting the corre-
sponding elements of the left and right sides of (2.84) equal to each other, one
can find the relations between the effective diffusion coefficients in the form of
equalities.

The thermodynamics of irreversible processes, linear in gradients, does not yield
a formula for calculation of transfer coefficients since it is phenomenological
theory. The theory of nonequilibrium processes (section 2.3) links the transfer
coefficients to the corresponding correlation functions. calculation of Which is
difficult for an imperfect plasma. Let us formulate the model approach to calcu-
lation of the effective transfer coefficients of a multielement imperfect plasma
(90]. based on the chemical model of a plasma and used in calculation of the tables
of values of effective coefficients given in Chapter 5. The mass fluxes of chemical
elements are determined by the mass fluxes of the plasma components (see (2.6)).
Let us introduce the expressions for the mass flux of a component and also of a
convective thermal flux which follow from tun cxrzsssion for production of entropy
formulated with respect to components and the Curie principle for an isotropic
plasma and which coincide with the expressions used in kinetic theory [36] in ap-
proximation of an ideal plasma (p - const):

N
I. - 3'.- m. z Dnmﬁ, .. I): VT

I I _|
N ”I
l _ . 1 _L
N

a -l
.0, . [2 .1, :.__ "‘1‘! I”
(I, P. VLI-I'I— P (m, L E P ’ ’

In (2.85) n - in, h; is the enthalpy per unit mass of component i, Du is multi—
conponent diffusion coefficients (mm). D}: is thermodiffusion coefficients and we
subsequently disregard the last term in d) (approximately 9'). The chemical po-

tential per unit ms of plasma component. according to the chemical model, is ex-
pressed in the form x,..v.(k)'/m.)lun. I 1:”) | MI; and the value ((1‘) is related
to the statsum of component i (89] and A“ is the contribution due to interaction
which was discussed in chapter 1. not us omit Au; and d- (the opposite case is

considered in (90)), then the equations of chemical equi ibrium can be written in

 

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

u.“
"ideal" form I. - I] 3:“K.U. P) and in LTR x1 - x1 (c1...cN.-1, p.’r) ({xi} is
I

the set of relative concentrations of basic components, uit is the stochionetric

coefficient, K1”, 9) is the constant of equilibriun of the i-th reaction and x1 1
- ni/n): the first term in dj is equal to VII . Let us express ij by Von and VT.
using the e?uations of chemical equilibrium in ideal form and the function x: =

- xﬁp, '1', cal), and then let us substitute ij into dj. (15 into ik and q (2.85)
into (2.6) and q, after which, having grouped the terms with identical gradients,
we find the effective coefficients of thermal conductivity for the convective

thermal flux and diffusion for the mass flux of chemical element (2.7) and (2.8)
(compare (2.81) [3. 4]:

‘ ' N I "I I! I ( d")
A E I, "-m, ”x, 37 m.- ”I” -L
LI I

 

 

gl‘. "n ("'I) ”1 h")! 71 n" I
., .1 m M ”I" L 3,".- l I: R. x
I I ‘ ' '
N.| I
_I_ 9:. .39.". 2'1) -
/ 1, 01 )y ‘1') I “L" I: (01‘ my.) .
”W a ”1 N H u d l (2.86
l. -_'. L 13-h, L Ill")',\" v " ""- ("l‘l') _'
I..I P I I 4I-‘I 1' 0" "”5”:
mb' .
_ ._' 2,,u(_"s_) ,
"I: "a I. r 34 ,
u N 10'
i’ _ 2 Kb. "'1" Ema/WK) ' ["1" l '
|..| pp I ' I
N . ”i" ll 0‘
I) ’ .: 2 "1'“, ..'l_ "‘II)IIlI2 ' l" -..£) -'
I L, . ° 0 IV) '4 (0‘5 7.7.1.0“.
A!
I 0
I): -- 2 m_u,, :- II'IDII'I :7 (27:4) ' i'
M I P'PII
I... ,'
I, 13!! (3"!) ."t
24 z, "r w ) '"I '
I I "

N
n: .g’, 3 u..m.m,v./w.
l.l- l ’

It is obvious that the thermal flux q and the effective coefficients of thermal

conductivity are dependent 0n the level of the energy reading since an ubiquity
is contained in hi.

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The "effective transfer coefficients” were repeatedly introduced in the literature
to simplify the real multicomponent diffusion and heat transfer. Two methods of
taking multicomponent diffusion into account are usually employed. In the first
uethod the fluxes of different ocmponents are expressed by the thermodynamic forces
(specifically, the concentration graidents) with proportionality coefficients--
multicomponent diffusion ccefficients HID and in the other method they are expressed
by the Stefan-Maxwell method, and on the other hand the concentration gradients are
expressed by the fluxes with proportionality coefficients, called resistance coef-
ficients. Discussion of “hydrodynamic approximation" for multicomponent diffusion
in the Stefan-Maxwell form is contained in monograph [119]. The Stefan-Maxwell re-
lations have the simplest form in the case when the first approximation is used in
expansion of the distribution function by Sonin polynomials--thsn the resistance
coefficients are equal to the reciprocal binary diffusion coefficients and thermo-
diffusion coefficient is equal to zero. The resistance coefficients are expressed
in higher approximations [120] by determinants containing 9:3 similar to hKD.

simplification of multicomponent diffusion in mixtures was suggested in [121, 1221.
The concept of the diffusion of chemical elements in an equilibrium mixture of two
elements-~uranium and hydrogen--was introduced in [122]. The effective diffusion
coefficients in a "frozen" flow, which were calculated in the boundary layer. were
introduced in [123] and approximate expressions for these coefficients were dis-
cussed in [123] as a function of the molecular mass and diffusion properties of
different components. Multicomponent diffusion in the Stefan-Maxwell form in chem-
ically equilibrium flows was considered in [124, 125] when the gradients of compon-
ent concentrations are expressed by the gradients of chemical elements using laws
of effective masses and the current and external potential difference were assumed
equal for the plasma.

A description of multicomponent diffusion [2-4] is used in this paper when the
fluxes of basic elements are expressed by the sum of fluxes of the components par-
ticipating in transfer of a given element and the conditions of local thermodynam-
ic equilibrium are fulfilled at each point that permit the gradients of component
concentrations to be expressed by the gradients of the fraction of chemical ele-
ments. One must have urn, of, hi, equilibrium composition of a plasma and deriva-
tives of basic components with respect to T and c. to calculate the effective
transfer coefficients with respect to (2.86). The values of T and ca were deter-
mined numerically on a compute" and calculation of the composition and h1 is dis-
cussed in Chapter 1. Model calculation of HKD and DI was carried out on the basis
of a system of classical kinetic equations, the collision integrals in which con-
sist of Ix--the elar ic collision integral that describes the collision of neutrals
with each other and neutrals with charges, Inuo-the integral of inelastic colli-
sions and Iy--the integral of elastic collisions that characterizes the interac-
tion of charged particles. The integral of charged particle collisions was selec—
ted in Boltsman form (Iy for a weakly imperfect plasma is considered in section

2. 2) and the charge-charge interaction potential was assunsd to be Debye. Theo-
retical substantiation of the indicated selection of the collision integral 1:
could not be made, but comparison of electric conductivity (which can be expressed
by MKD [36]) of an imperfect cesium plasma. calculated by means of the given model
kinetic equation, to known experimental results shows satisfactory agreement [65].
The coincidence between the values of the shear viscosity coefficient of an in-
perfect single-component coulomb system calculated by the molecular dynamics

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F". ”It?“ IAI. It". "ﬁts

method [53] by formula (2.51) and by the values determined from solution of the
corresponding model kinetic equation. is also good. Thus, the coulomb effects not
taken into account in 13°! in Boltsman form apparently make a small nmerical con-
tribution to the kinetic coefficients of an imperfect plasma. Consequently. the
use of a model system of kinetic equations to calculate the transfer coefficients
of an iaperfect plasma is feasible.

2.6. Method of Calculating the Transfer Coefficients of an Iaperfect Plasma.
Discussion of the Results of Calculation

The method of calculating the transfer coefficients of an imperfect plasma whose
values are presented in the tables is outlined in the given section. The analysis
made in sections 2.1-2.5 and discussion of experimental data (section 4.5) sub-
stantiate the use of the model system of kinetic equations to calculate the trans-
fer coefficients of an imperfect plasma. The collision integral of ICU, which is
pointed out above, consists of three terms determined by elastic collisions of
charged particles with each other, by elastic collisions of neutral and charged
particles and by inelastic collisions of particles. The integral of elastic col-
lisions of charged particles is selected in Boltsman form with Debye interaction
potential between particles (see section 2.5). The integral of elastic collisions
of neutral particles and neutral: with charges is also selected in Boltsman form.
Processes related to chemical transformations of particles-~dissociation. ioniza-
tion and so on, processes of excitation, recharging, transfer of excitation and so
on are generally contained in the integral of inelastic collisions. Information
about inelastic collisions and collisions of excited particles with each other is
very limited; there are rather reliable data on recharging of some atoms on their
own ions [91] and electron scattering on excited atoms [65]. Solution of the Ku
system with inelastic collision integral is cumbersome and moreover the convergence
of calculated values of transfer coefficients with an incnase of the nunber of
orthogonal polynomials used in their calculation has not been investigated. Thus,
all inelastic processes with the exception of recharging of an atom on its own ion
was disregaer due to two circunstances: the paucity of information about colli-
sions of excited particles and inelastic collisions and the complexity of expres-
sions for the transfer coefficients with regard to inelastic collisions-min specif-
ic calculations of the transfer properties of working substances presented in the
tables (5.1-5.7): it was assumed that excited particles interact elastically with
each other as do particles in the ground state. The simplifications enuerated
above permit one to expand the anisotropic part of the particle distribution func-
tion by Sonin polynomials. The dependence of the transfer coefficients on the
nunber of Sonin polynomials used in their calculation was investigated in many
papers [71] , where it was established that the convergence of multicouponent dif—
fusion and thermodiffusion coefficients by which the effective transfer coeffi-
cients of plasma viscosity and also the thermal conductivity of nonionized gases
are determined, is very rapid. Since ambiguity in the collision cross-sections of
the plasma particles of working substances comprises no less than 50 percent, it
is sufficient for practical calculations to use the expressions for multicomponent
diffusion and viscosity coefficients in first order by Sonin polynomials and ther-
modiffusion and thermal conductivity coefficients in second order. Spitzer asymp-
totics (35] of shear viscosity and transport thermal conductivity coefficients in
the range of complete ionization was provided by "correction” of couloab interac-
tion cross sections. The convergence of transfer coefficients-melectric

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conductivity and theme-EMF that detersine electric current is slow for a partial-
ly ionized plasma. Therefore, the Frost interpolation method (2.97) was used to
calculate conductivity and the them-EMF [71].

Let us write the formulas for the transfer coefficients of a plasma used in the
calculations. The thermodiffusion coefficients of the cowonents have the form

[36]

0 0|
(.3, l," 0
I0
I.“ I.” 1,

u: .. - P2. .3319”. 9_ o (2.97)
5" | If,“ ml '
I.,'," L};

In (2.87) the values of L1) are the quadratic matrices of N-th order vith elements:

can . w T 1.1, 1 gum, . ~.
Lu —0. I.” - 0.64- -(-ﬁ;' I L Eﬁ;) l:/_- I'

l
' RH

\

I‘” . 1; 1' v ..‘:279.(!:‘¢-’;.. 3)
" ' r .J (m. I who"

in
a. . 'r “Ho-“i, .) . _
. .I,( --—--x,\' -.... .-__. ‘ . ;
l“ , l, ‘ I ‘1'” I MI) i", # I (20 88)
lo '"I on II “If . 1'
. - -- , ; [_ - __.-. ”.0.“ _
Ill ‘ I; l A. P x

 

-‘ 3.1.0.6103? l 6,25“: I “will... l- 013.0). 11:.) ‘
x _. . . --..__. — ---.. ---—-_._—..
.L ""1 l "'l)‘ 3‘1!
V I

T u m .
u __lﬂa_!__ . r_ -__ ._ .
L., ._ 0,64 “,7 Tu. -I Mum, “3.7.. 3H,, 4A.,I : H-

Here “011 and A1 are the binary diffusion coefficient and thermal conductivity of
a "pure gas" of particles of the i-th variety

3 N'- I6 I
-_ _.______- A .,__-_ , (2.89)
" m ”INH'" ' ‘ 4 [mm

me: thermal conductivity of the plasma is determined by expressions (2.88) and
(2.89) [36]
1}," 1.2; o
‘1‘]. lb. 1.
1' ”a J’ -_‘.'.!.__"..
o
‘92 ”2|
L” I."

(2.90)

 

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The viscosity of the mixture was calculated by the formula [36] :

"u I.
. I, 0
" In”!
.’ N 2 RT . m. .
[I _-, -‘.. l‘ ‘ __‘_'..!-- --— -l| ‘|~0,6—-- An‘;
u m (II I ml) P9" I"
.;2
21'], R, -— e , ;
llu- "7:11;,— 795; I' Onaﬁlll H’ I-

In this case

5 IT

. ._. .—___—_

“I _ 1.”
8 us.

the nulticomponent diffusion coefficients are determined in the f<

I [I -K"
"I - "1;.2"‘m. IRUI '
1‘ If", I. 4‘
K” (I. K.;= ‘55-! “'72-’73' ‘1‘].
In
where K13 and K“- are the expressions:
0 . . . Km: Kl.e-.' . . . KI

Kn ( ”INK, LI - ~ -K" |:l I K,-l.l‘|-I . . .K,-
Kll.l.l - - -I\”I:a I KnlJfl - - ~Kj|l

KN.) . . .19.}. Km; . . .o
. ' . IJ ‘ UJ)‘ tl.2)'
,1. “-22-: w +9331; .‘.“——: "”3537 (MS)
9 ' ' u - ° 0 -

Here 9%"). was determined by the interaction cross sections of the i-th and j-th
particles

mm m

«u -.__

|
ll‘2(s| m‘l— 7

”3"” (—1 )m) ° "v“"oti'dv;
21m”

”4-"; 7'
ll-l "0

 

(2.96)

0(6, v) is the differential scattering cross-section, v is the relative particle
velocity, v - an/zk'r, "ij is the reduced mass and p is a constant that character-
izes the interaction of varieties i. and j. The values of $21 " , tabulated for
different interaction potentials (Table 2.1), were used in cllculating the plasma
transfer coefficients.

Table 2.1. men of Potentials Used in Calculations

_. . _. . -. . . .. . _. ‘_._—_.--_—_. _—.—..—_-—.-_—._

 

 

"algal-ea l (5)1.“ l "mu“ J Jun :21":
Jlrnepaa )lmnu‘u (5) ‘ _p_ '3 _p_ ‘ p. C III]
1K!) "(I )I
IZu-nu-unul (6) --u' ‘ I “,1!" 7cm (2w) 0. e. 1 It)"
IlMupnuIIm-uum‘l (7) " 80'1“)", 1, 0 [WI]
3xrmmruuunmmm(8) "¢"P(' VIP) a, p |l05|
I-ixpuuugunumuuﬂ (9) l t (0") "P ('4’?) e, 9 “0|, ”5'
Mn. -(10) clurl *2» (In-ml» - a. , :02. I03
'" - 2mm no w»: " ’ ' '
a rxp(-- n," "rm/2: c. n,. I, ([06]
Key:
1. Potential 6. Power
2. Form 7. Polarization
3. Parameters 8. Exponential
4. Literature 9. shielded
5. Lenard-Johns 10. Horse

The parameters of the interaction potentials of neutral atone and molecules are
presented in Table 2.2 and the interaction of neutral particles with charged

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
N). OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particles was described by polarization potential with values of polarizability
presented in Table 2.3. The resonance levels or electron energies of stone and
molecules required to estimate polarizability are presented in the same table:

 

u;-- 22‘ .('%)u ... ‘__!2_ '

En - 5. . (Ea - 50'

‘0): is the transition oscillator force 0 + k and the oscillator force for resonance
transition was seemed equal to unity in the estimates. The estimated values or
polarizability are noted in Table 2.3 by the symbol *. In those cases when the
interaction potentials of neutral particles are unknown, the interactions between
then were assumed dispersion and the then Van der Heals constants were estimated by

the London formula (91]:

aiglgiﬂ

c -- .
u 2(AE. ME.)

The parameters of biatonic molecules were taken from survey [98) .

Recharging must be taken into account in the collision integrals for odd values of
3‘. s).[ :th resonance recharging cross-sections were calculated by asymptotic
eory 9 x

"R: I s
_.-—-—‘ —- ——'AR =oe28l
Q 2 . u l a, ( J

and the potential of resonance exchange interaction is equal to (in atomic units)
A A’exl‘ (" 3;)?" " eI‘M—Rn.
Parameters A and y are presented in Table 2.4.

Calculations of electric conductivity and them-EH? of a plasma were made by the
formulas [71):

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR M'FINAI NSF ONI V

Table 2.2. Parameters of Interaction Potentials of Neutral Particles

Ila-mack Ina [lacunae

‘w Irv—Tl“ T;:':|'T“T"_“

 

 

 

 

 

I -.II,
II,’_II'
H.—h
ll: —LIII

-U
E:%:'

I
II LIII
II II

I "IN Fl)
5 “60]
II?

79.I

77.4
I14!“ —I.)
898

693

I 786(- --I)
LS3” - I)
2338

I787

2793

IIS?

I'IIIS
HI.”

5'!!!)

LII

'f- )(II

I'.’III'I( 3)

L’III5

I H39
III.“
2778

882

'IIIIIII

law

I 62

I‘ll

.‘I I

III [4
56M

I3 ‘6

I:ﬂNNQNN&OéO¢NGNNN-ﬁ.

d-uhcbde.ehcb-..-30L.O

lﬁ
7372

I.40I

0° 69:

I.I97
I 2I8

:ceoco

as

III'JI

III-6

'I 55")
I2III
'22I
I I7
I“
!.ﬂn
‘252
I59 '
2908
Um
3|
2”

l0?
l0?

[ml

I06]
ll . I09|

III5|

II-I|
”5|
“5|
ItIIII, l|0|
||l0|

 

IIIII

|IIII, ||7|
|Il7|

|II7|

Note. In those cases when the literature is not indicated, the parameters of the
potential were estimated by combination rules [113] or the constants of Van der
Haals interaction were calculated by the known polarizabilitiee of the particles
(Table 2.3) and resonance energy on the basis of the London for-Illa [91].

MW
1 . Interaction 3 .
2 . Potential 4 .

Atomic unit
Literature

v,--- 202’w.+ va;.L(z.)n.—f;-('—‘,§:-)In "II -I- (JEN

The values or the correction coefficients yam are presented in Table 2.5 I93).

(2.97)

Let us discuss the transport electron scattering cross-sections on neutrals used
in the calculations. To describe elastic electron scattering on a hydrogen atom

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

Table 2.3. Polarizability of Atoms and Molecules and Resonance mutation mergy

[68]
l'ISPnuu— IIIIIJIK-JCIIU IIIJ,IK.ILII|

u...(2)I ”I IMI MI WIIWI 652|243°I353°I13v

Ali._ . I 375 I 0879' 0592' 0400' 0735' MIG I .06“ I .OSJQI 1360

O
Polarizability was estimated in the appmxination f - l for the resonance level
(t is the oscillator force)

Key:
1. Particle 2. Atomic units

Table 2.4. Parameters that Determine Resonance Recharging Cross-Section [112]

3'1““
II M Na K (4

y ILOIII 629 .65 I 665 I 5:16
A IzoaIsa I74 I52 I39

Key:

1. Atom, ion

Table 2.5. correction Coetficients for Conductivity and mam-EMF

 

 
   

v, IsI Hi I owl JMI .9225
I:“ J 2121I.IIIII .smI 32on I

and molecule and also of all alkali metals except cesium, data systenized in [94]
were used. These data can also be used for the reason that they are presented in

numerical form with small division by electron energy. Elastic electron scatter-
ing on cesium atone was studied more reliably in [95]. The electron scattering

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cross sections on molecules of alkali metals and their hydrides were calculated
by polarization potentials. The electron scattering cross-section on a uranium
atom was approximated by estimation [96].

Let us present the expression for coefficient Xx [5], corresponding to q in the
form of (2.85) without regard to of (see (2.11)):

“I I
1' ..-. I: X (All, RT) ;

N

- N
0 cl '2‘}. (I‘d/l.) g. (uﬂtl — "ll", A”)

(2.98)

All». maiL’ﬁﬂil'L ;

«11'

16 ﬁlm
-— - ——--!——-uoﬁﬁ;dr.

A " a. .
,1 5 «arm. I In»

Here m is the number of chemical reactions in the plasma and Ke(T, P) is the con-
stant of the e-th chemical reaction whose equation is written in “ideal“ form.

1 p-ﬂﬂwmlu

      

_ __l__ .-l.- -.—l—

,0 m 20 mu

Figure 2.17. Dependence of Viscosity of Helium Plasma on Temperature:
l--results of authors; 2--data of [93]

The values of n, 1', xx, 3 and a of a lithium, sodium, potassium, cesium and uran-
ium plasma and K + U and K + H mixtures were calculated by the formulas presented
above; the effective transfer coefficients (Tables 5.6-5.7) were also calculated
for a plasma of mixtures over a wide range of temperatures, pressures and frac-
tions of chemical elements in mixtures. Comparison of the transfer coefficients
calculated by the described method to experimental data is discussed in section
4.5. Comparison to calculated data for a weakly imperfect argon plasma [91] in
viscosity and total thermal conductivity (1' + Ax) shows good agreement (see Fig-
ures 2.12-2.16) the same as for multicomponent diffusion coefficients of a helium
plasma [93]. The comparisons=were made for the transfer coefficients of a hydro-
gen plasma and other substances (97] which show that the method used to calculate
the transfer coefficients of an imperfect plasma (see Tables 5.1-5.5) in the range

113

FOR 0FFKJAI.US£IMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of weak imperfection yields calculated results that agree with known data. slight
divergences are related to different methods of calculating the conpositioa and
different types of data on elementary processes in a plasma (Figures 2.11-2.22).

All
Win-K)
(1)

 

Figure 2.18. Dependence of Thermal conductivity of Hydrogen Plasma on
Temperature at p - 0.1 MPa: 1--results of authors: 2--
data of [118]

1. H/(n-K)

A ’ a. -.. ._ ._ ...___ ‘.

   

0 L__L_L_#
2 J 4 7, 10

Figure 2.19. Dependence of Thermal Conductivity of Hydrogen Plasma on
Temperature at p = 0.1 HPa: l--resu1ts of authors: 2--
data of [97)

Key:
1. w/(m-K)

The electric conductivity of a plasma of alkali metals was calculated in [99, 100].
Comparisons of calculations of the electric conductivity of a cesium plasma to the
results of [99, 100] at pressures of 1 and lO HPa are presented in Figure 2.23, a.
In [100] the calculations were made only for pressure of 1 HPa. The differences
in calculations of the given paper from [100] are related to the difference in the
methods of calculating the composition of the plasma since the calculation was
carried out by Ekker-weizel theory in [100]. which exaggerates the reduction of

114

I1)! OﬂﬂWCJAI.IJSEZ(MVLY
roa omcw. use ONLY ‘3'

L A x

BMn-K
(1)

1,!

0,6

0,5

0,2

 

-—L_l.—.L_—l—_L
o 2 6 a a max

Figure 2.20. Dependence of Thermal Conductivity of Argon Plasma on Ten-
perature at p a 1 ma: l~-resu.lts of authors: 2—-data or [91]

1. N/(In-K)

 

Figure 2.21. Viscosity of Argon Plasma at p - 1 MPa: 1--tesu1ta of
authors: 2 and 3--data of [91]

   

.. L--.’ . 1.x.

.I ..L
0,? 0,5 0,60,“ ." (3,,38 (1)

Figure 2.22. Transport Cross-Section of Electron Scattering on Atoms of
Alkali metals

’3
l . Electron volts

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pigure 2.23. Dependence of Electric Conductivity of Cesiun Plasma on Tul-
pcrature at Pressure of p - 1 an (a) and lo “Pa (in): 1--
results of authors: 2--data of [99]; 3--Spitzer coulomb cal-
ponent of electric conductivity of plasna: 4--data of [100]

ionization potential and accordingly electron concentration. A similar difference
exists with the calculations of [99], where the composition of the plasma was cal-
cualted by Debye theory in a canonical group and the degree of ionization was also
exaggerated. This is illustrated especially clearly in Figure 2.23, b at tapere-
turea of (5-7)-1o3 K, where imperfection is greatest. In the high-temperature
range, the differences in the calculations with the results of [99] are related
to the different asymptotics of the expressions of electric conductivity of a con-
pletely ionized plasma in the weakly imperfect range (I‘ + 0) since the calculating
formulas of [99] have no Spitzer asynptotics (see section 2.2).

The results of calculation of the present paper are compared to experimental data
in Chapter 4.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF GASES AND PLASMA

Roscow TEPIDE‘IZICHESHYE SVOYSTVA mum SR3) GAZOPAZNOGO ‘1th mm in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 119-146

[Chapter 3 from the book "'Ihermophysical Properties of Working Media of the Gas-
Phase Nuclear Reactor", by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor' L'vovich Iosilev-
skiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna Runnetsova, Vladimir Ivamvich
Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Iappo, Boris Nikolayevich Lomakin, Georgiy Alekseve-
vich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevich Son andVladimir Yevgen'vevich Fortov, Atomizdat,
1,800 copies, 304 pages]

[Text] 3.1. Transfer of Radiation in a Gas-Phase Nuclear Reactor. Elementary
Processes of Absorption in a Plasma of Working Media

The fissionable material ina gas-phase nuclear reactor is in a plasma state at

temperature several tens of thousands of degrees and pressure of several tens of
MPa. The main mechanism of energy transfer from fissionable material to the work-
ing substance is radiant heat transfer. For this reason one of the most important
problems occurring in solving that of the transfer of fission energy of nuclear
fuel to the working gas by radiation is investigation of the properties of a uran-
ium plasma and the gases which can be used as a working substance. A knowledge of
the spectral absorption coefficients and the radiant thermal conductivity coeffi-
cients over a broad range of temperatures and pressures permits one to calculate
the temperature fields of the uranium jet and working substance of a gas-phase
nuclear reactor.

As pointed out in the introduction, alkali metals, their eutectic nixtures and a1-
so the mixtures with substances having ionization potentials can be considered as
promising mrking substances for different nuclear power plants. Among the latter
the most studied are the properties of hydrogen [174]; therefore, the properties
of mixtures containing hydrogen [9] and also the optical properties of uranium and
its mixtures with alkali metals [10] are investigated in the given chapter in ad-
dition to pure substances [5, 6) whose optical properties for a nunber of param-'
stars were considered earlier [7-8].

The nmber of components that absorb radiation is high and is considerably depen-
dent on the range of temperatures and pressures. In a uranium plasma this is
neutral uranium, its ions of different multiplicity factor and an electron gas:
a plasma of an alkali metal will also have a similar corponent composition.

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mixtures of uraniun with alkali metals contain components typical for uranium
and alkali metals according to the percentage content of each substance in the
mixture. A litmus-hydrogen plasma has a more diverse composition: mlecules
of Liz, Lin and Hz. lithium and hydrogen atoms, positive and negative lithium and
hydrogen ions and electrons. Potassim-hydrogen and sodium-hydrogen plasmas have
similar composition.

let us enumerate the elementary processes which determine the spectral absorption
coefficient: 1) free-free transitions in the ion and neutral atom fields that
determine the absorption of radiation in the infrared region when the plasma is
ionized to a sufficient degree, 2) bound-free transitions corresponding to photo-
ionization from the ground and excited states of atoms and ions both positive and
negative and 3) bound-bound transitions mich determine the striated molecular and
linear spectrum of atoms and ions.

The population of named elementary absorption mechanisms on specific spectral sec-
tions for each temperature and pressure yield the total absorption coefficient of
the plasma, complexly dependent on the wave nuber of the photon v, cm'l. ihe
Rosseland mean and the coefficient of radiant thermal conductivity and also the
mean Planck absorption coefficient--required data to calculate the degree of black-
ness of the plasma and of the temperature fields in a gas-phase neuclearreactor--
are determined by the spectral absorption coefficient.

The radiant thermal conductivity coefficients of a plasma are determined by the
know: formula [ll]

lg: %al~'l", (3.1)

where a is a Stefan-Boltzman constant and in is the Rosseland mean from the length
of the free path of radiation lv - lql which is determined by averaging by the
Planck function Bv:

"5 .m .m
.j I.- -n.- '4!v/‘- ﬂ. '-dv. (3.2)
’ 5

Table 3.1. Dependence of Spectral Range of Calculating the Radiant Thermal
Conductivity Coefficient on Temperature, 103 curl

. ._.___-_ _—_———-——

  
   

05 SH 7 II 7 l0 6
5 I. I. :Hi 27 2 43.8 no 69, 6 84
In NI I02 I40 I75 2w

 
    

 

The spectral absorption coefficient Kv is determined by the set of elementary ab-
sorption processes and is a complex function of frequency. temperature, pressure

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and couponent composition of the mixture. If one goes to the dimensionless vari-
able u - be In in the range in the nmerator of (3.2), then

I a":
u £(u)R(u)du, (3.3)

where Mu) is the universal weight function expressed by the derivative of the
Planck function in temperature. The value of R(u) has a maximum at u - 4. In
practical calculations the frequency range of integration is limited. The range
of values of u at which am) is sufficiently high and the contribution to la is
significant can be determined by the inequality 0.5 i u i 10; therefore. to calcu-
late the Rosseland mean one must know the spectral absorption coefficient of radi-
ation over a wide spectral range whose boundaries are dependent on temperature
Table 3.1). The spectral range that makes a significant contribution to the coef-
ficient of radiant thermal conductivity expands significantly as temperature in-
creases. According to the boundaries presented in the table, the spectral absorp-
tion coefficient was calculated in the range of wave numbers from 5-102 to 3-105
cm‘1 when calculating the radiant thermal conductivity coefficient for temperatures
: 40,000 K. The elementary mechanisms of absorption which were taken into account
when calculating the spectral absorption coefficient and the radiant thermal con-
ductivity coefficient are considered in detail in the following sections.

3.2. Deceleration Absorption on Ions and Atoms

A process inverse to bremstrahlung of electrons in fields of ions and atoms makes
the main contribution to absorption with an adequate degree of ionization in the
infrared region of the spectrum. According to Kramers theory [12] the deceleration
absorption coefficient in an ionized gas is

2
g u 4 2n 'I. If
tK" a: --. ___'_) ri-nlnlg'
3 Ilmll' mm (3.4)

The Gaunt correction factor 9 is determined by the ratio of distances of long and

short collisions and for a low-temperature plasma (2ncv < up, where up is the
plasma frequency)

._V_3‘_ -2. -.I.. 2.x r
g.. " In r ,n W(c)~o,7e..

(3.5)
where C is an Euler constant.
This expression follows from the fact that the rate of energy loss by bremstrah-

lung from the unit volume is proportional to the correlation function of the elec-
tric field in dipole approximation [11]

do 2 :‘c . ‘
<4: > ‘ 35,;5;<"-('- l)"-(t'. 0). (3.6)

119

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0PM“. USE ONLY

while the Fourier componentr. of this correlator are determined by the longitudinal
dielectric permeability cum), where u - 2ﬁcv is the frequency of the electric
field:

(E(r, «new, a» mm 1’5. lmi T,'(To')‘]°("' — u’)6(r r). ‘3'”

The presence of ion correlations during electron scattering on ions makes a small
correction to the correlator of noninteracting ions [12] at least for a wekaly in-
perfect plasma. For this reason calculations of deceleration absorption were made
by formula (3.4).

Ionization of the alkali metal occurs in a mixture of an alkali metal with a sub-
stance having hie-h ionization potential and the radiation absorption on neutral
atoms of the nonionized material is significant. Therefore, deceleration absorp-
tion in a field of the hydrogen atom in the infrared and visible regions of the
a;_.tr'um must be taken into account in mixtures containing hydrogen. The absorp-
tion cross-section with free-free electron transitions in the field of a hydrogen
atom was calculated in [13, 14] and in some later comunications (see survey (15])-
A cross-section [14] found by means of wave func lions of the free electron in a
static Hartree field of a hydrogen atom was used in the given paper. The photo-
absorption cross-section with free-free transitions in the field of a hydrogen '
molecule was taken from [16]. where it was calculated by means of asymptotic wave
functions. Free-free transitions were considered for mixtures containing up to

50 percent alkali metal and for pure alkali metals and in field of neutral atoms
of an alkali metal since their concentration is maintained at a sufficiently high
level over a wide temperature range (except the very highest). The contribution
to total absorption tram this mechanism becomes comparable to other deceleration
processes in the infrared and visible regions of the spectrum. Calculation of the
deceleration absorption cross—sections on atoms of an alkali metal used in the
given paper is presented in [17].

3.3. Photoioniration of Atoms, Ions and Holecules

Photoionization of atoms is significant in the absorption spectrum for all mixtures
and at all the considered temperatures. Photoionization of an alkali metal from
the ground and excited states is of important significance to tanperatures on the
order of 15,000 K in the visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the spectrum and
photoionization of hydrogen from excited states is important at higher temperatures.

The absorption coefficient determined by photoionization of atoms as a function of
v is expressed by the formula [18]

Kt, —~ ‘0.1(V)i'.aﬂl;( —k‘../h1').
o 2,! (3.3)

where N is the concentration of absorbing atoms, Enl is the energy level with
quantum numbers n and 1 calculated from the ground state of the atom, 9nl is the
statistical weight of the level, Q is the statistical sun of the atom and am (v)
is the photoionization cross-section of level Enl-

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Smation in expression (3.8) is carried out at the given value of v for all
energy levels that meet the condition I - Enl < v (I is the ionization potential
of the atom).

Coulomb interaction of particles leads to the occurrence of a random microfield
of a plasma [19, 20] in which Stark expansion and a shift of highly excited energy
levels of atoms and molecules occur. moreover, there is a thermodynamic decrease
of ionization potential in an imperfect plasma. The boundary between regions
where one or another effect predominates is determined by the formula [21]

T=- I,85n.’"‘. (3.9)

where T is temperature, K and no is electron concentration, r3. The different
possibilities of taking the shift of the photoionisation cross-section threshold
in an imperfect plasma into account are discussed in section (3.6) and the shift
of the photoionization cross-section threshold in the main part of calculations
presented in Chapter 5 was assumed equal to the thermodynamic decrease of the ion-
ization potential since it turned out as a result of correcting calculations that
the use of different values of threshold shifts is weakly dependent on the radiant
thermal conductivity of the plasma.

One must know the photoionization cross-sections of a large mnber of energy lev-
els of atoms to calculate the photoionization absorption coefficient.

The photoionization cross-section for the energy level of an atom characterized by
quantum numbers n and l is expressed by the formula [18, 22]

 

an.(v) u “:3” I'.§|€1"5P.n(f)"aw ('W'f . (3.10)

where P31 (r) is the radial function of an electron in the bound state with quantum
numbers n and l and Gk1' (r) is the radial wave function of an electron in the free
state with energy 15 k2/2m and with orbital quantum number 1.

'lhe Schroedinger equation for a hydrogen atom has a precise solution and its radi-
al wave functions are kmwn [29]. Precise formulas of the photoionization cross-
sections of hydrogen are presented in [11] for four levels with main quantum num-
bers n I l, 2, 3 and 4. (since the states of hydrogen are degenerate with respect
to l, the given expressions are the sums of cross-sections for all values of l at
given value of n). The absence of data for levels with greater value of the main
quantum nunber should not introduce errors into the calculations since the popula-
tion of these levels is very low at low temperatures and they are cut off due to
reduction of ionization potential at high temperatures.

The approximate semi-empirical method of the Burgess-Seaton quantum defect [23]
was used to calculate the photoionization cross-sections of the atoms and ions of
alkali metals. In this method the semi-empirical Bates and Damgaard function,
which is an ideal asymptotic solution of the Schroedinger equation correspcmdinq
to the experimental value for the given energy level, is used in this method as

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the radial wave function of an electron in the bound state. The radial wave func-
tion of an electron in the free state is determined by the quantum defect method
and is expressed by the following asymptotic formula [23] x

(m. 1', u) ~k"""sln|kr — % I”: + f In (2») +
In argr(l'+ I —'7')+6p(h‘)]. (3.11)

Here the phase 61- (k2) - tul. (k2): u1'(k2) is the quantum defect for 1' levels
extrapolated to the region of positive energies. The quantum defect equal to
11mm) - n1 - n‘, is determined by experimental values of the energy levels of the
atom as the dif ermce of the nominal (hydrogen) and effective main quantum nun-
bers. The experimental values of the energy levels of alkali metals were taken
from [24].

An experimental investigation of the absorption cross-sections of the atoms of al-
kali metals from the ground state was carried out in a nuhber of papers [25-27].
The form of the photoionization cross-section found in these experiments for lith-
ium is in satisfactory agreement with calculation by the quantum defect nethod
(Figure 3.1). The characteristic feature of the behavior of the photoionisation
cross section of sodium, potassium and cesium is a minimal: value of the cross-sec-
tion near the threshold. It is interesting to note that calculation by the quantuu
defect method also yields a minimum beyond the threshold for alkali metals. but
its position is shifted toward higher frequencies compared to experiment and if-
fers in absolute value. Experimentally derived photoionization cross-sections
from the ground states of alkali metals, except lithium. were used in calculations

of the total absorption coefficient.

The photoionization cross-sectiOns from excited levels are easily described by
Burgess-Seaton approximation. Thus, available experimental data on the photoion-
ization cross-section free the excited level 3291/2, 3/2 of a sodiu: atom [28]
confirm the correctness of the selected method. In Figure 3.2 experiment is com-
pared to calculations made by the quantum defect method [29] and in approximation
of radial wave functions found by the Hartree-Fock method.

  

0" ...I._L__A__.

2.5 so 75 note"

Figure 3.1. Photoionization Cross-Section of Lithiun from Ground State:
1--calcu1ation; 2--experiment

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

 

_.I_n._.l._n_|__:_s__t_hi_L_
J000 1200 3400 .7600 3000 LA

Figure 3.2. Photoionization Cross-Section from Excited Level 32 up, 3/2
of Sodiua: l--ca1culation by quantum defect method: 2--calcu-
lation by Hartree-Fock metlvd; 3--axperiment

As mentioned earlier, the maximum energy to which calculations of the absorption
coefficient were made corresponds to a frequency of 3.105 m’l. since the ioniza-
tion potentials of lithium and sodim ions are so high that the ionization thres-
holds of the ions are far beyond this boundary, photoionization of lithium and
sodiun ions were not considered in the present calculations. The ionization po-
tentials of potassiun and oesiuu ions lie within the considered range. Therefore,
secondary photoionization, whose contribution is significant at high temperatures
when a plasma is strongly ionized, was taken into account in calculations of the

optical properties of India with participation of potassiun and cesium in the far
ultraviolet range.

Let us consider photoionization of uranium and its ions. Analysis of known methods
of photoionization shows that their application to atomic system: containing a
large number of electrons is practically inpossible. The difficulties of calcula-
tion were determined by a deficiency of experimental data on the scheme of terms,
the type of bond, configuration impurities and so on.

At the same time there is considerable experimental information about the energy
levels and oscillator forces for the atom and first ion of uranium [30]. However,
direct calculation that takes into account these data would be too cunbersome and
moreover information about the spectrum of uraniun is available only for part of
the discontinuous spectrum. For this reason an approximate method of calculating
the absoprtion coefficient was suggested that is based on general information
about the spectrum of the uranium atom and ion known from [30]. The photoioniza-
tion absorption coefficient is determined by formula (3.8). Following [20]. let
us assune that the frequency dependence of the photoionization cross-section is
the same as that in the Kramers formula, i.e., for quanta with frequencies v_>_ 33

(83 is the energy level of 1 calculated from the continuum), we have the follow-
ing function:

9 .-
a,’ ‘-‘ IIV ’. (3.12)

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The constant A is found free the expression for the oscillator force of bound-free
transitions:

_0"_. u a M (3.13)
a {0, 4V "——W (El). .

I
Thus, the following formula is found for the photoionisation cross-section:

u MI EL, (3.14)
v’

This expression coincides with the Kraners formula if the hydrogen-like expressions
are taken for the ionization potential and oscillator force:

15, .—-. via/(24m); 1:: 83/0 vim). (3°15)

where g is a Gaunt factor. Let us assure that the frequency dependence v'3 in the
photoionization cross-section is also valid in the discontinuous spectra (Figure
3.3) and integration in formula (3.13) can then be applied to the mrqy of the
first line of the Ridberg series Ej and one can assue the sun of oscillator for-
ces as f - 1. according to the rule of sums. The derived formula will effectively
take into account the continuous spectrum and absorption in the lines. ﬂaking an
assumption about the sum of the oscillator forces, we assure that an excited elec-
tron is located in the effective field of the ion and all transitions between ex-
cited states of the atom occur without variation of the state of the ion. Consid-
eration of transitions with excitation of the residual ion and transitions of other
valency electrons nay lead to some increase of the photoioniration cross-section at
high frequencies of absorbed quanta and is included in the ambiguity of the pro-
posed model.

 

P.” v

Figure 3.3. Behavior of Photoionization Cross-Section Near Threshold. The
dashed line shows extrapolation of the cross-section for bound-
bound transitions.

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The photoionisation cross-section in this approximation is determined by the
formula

(3.16)

Substantiation of the assumption of the continuity of the continum transition to
the discontinuous spectrum may be the following concepts. Electron motion is quasi-
classical in states with large quantum nunbers and motion along an elliptical orbit,
corresponding to a large value of quantun nus-bar and low negative energy. is very
close to motion along a hyperbolic orbit with low positive energy. let us consider
transitions from the n~th level when a photon is absorbed within semi-classical
concepts. If frequency increases, the electron in the final state enters elliptical
orbits that more and more approach a parabolic orbit. At V - ”y; it enters a para-
bolic orbit and at frequency v, somewhat exceeding vn, it enters hyperbolic orbits
close to a parabolic orbit. Since electron motion in the final state varies con-
tinuously, one should expect that the mean effective absorption cross-section of
light by atoms in the n-th state will also be continuous upon transition from the
discontinuous spectrum to the continual (see Figure 3.3). For this reason semi-
classical formula (3.16) will yield a good estimate for transitions from levels
with low quanta numbers, including for 083, as occurs upon comparison of the semi-
classical and quantum photoionization cross-sections from the ground level of a
hydrogen-like atom. Therefore, the lines according to the method outlined above
were also subsequently taken into account when calculating the absorption coeffi-
cient for u“, 0*“ and U“+*, i.e., formula (3.16) was applied to photon energy

of AB) 1 V 1 Ej, which corresponds to bound-bound transitions. In the outlined
method for calculating the photoionization cross-section. one must find the first

line of the Ridberg series Ej for each level of j. his can be done by assmning
that the effective main quanta: number n3 corresponds to each level of 1 so that

15, =-. RyZ’ni"; A£,=E,—-Ryz'/(n,+ l)‘. (3.17)
where z is the multiplicity factor of the atomic remainder.

'ihe next approximation is related to a large number of levels of the uranium atom
and ions: therefore, one can convert in formula (3.8) from sumation by levels to
integration if the nmnber of states of the atomic levels is introduced in the form
of ME) - c(-E)'°, where the constants c and a are found tram experimental data
[30). The contribution to the absorption coefficient due to photoionization, ac-
cording to (3.16) is determined by the mean value

.41
5. (m a (n ulgl— (I + mm .- (s) as
(Ah‘)= " -u -— . (3.18)

I, r m up 1-0 1- minus 45

 

where l is ionization potential and AI - u is a reduction of ionization potential.
Integration in (3.18) is carried out by the range of energy levels that satisfy

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
won Oil-KIAI. USt. UNIJ

the condition a - AI _<_ v atthe given value of photon frequency v. The statistical
weight of level 9(3) varies irregularly, assisting similar values [30]: therefore,
let us further assume that it is dependent on energy. Substituting the density of
states ME) - dN/de into (3.18) and assmning that

M. 9%1" 2Ry' "-(-E)"' 2'". (3.19)

- we find the expression for the abwrption coefficient:

Ilﬂ’

s’"‘e'de I i s"°"e‘d¢.

I [RV/IT

. . .- ar an
$’--2'u’7‘-a:(;;); ‘f (3.20)

where a0 is the Bohr radius.

Photoionization was taken into account integrally in numerical calculations only
from the upper levels, for which there are no experimental data in (30], and direct
emanation was carried out for the lower levels. The value of the statsun of the
uranium atom is required for these levels. Convenient approximation foruulas
based on the data of [30] are presented in [31]:

0., -__ —0,0308'r0 + 0.8881" — Lawn + 5,5447 + l8;

(3.21)
0“. -= 0.00241" - 0,0815l‘l“ + l,00l‘l" — ”181“ |- [2,041' -|- ID.

Here T is the temperature in thousands of x. The approximation is valid at T <

< 15,000 K.

Parameter 0 required for the calculations was selected as equal to

au'—4, tau. --5."', Gun uau... Sauna—4.

Besides the photoionisation processes of atoms described above, continuous absorp-
tion in the region of the near ultraviolet was observed in some experiments [25,
26, 32] in molecules which are absorbing components in the working substances un-
der discussion. They include photoionization of the Liz molecule. The absorption
cross-section found in [26] due to photoionization of Liz was used in these calcu-
lations of the total absorption coefficient at low temperatures. The photoioniza—
tion cross-section of sodium was measured [25] in the range of wave numbers
38,000-62,500 cm'1 and it has a value of approximately 10-18 «:2. The potassiun
molecule also has a continuous absorption spectra: in the near ultraviolet [26]

and its cross-section is of the same order as that for sodium. The photoioniza-
tion threshold of the bin molecule has a value of 62,500 and but the cross-sec-
tion of this process is unknown. The photoionization cross-section of the hydrogen
molecule was measured in [32] but the corresponding range of frequencies is insig-
nificant at low temperatures for mixtures, while photoionization of atoeic hydrogen
whose concentration eXceeds the concentration of molecules and whose frequency in-
terval is the same, is more significant at high temperatures.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are negative ions of hydrogen H“ and of the alkali metal Li“, Na’, K' and
Cs‘ in mixtures of hydrogen with alkali metals at temperatures above 4,000 x in
specific quantities (depending on the concentration of the alkali inpurity) and
the H“ concentration in this mixture is several orders higher than that in pure

hydrogen.

The energy of electron affinity to hydrogen comprises 0.75 eV: therefore, the neg-
ative hydrogen ion may absorb photons over a wide range of the spectral due to
photodetachment of an electron. The cross-section of this process, according to
calculations of different authors, is rather high (approximately 10'16 m2) and
therefore the presence of even a relatively small number of 11‘ should make a sig-
nificant contribution to the total absorption in the infrared and visible regions
of the spectrum. The photodetachment cross-section of a negative hydrogen ion
found in [33] was used in the present calculations. The wave function of the
finite state in this calculation was taken in the form of the product of the unper-
turbed function of the hydrogen atom by the wave function of the electron moving in
a static Hartree potential of the hydrogen atom and the Benrich function with 11
parameters determined by the Ritz variational principle was used as the wave func-
tion of the bound state. There are now many papers devoted to theoretical and ex-
perimntal investigations of the photodetachment cross-section of a negative hydro-
gen ion. There are more accurate calculations obtained by means of Bartree-Pock
wave functions with regard to exchange in the survey of these papers [34]. How-
ever, the difference between them is small cospared to the accuracy of other
determining processes.

The continuous absorption cross-section for the process of electron photodetachment
of a negative ion of an alkali metal was calculated [1?] using the wave function of
the bound state, consisting of two s-electrons outside the closed shell. The free
states were described in the purely polarization potential. These results were
used in the calculations.

3.4. Absorption in Atomic Lines

A uranium atom with six electrons on the outer incomplete shell is characterized
by a large number of tight levels (Figure 3.4). The experimentally measured
30,000 lines of the uranium atom and its first ion at low pressure in the visible
and near ultraviolet regions of the spectrum are presented in [30] . The uraniun
lines broaden and overlap [35] as pressure increases since the absorption spectrum
in the lines is actually quasi-continuous, i.e., that where individual lines do not
break down; therefore, the method of calculating the spectral absorption coeffi—
cients in the lines of the uranium atom and its first ion was as follows. The mean
absorption coefficient for the frequency range Av, found by summation of all lines
belonging to a given frequency interval, was calculated:

K?" 2:1 .4"... “g.l.exp( ._ Pg). (3.22)

where 5k is the energy level from which transition occurs, 9,. is the statistical
weight and ﬁx is the transition oscillator force. Lines with their own oscillator
forces that determine the contribution of each line [36] , known from experiment,

12')

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY

were taken into account in the calculations. A total of 326 lines of neutral
uranium and 316 lines of its first ion, for which the oscillator forces are )mown,
was taken into account in the calculation. Ions of higher multiplicity factor play
the main role in absorption ina uranius plasma at telperatures above approximately
15,000 K. since there are no transition probabilities and other spectroscopic
data for couble, triple and quadruple ionized uranium the contribution of the
lines to the absorption coefficient was taken into account integrally by the method
discussed in section 3.3.

 

Figure 3.4. Diagram of Energy Levels of Uranium Atom: ugh-first line
of Ridberg series corresponding to transitions to level Ens;
I--ionization potential; AI--reduction of ionization potential

Key :
l . conti nuum

The absorption lines of the atoms of alkali metals are isolated from each other

in the visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the spectrum. The absorption coef-
ficient in the spectral line of the atom is determined not only by the oscillator
force but also by the shape of the contour of the line which in turn is dependent
on temperature, pressure and concentrations of the plasma couponents:

u «a
“v " :IINJ» (3.23)

where Jy is the contour of the spectral line.

spectra). lines broaden at high pressures mainly due to interaction with neutral
(Van der Heals and resonance) and charged (Stark) particles. Doppler and radia-
tion broadening are insignificant. The contour Jv can be regarded as a convolution
of the controus of each mechanism in the case when many different mechanisms affect
broadening of the line. Broadening of the lines of atoms of alkali metal by neu-
tral particles of H and H2 and also by charged particles is described by ispact
theory. i.e.. the shape of the contour can be selected as dispersion in each indi-
vidual case. Convolution of the dispersion contours is again a dispersion contour
where the half-width and shift are the sun of the half-widths and shifts of indi-
vidual types of interaction. The dispersion shape of the contour was taken in the

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

case at resonance broadening of alkali metals for the limbs of the line but the
half-width was selected in this case so that the expressions of dispersion and
Gaussian contours for the limbs of the lines coincided. As a result the contour
of the spectral line is described by the expression

IV = Wzlin'iv — Vr- At)’ 1- (Wt/WI”. (3.24)
where w; is the total half-width and A; is the total shift.

At low temperatures and low additions of alkali metal when the main mechanism of
broadening of the spectral lines is Van der Waals interaction of atoms of the alka-
li metal with hydrogen atoms and molecules, the half-width of the line is deter—
mined by the velocity of relative motion of interacting particles, dependent on
the temperature, concentration of the broadening particles and the interaction con-
stant, which is dependent on the energy levels of the interacting particles and
the oscillator fones of the corresponding transitions [18].

Resonance broadining, which was calculated in (37] , is significant at low teapera-
tures and larg. additions of alkali retal.

'rhe charged particle concentration increases as the temperature in a plasma in-
creases, i.e. , L‘tark broadening due to interaction with charged particles is added
to the considered broadening mechanisms. The parauters of Stark broadening used
in this paper were calculated in [38]. Insufficient data were found by linear in-
terpolation and the half-width was found by summtion of the effective resonance
and start): half-widths. The total shift of the center of the lines was determined
by emanation of the shifts due to all mechanisms. The oscillator forces of transi-
tions were taken from [36, 38, 39]. In the calculations presented in chapter 5,
16 lithium and sodium lines each and 18 potassium and cesiun lines each, which ab-
sorb mainly in the visible and near-ultraviolet regions of the spectrum, where
taken into account. The contribution of ions of alkali metals to absorption of
the lines was not considered in the calculations, which is insignificant for M"
and Na+ but may be significant for It“ and Cs+ at high temperatures. ltherefore,
data on the radiant thermal conductivity coefficients for potassium and cesium in
the tables of Chapter 5 are limited to 30,000 K.

Absorption in hydrogen lines of the Lyman and Balmer series was considered at tem-
perature of 10,000 K since molecular hydrogen absorption significantly predominates
over all other elementary processes at lower temperatures in the ultraviolet region
of the spectrum and lines of the Balmer series lying in the visible region of the
spectrum make an appreciable contribution only at temperatures above 10,000 X.
Analysis of the component compositions of hydrogen mixtures with alkali metals
showed that the width and shape of the hydrogen lines are determined by interaction
with charged particles (Stark broadening) and all remaining types of broadening of
spectral lines are insignificant at the considered temperatures. A number of pa~
pers [38, 40, 41], in which the numerical contours of the spectral lines of hYGIO'
gen of the Lyman and Balmer series at temperatures of 10,000, 20,000 and 40,000 K
and at different concentrations of charged particles (1023, 1024 and 1025 m“3) are
presented, is devoted to the theory of Stark broadening of hydrogen lines. The
absorption coefficients in hydrogen lines were calculated using these results.

129

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Extrapolation toward higher values was made as a function of the charged particle
concentration in different versions of the working substance. The limbs of the
lines were calculated by formulas and tables presented in [38, 41, 42].

3. S . Molecular Absorption

Biatonic molecules have typical electron absorption spectra that are bands which
consist of a number of rotational lines. This complex structure does not pentit
one to avoid sous approximations in calculation. The integral absorption coeffi-
cient of the rotational line is described in Born-Oppenheimer approximation in the
following manner [43]:

“ ER” ’ __”a.
IK'W‘ McIR" “I q" 2:. ”WV" (3.25)
In this formula the value of the electron matrix element R: dII’h’hd‘ is 60-

pendent only on the electron eigen-functions of the ground and excited states. The
Franck-Condon factors qv’o' ”Wu-u.- d! l’ are determined by the vibrational eigen-
functions related to combining electron states. Henley-London factors XJ'J" deter-
mine the force of the rotational line while v”. is the position of the given rota-
tional line characterized by the difference of electron. vibrational and rotational
thems.

The spectral dependence of the absorption coefficient, corresponding to specific
electron transition in biatomic molecules whose rotational lines are broadened and
overlapped, is determined by the formula [49]

“ —--R' ""' i} in
Ks ‘ , ll 2_ Cl.) .' x
.Iluhv Q( 0.0 A) (3.26)

J

chlp(— 5;?) E 111901 0"].
1-.

J'nl I. 1.114

where 60,“ - l for AA - o and 50M - 0 for M f 0, which yields A-doubling (A is
the projection of the total orbital went to the internuclear axis). The posi-
tions of the centers of the lines, the static sums and the energy levels are deter-
mined by spectroscopic constants [44-45]. Sun-nation is made in expression (3.26)
for all the vibrational and rotational quantun nunbers up to the boundary value.
The boundary value of the vibrational quantum mnber v9; follows from determination
of the dissociation energy since the vibrational levels are applicable at high
temperatures up to the dissociation boundary. The last discontinuous level V“ is

reached at

(New + 6) =- D.. (3.27)
where 0 s 6 s 1. Do is the dissociation energy of the molecule and G is the ana-
lytical function of the vibrational quantum nunber. The boundary value of the

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rotational qmntun number at given vibrational number is determined by the function
found in (46]: .131r - r (1 - v/vgr). This relatiOn permits one to determine as!
simply and with sufficient degree of accuracy if .33!“ is known, i.e.. the value of
J9: which corresponds to v - 0 and Vgr' The value of r was determined graphic-
ally from the value of the potential barrier for the ef ective potential curve
plotted by the an method (Ridberg-Klein-Reese) for different values of J.

The Pranck-Condon factors that determine the intensity distribution in the elec-
tron system of bands were found by quantun-mchanics calculations. The vibrational
functions are solutions of the Schroedinger equation with corresponding interaction
potential of atoms in a biatomic mlecule. The Morse potential, for which the
Schoredinger equation is solved analytically, is the most frequently used in these
calculations. 'lhe wave functions for it are associated Laguerre polynomials by
which the Franck-Condon factors are calculated. This method of calculations was
used to calculate the Franck-Condos. ﬁne-tors of three systems of lithium bands.
(X‘X; -> 4'33. X's: " "'"u- X'z'd " ("2'") , three systems of sodium bands

“"23" -> A'XJ. X'X,’ , Ii'll." X'ZZ,’ -e ("22) and four systems of potassium bands
(x'r; Mm. x'z‘: . mu,“ X's; .. 6'21. X'E.‘ *D‘".).

The Franck-Condor: factors cannot be calculated by using the Horse potentials for
molecules of hydrides of alkali metals, which are one of the main absorbing com-
ponents at low temperatures, since these molecules have abnormal values of spectro-
scopic constants in the first excited state. The m method, which is dependent
only on the experimental values of spectroscopic constants, was used to plot the
potential curves of the ground and excited states of hydride molecules. The vi-
brational wave functions were found from solution of the Schroedinger equation
with a potential given nmerically. The numerical method of Numerov was used to
solve the Schoredlnger equation [47]. The eigen-functions and tables of Franck-
COndon factors were calculated to the boundary value of the vibrational quantum
number in each electron state. The rranck-Condon factors,also calculated by using
the rum potentials, were taken from [48] for two systems of bands of the hydrogen

molecule (x-x.’ -. 4-2:: in x'r,’ -. mu.) -

The absolute value of the absorption coefficient is determined by the square of
the matrix element of the dipole moment of transition. Quanta-mechanical calcu-
lation of this value for multielectron molecules is related to great difficulties
but quantum-mechanical calculations yield satisfactory results for hydrogen and
MB, which have a small number of electrons. There is a nunber of values of the
oscillator force both experimental and those found by quantum-mechanical calcula-
tions for systems of bands x + A and x -> B of the hydrogen molecule [49-51]. A
number of experimental values of oscillator forces found for the system x + A upon
transition to vibrational levels v - 4, S, 6 lies in the range from 0.51 to 0.28,
according to data of different authors. There is also a difference in the experi-
mentally determined values of oscillator forces for the system of bands X -> 3

(v' - 0, l, 2): from 0.7 to 0.29. Theoretical calculation of the dependence of
the electron consent of transition 17. on the internuclear distance for the systems
of bands under discussion was carried out in [51]. It turned out in this case
that this dependence is significant for the system x + A (from 0.5 atomic unit to
1.5 atomic units). The dependence is weak for the system of bands x -> B as a
whole: despite the steep rise from 0.5 atomic unit to 0.9 atomic unit at R - 2
atomic units, R. retains a value of 0.9 atomic unit everywhere. This dependence

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFKIAI. UM; ONLY

of the dipole meant or" transition can probably explain ”18 significant ““1900“
of the experimental values of oscillator forces discussed above. The mean values

of oscillator forces, according to [51], were used in calculating the total ab-
sorption coefficient in systems of bands x -> A and x 4 a of the hydrogen molecule.
Calculations of the oscillator forces by the Geitler-London method and the molecu-
lar orbital method (52] for the Li}! molecule yielded a coincident result. The
dependence of the value of a. on the internuclear distance was investigated in
these calculations. The mean value of 3., corresponding to the oscillator force
equal to 0.13, was used in our calculations.

The data available in the literature on oscillator forces for lithium and sodiu
molecules are presented in survey [531.Ansxperimental value of f. - 0.3 was
used in calculations for the red system x -> A of the lithiu- molecule and the theo-
retical value of f. - 0.66 was used for the blue-green system x -e 8. There is a
value fe = 0.2 estimated by the molecular orbital method for the sodium molecule
[54].

The oscillator forces were estimated by a method similar to [54]. which takes into
account only two optical electrons outside the closed shell, for the violet system
of lithium bands, two systems of sodium bands and four systems of potassim bands.

Table 3.2. Oscillator Forces of Systems of Lithium. Sodium and Potassium Molecule

 

 

 

Bands
'—— one»
(1) _______ (2)
Mast-yea;
x-4 he he no

H. I 0.3 IIOGG I0.” I -
No. 0.2 I 0.36 I 0.00 I

K. I 0.") I 0.23 . I 0.! I 0.0!

Key:
1. Molecule 2. System

The oscillator forces of systems of lithium, sodium and potassium molecule bands
used in the present calculations are presented in Table 3.2. Besides the system
of bands in the visible region of the spectrum described above, the lithiu hydride
molecule has a continuous absorption band in the near ultraviolet [55] . M dis-
crete bands and a continuous spectrum were observed in the system of bands corre-
sponding to transition from the ground state xlng of the lithium hydride molecule
to the excited state Bl u- The spectroscopic constants of the Elﬁn-state of
lithium hydride, in cm ’1, are presented below.

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fa I ”a I ‘e‘a “a l 'eﬁ)
34ml 215.5 I 42.2 | one: [0306' Iran

The potential curve of state plotted by these constants permits one to conclude
that the observed continuous absorption spectrum corresponds to transition to the
repulsion part of the curve (Figure 3.5). A very small potential hole (183 cm'l)
in state 111‘, provides the basis to disregard bound-bound transitions and to seems
that the photodiasociation process or" the Li}! molecule makes the main contribution
to absorption. This elasntary absorption process was calculated by the method
proposed in [56]:

 

 

 

3" 1
K9 3 vi?! (v) 2 NM». ”'2‘”

where v is the transition frequency, Pg“) is the square of the matrix element of
the dipole mnt of. transition and qv v) is the density of the Pranck-Condon
factors. The sun in (3.28) can be transformed to a more co.venient expression if
the eigen-iunctions of the ground state are replaced by Hermitian polynomials and
if the Pranck-Condon factors are replaced by values for a harmonic oscillator:

EN.4.(V)“1|7i :11 ”'4— :i: "1'

where I' V‘: (' ' "J3 1“- “N— 0m; 0 |,439u_; ¢ =-‘ MW'WJV'S u is the reduced
mass of the molecule and re is the equilibrium internuclear state. Formula (3.28)
than assumes the form

 

 

(3.29)

 

KC' .- E R: . CT." -1; a _
a” v M V7 "WWI "' :E] (3.30)

Normalization in calculation of this process was carried out for conditional os-
cillator force to = 0.1 since there are no reliable data on the probability of
transition of this system.

Besides molecular absorption in electron band systems, a great deal of attention
was devoted to absorption in the infrared region of the spectrum, specifically to
absorption of heteronuclear molecules of hydrides of alkali metals due to vibra-
tional-rotational transitions. although it is known that the absorption level due
to this mechanism is significantly lower than that in electron band systems. his
is related to the fact that photons with long wavelength lying in the infrarod re-
gion of the spectrom are responsible for radiation transfer at low temperatures.
me integral absorption coefficient 0! the spectral line corresponding to vibra-
tional-rotational transition is determined by the expression

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OH'KIAI. USE ONLY

II, 10‘
cu '

    

4
.‘7'1.

J"

   

I. I, 2 rumba

Figure 3.5. Potential Curves of Ground X'Za-State and Excited Elﬁn-State
of Lithium Hydride Molecule

. 8'" N.
Ike‘dv t.- T; ‘R'Vrfi'p-Il' I”. ”7.07.. (3. 31)

where NV) is the number of molecules at a given vibrational level. The value of
Rv'v" is similar to the matrix elenent of an electron dipole moment of transition

Rs'e' "- I"? (p) M”. (3e 32)

where 06' and W" are the vibrational eigen-functions related to the ground state
of the molecule. The spectral absorption coefficient for vibrational-rotational
bands in the range of infrared frequencies was calculated by a formula similar to
(3.26), with regard to (3.31) and according to the sampling rules for vibrational-
rotational transitions according to which it makes no sense to take into account
overtones above Av - 3 since their intensity is several orders less than that of
the main band. The calculating steps was selected with regard to the vibrational
and rotational spectroscopic constants and the absorption coefficient was normal-
ized for experimental values of the derivative of the dipole moment [57] for the
lithium hydride nolecule. The same normalization was adopted for other hydrides
due to the absence of reliable data.

Vibrational-rotational transitions for homonuclear molecules are forbidden in di-
pole approximetion, but the presence of vibrational-rotational spectra of homo-
nuclear molecules induced by high pressure was established in the experiments of
[58-60) and guadradic dependence of the intensity of the bands on pressure was
noted. As indicated by calculations made in [61. 62], the dipole moment of the
complex consisting of two molecules interacting with each other is determined by
the presence of a quadrupole moment in colliding molecules. The exchange forces
that arise upon overlapping of wave functions distorted by interaction are also
significant.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

The spectral absorption coefficient determined by this process was calculated by
the formula

"luau: ”III-:43 ‘ ‘
Ky r— —|—f,,-.3—N‘l_ 2 ER UI\’P PUI’I P’I’I >- X
amQAv .;. .. .. '3' .. :;---- 2- W

x 3‘ la (Jul a (1950:” 5031:) ’I "' L.(J.Ji)a(l.) x
I;-III--7.-lla- 10”
X609.) I. H (1.. 1;)..(1’.)6(ISJ.) ”Jr ”"10 x
:< I. (1.1;) I.Ivm,,,,,, . .. r

Ill!

(3.33)

The notations at!) and ma. J') in formula (3.33) are the sane as in [61]:

...[:‘....[;'....[;' .-.L~‘ -
u. 1.I,l.; "III. I]! .IJI I .112 "ale ”.1“

V

Ev; is the vibrational-rotational energy level of v and J and PVIJI and Psz2 are
the Boltznan probabilities of state of a system of two particles

_ :" cxpl— 99101.06}?th (3.34)

where NR) is the intermolecular interaction potential and the unard-Johns poten-
tial was used in the given calculation (see Chapter 2). The values of 131(k) are
given in [61] in the form of tables: 3v,v113 the vibrational natrix elenent.
Smation was carried out with respect to J in formula (3. 33) according to the
sampling rules for quasi-molecules of (H2)2, AJ - 0, + 2. Stmation was carried
out with respect to v from v =- 0 to v - 14 according to the value of the maximum
vibrational nuuber for the ground state of the hydrogen molecule. Q is the sta-
tistical sum of the (H2); quasi-molecule. The calculations were aade in the
spectral range from 2-10 cm‘1 to 104 cn'l. The ration xV/nl’ for the (Hz)2
quasi-molecule for different tenperatures is shown in Figure 3.6.

3.6. The Effect of Imperfection on the Optical Properties of a Plasma

Absorption of radiation by an isolated atom is described by narrow lines in the
discontinuous spectrum where radiation broadening is determined by the finite
line in the excited state. but photoionization and by deceleration absorption in
the continuous spectrum. The series of lines converges toward the photoionization
threshold. The presence of the surrounding medium for an atom in a plasma leads
to several effects.

First, the lines in the spectrum of atoms induced by interaction of the atom with
the surrounding particles and by the Doppler effect are broadened and shifted. As
already mentioned, Doppler broadening is insignifith compared to impact and
Stark broadening: therefore, only these mechanisms of line broadening were taken
into account in the calculations.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7-5000!

  

__ ...l. ._____l_.__——J-—-—
2 4 o a v.10’cu"

Figure 3.6. Absorption of Molecular Hydrogen Induced by Pressure in the
Infrared Region of the spectrum as a Function of 'reeperature

Key 3
l . Experiment

second, the presence of a plasma leads to variation of the spectrun near the
photoionisation threshold. Broadening of the lines lying near the continuun leads
to their fusion, which can be interpreted as shifting of the photoionization
threshold toward lower frequencies. The presence of coulomb interaction leads to
shifting of the ionization equilibrium, as was discussed in Gupter l. m- ef-
fect can also be used in dividing the spectrun into discontinuous and continuous.
But since the oscillator forces change continuously front the discontinuous spec-
trum to the integral due to the density of the oscillator forces in the continuum
the resulting absorption coefficient hardly changes; therefore, .the boundary was
shifted in the present calculations by the value of thernodynallic reduction of the
ionization potential. An early survey of papers on the effects of displacement of
the photoionization boundary due to the Stark and Debye eechanisms is contained in
[63) and later surveys up to 1967 are contained in (38, 15); therefore. we shall
limit ourselves here to an outline of papers written on this problem after 1967.

A series of papers apparently going back to [64] is based on refinuent of the
Inglis-Teller theory. lot us consider for an example a hydrogen etc: in an elec-
tric field uniform on atomic size with intensity 1’. Variation of the ionization
potential of the atom in the field is

mam =2e1/EF.

If the distribution function of the electric field in the plasma MP) is known,
then the radiation intensity in the continuum is determined by the average value

u») A icxpl—Mﬁ'l—Agﬂ] mndr.

I

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here A ~ 9(N1Ne/n3T3/2), where g is the Gaunt factor, n is the main quantum number
and N. and N1 are the electron and ion concentrations. In dimensionless form the
field distribution function is

wmdF-IWI‘M‘. (3 35)
where I‘HHFm I-'=o 2.6! MP“ . For noncorrelated ions, tits) is the 301th
function [69):

Wm) u. — 3" xslnxexp[— (-3 -)."]dr. (3.36)

The spectral density of the radiation intensity of the continuum for n - 2 was
calculated in [64] with Meter and Baranger field distribution function [65] which
differs from (3.36) when the parameter of imperfection 1‘ increases. The appearance
of the interaction parameter in (3.36) is natural since the correlation function of
ion distribution contains this parameter (only this paranter in the classical
range). Smoothing of the photoionization peak and its gradual fall toward the red
side of the boundary was found as a result of calculations. The factor of the
realizability of wn such that the statistical weight of state decreases g“ a Hngn
was introduced in the same paper [64] so that the population of state n becomes

M...__w .u p(_—-—l—_—J.£ 5) (3.37)

111a field distribution function MB. 1‘) calculated by HOOper [67] was used in [66].
The shroedinger equation with potential distorted by the external field was solved
to determine the condition of decay of the bound state. In this case the decay of
the bound state occurred when the minimum height of the barrier formed by the in-
cident coulomb field of the nucleus on the one hand and by the external field on
the other was compared to the energy of the bound state. The following integral
was selected as the factor for realizing the bound state

I‘ll".
w“; i mama. (3.38)

This method was used to calculate the absorption coefficients of the plasma for
photoionization propagated into the low-frequency range from the boundary. It was
assured in the calculations that the photoionization cross-sections are indepen-
dent of the electric field disturbing the atom. Paper [68] is devoted to this
same problem (although with a less clear physical meaning).

In [69] the n1 - T-diagram was divided into three zones as a function of the rela-
tionships between the last observed quantum number n1, the last realized quantun
number due to the effect of microfields n2 and the last realized level in the
Debye field n2. The lines fuse in the range n1 < n2, n; and for calr .lations the
photoionization cross-section can be lengthened to the low-frequency part of the
spectrum to level n1. The density of the oscillator forces with respect to energy,

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR own“. on. own

according to a statement. of the authors, has a gap caused by the nonhydrogen-like
density of states and by the behavior of the square of the dipole mutant of the
electron in the short-range (due to interaction) electron-ion interaction poten-
tial in the range n5 < n1,n§ and n; < n1.ni. The photoioniration threshold in
this ”nonrealization node' can be easily expressed and the interval. either free of
spectral lines or with weak lines is adjacent to it. Ooeparisons by the authors
of the absorption coefficients to experimental results for continuous radiation of
an argon plasma permit this interpretation.

It was found in Chapter 1 that the thermodynamic weight of highly excited states is
non-Boltsnan and it can be represented for a hydrogen atom in the form
n2Pn(B)exp(BEn) and the weight function 531(8) varies from 1 to 0 upon transition
from the ground to highly excited states. We find the contribution to radiation
from bound states with the same accuracy as when finding the contribution of bound
states to thermodynamic functions [17].

Plasma interaction with the radiation field is described by a Hamiltonian (in the
atomic system of units):

"m = __ Lynx) A001”. (3.39)
C

Here calibration with scalar potential equal to zero was adopted and the vector
potential is

I Mb 'I- _. -5 -
A(X) = 7—7- 21l€0.h(’0— l‘oﬁm' m 'l- at; w 00'. (3.40)
LO

Here ex", and a: 9 are the operators of photon mnihilation and production and 09,);
is the photon polarization vector with frequency w I Zucv. The operator of
charged particle current in the representation of interaction with respect to an
electromagnetic field and Heizenberg representation with respect to interacting
particles has the form

an - i} 23 7;:- va (xmtx) -- v: (x) mun --

’ (3.41)
_ E 2;“; Amp)“ (x).
l

The subscript X indicates the variety of particles with charge ex and mess Ix.

The probability of radiation per unit time, averaged by the initial states i and
added by finite states f is:

«(w = .35. e’ (a ' a”: I A“)

l (i I II‘" I I) Has. —E,—-r....)ﬂ_, (3.42)
I. (21!).

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

Substituting Hamiltonian (3.39), we find:

dam-K) (3.43)

«law. a») = T (M- '“" T)Kaa(4. a).

where o is an element of the solid angle.

K..(q.u)=2_le"""'*” ".‘)<m(onox
x a I we) I !)6(k.-*;— q) 6(u— m)

Here the transition frequency of the system is “It: £11...” N‘“£1"‘l‘a~‘ . Let
us express the correlation function of currents It“ by a two-particle lagging

Green function:

0“» (1%: 16x3) = 0(1 — ryspwwu-m—u) x
xlﬁ (xzwm. (x;) m (14)” - (3.“)

Coordinate x also includes the time variable and in expression (20.12) ’9 " ‘1="
and l. .: 1; L; . lat us turn to the Fourier transform with respect to coordin-

ates and ties and let us calculate the track by a complete systeu of eigen-f functions
of the Haniltonian H. As a result we find

 

6:44:03; 9.. ‘h- u) 3‘ “(In 'I' (II—(h- (MGIS'IP. p'; q, a); (3.45)
_ -. M":
Gfx-(p. I": II.¢-o)=(‘2u)'l emu") 5‘)_'___¢_L5(q.,_
eon-l «+50
(3.46)
""t "I’< lax' (P -—-)u (P --| 71-)|I> <Ilai(l’ (-
__ _____ -\
'4 )"*(” 2 "/
Comparing (3.43) and (3.46), we find the relationship of R3 and 61;”:
K A3 R qty dxl , , “fr“. P'- ' "Io-4;)-
..pI'I. to) 72"); 1;;FIS I PI’.I’,-'—l'j—:ﬁ. (3.47)

The lagging Green function is determined by analytical continuation of the two-
particle temperature Green function to the imaginary semi-axis:

“3.0,. ”I. q. a) _._. _?_'(I‘u.-(p, p'. q, (0‘)"... MUI“; (3o‘8)

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0511(1AI. "SI-2 ONLY

(in (l',p’, (1.0).)“ b7 2: clp(lu,0'-| wv)o..-(p |-—; ,

”I“.

“I. P, "' ‘3' o P, '| _3' I “s .' ”A. I, "' ';_ I 0| —“h)("’ "'0’-

Hultiplying the probability of radiation dw by the photon energy, we find the
spectral density of the energy emitted per unit values of please [76]:

' Nl— -' . 3.49
Je. 4 ( cum») lm dpdp . a. ( ’

 

The following diagrams were added in [70] to calculate the contribution of radiation
occurring due to bound states:

The double line here denotes the ion line while the singe line denotes the electron
line. As a result of sumation the expression for the radiation intensity reduces
to standard form (broadening of the lines is not taken into account):

a. ﬂu e . _
T" “'59,: “ZEﬂM— “Es-)4! IPuI “(MH' En Eﬂ)‘ (3.50)
Here the statistical sum of the atom is

z - )ju'e"-P,m). (3.51)
Pornula (3.49) was used in [72] to take into account corrections for density to
the brustrahlung of electrons in the fields of atoms when the length of the free
path of the electron is comparable to its de Broglie wave. The interaction poten-

tial of an electron and atom was regarded as short-range and only s-scattering was
taken into account. As a result of sumation of the diagrams

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the following expression was found:
dz. = dd." II +. N011] (M). (3. 52)

The function f(x) is presented in [721: parameter qur (q is the transport scatter-
ing cross section of the electron on an atom, XT is the thermal de Broglie wave
length and N is the density of atoms) determines the unpaired nature of electron
scattering on atoms. In this case an increase of the effective collision frequency

with an increase of density leads to an increase of deceleration radiation
intensity.

The corrections to optical properties discussed until now are related to a weakly
imperfect plasma. If there is a significant increase of density, the positions of
the energy levels of atoms and the matrix eleeents, i.e., the oscillator force in
the discontinuous and continuous spectra, vary. The largest number of calculations
with respect to shift of levels was made by mamas-Fermi and Hartree-Fock methods
in a model of a restricted atom [53, 73-77, 88-91]. Variation of oscillator forces
related to an increase of cesiun density was calculated in [73] and this variation
is presented in Figure 3.7 at '1‘ - o and in Figure 3.8 for a photoionization cross-
section with level 6s. The considerable dependence of the photoionisation cross-
sections and oscillator forces on density indicates the need for further detailed
investigations in this field.

    

m’ .1. ..__I_7__..._|___._
I” In ( p4).

Figure 3.7. Variation of Oscillator Forces of Cesium as a Function of
Density of Substance [521 ‘90 . 1.3785 g/cm3)

3.7. Discussion of the Method and Results of Calculations of the (ptical
Characteristics of Working Media

The elementary mechanisms of absorption described in this chapter were included in
the program for calculation of the spectral absorption coefficient of the working
substance, which is one of the discussed mixtures for a pure substance in the plas-
ma state. Calculations were made in the temperature range from 4,000 to 40,000 K
for mixtures of different conposition containing 3, 10 and 50 percent alkali metal
and'pressures of 0.1, l, 10 and 100 MPa. The correction for induced emission xv -
= K, [1 - exp (-hcv/kTH, which is significant at low temperatures, was introduced

14].

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

4/ 0,5 i,0 I; Imps (1)

Figure 3.8. Photoionization Cross-Section of 6s-State of Cesim as a
Function of Density [52] (l - p - 10'? 90’ 2 - - 90’

Key:
1. Atomic unit

when calculating the total absorption coefficient. Graphs of the spectral density
of absorption coefficients are presented in Chapter 5 for a nuber of temeratures
and pressures found by emanation of the contributions made by individual median-
isms in specific spectral ranges.

As indicated above. the high concentration of charged particles leads to a decrease
of the ionization potentials of atoms and this limits the nusber of malizable
levels from which photoionization occurs. Therefore. the nusber of levels was
limited by the extent of reduction of the ionization potential and the photoioniza-
tion thresholds were shifted toward a thernodynanic decrease of the ionization po-
tential. If density increases, absorption in isolated lines of alkali metals in-
significant due to their broadening because of interaction with surrounding
particles. when calculating molecular absorption, averaging in the spectral range
of Av in formula (3.26) implied that the absorption spectrum is quasi-continuous
due to overlapping of the rotational lines occurring as a result of particle inter-

elementary processes and a nunber of other values were found in approximation of
an isolated atom without regard to the effect of high pressure. which should be
reflected in the accuracy of total calculations. Moreover. other assunptions were
also made. Due to the absence of experimental values, estimated calculations of
the oscillator forces were made for Nag, K2, Na}! and 10! molecules in the approxi-
mation when only two external electrons were taken into account. This is also
true of the error in calculating the absorption coefficient. It is difficult to
estimate the accuracy of these calculations: it is different in different spectral
intervals and depends on teuperature since different elementary processes which are
known with different degree of reliability determine absorption at different tem-
peratures in given sections of the spectrum. Moreover, some approximations in
calculation of the thermodynamic effect which gives a relative value of the con-
tribution of one or another elementary process may introduce a specific error in
calculation of the total absorption coefficient. Taking this into account, the

142

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accuracy of these calculations can be determined by comparison with experimental
results (see section 4.7).

It is difficult to give the complete characteristics of the optical properties with
the large variety of mixtures and the complex dependence of the absorption coeffi-
cient on frequency, temperature and other parameters: therefore, let us note only
the main characteristics. High absorption coefficients in the visible and infrared
regions of the spectra: for those temperatures where the plasma is ionized to a
significant degree are typical for pure alkali metals. Molecular bands and atomic
lines that lead to peaks in the spectral dependence of the absorption coefficient
make an important contribution to absorption in these regime of the spectm at
low teaperatures. Pressure mainly affects the absolute value of the absorption co-
efficient, introducing its own corrections to the spectral dependence through the
extent of shift of the photoionization peaks and the nuber of levels participating

in absorption. The spectral dependence of the absorption coefficients of lithium,
sodium. potassium and cesium are shoum in Chapter 5 for different temperatures and
pressures. 'me radiant thermal conductivity coefficient of alkali metals increases
sharply with an increase of tenperature at all pressures. This is related to the
high secondary ionization potential of alkali metals and their transparency in the
far ultraviolet region.

X,,m"-—-—-—--v--—-——---— ,pi'—'--'—-'—-

      

01010309,

Figure 3.9. Absorption Coefficient of Lithium Plasma at Pressure of p - 1
MPa and temperature of '1' - 4,000 K (b) and p - 1 MPa and 'r -
- 12,000 x (a): l--data of authors: 2--data of [7]

The dependence of the radiant thermal conductivity coefficients for mixtures of
hydrogen and alkali metals is characterized by the presence of a second minimum in
the temperature range of 10.000-15,000 K, which gradually disappears as the ad-
dition of the alkali metal increases. This minimum is explained by an increase
of the absorption coefficient in the ultraviolet due to hydrogen components.

The optical properties of a mixture of uraniun with alkali metals, i.e., of a
medium Which is formed as a result of diffusion on the boundary of two zones--
uranium and the alkali metal are also of interest to calculate the transfer of

radiant energy. The thermophysical properties of a mixture of uranium and potas-
sium are presented in chapter 5. The addition of potassium to uranium does not

143

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

significantly alter the nature of its spectra: but is felt in the absolute value
and in the parts of the absorption coefficient in individual spectral regions.

Oowarison of the results of calculations to other theoretical calculations is
difficult since only calculations of the optical properties of alkali metals [7]
where, however, the method of calculating the total absorption coefficient of a
plasma is not described, are known to the authors. Nevertheless, conparieon of
the absorption coefficient of the lithium plasma to the results [7) presented in
figure 3.9 shows agreement in characteristic value but it is obvious from the fig-
ures that the considered spectral information is abundant in the given paper.

The results of theoretical calculations are compared to experimental data in
Chapter 4.

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moscow TEPIOFIZIGESKIYE SVOYSTVA WHO! 8880 WWW YADERMGO mm”
in Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 147-189

[Chapter 4 from the book "Ihermophysical Properties of Working Media of the Gas-
Phase Nuclear Reactor", by Viktor Konstantlnovich Gryaznov, Igor’L'vovich Iosilev-
skiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna Kuznetsova, Vladimir Ivanovich
Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Lappo, Boris Nikolayevich lauakin, Georgiy Alekseye-
vich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevichSm and Vladimir Yewen'yevich Portov, Atomizdat,
1,800 copies, 304 pages]

[Text] 4.1. Characteristic Features of Experimental Investigation of an Imperfect
Plasma

inaccuracy of the input intonation about the ionization and dissociation poten-
tials, electron energy levels, cross-sections of elmentary processes and so on.
The results of calculations in the range of this inaccuracy agree with nuerous

of experimental papers devoted to an imperfect plasma is very limited. Specific-
ally, direct measurements of the therubphysical properties of a plasma at working
substances in the range of full-scale pressures and temperatures of a gas-phase
nuclear reactor cannot now be made. Therefore, to estimate the quality of the
theoretical approximations used, one must resort to experiments with substances
convenient for direct experimentation, bearing in mind the simulation of the prop-
erties of the plasma by the interaction parameter.

natural that this circumstance leads to known ambiguity of the results which, how-

ever, can be used for qualitative conclusions about the properties of the plasma
and specifically about its phase conposition. For our purposes investigations of

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a high—density plasma with appreciable coulomb interaction and developed thermal
ionization will be of greatest interest. Experiments whose results were found on
different installations with duplication of the means of diagnosis will mainly be
used in quantitative comparison in the given chapter. These experiments can be

section of high-temperature thereophysics requires the use of nontraditional exper-
imental methods. It is significant that there are optima: conditions corresponding

case when Boltsman statistics (ngl << 1) is applicable. Isothermal compression of
this plasma causes an increase of the coulomb interaction energy ~ ezng/ 3 and ac-
cordingly an increase of the parameter of imperfection I‘. But the interparticle
distance ~ :1“3 decreases in this case and when it becomes comparable to the length
of the thermal de Broglie wave of an electron L-(Qxh'lmJTW’ , the electron
component of the plasma is degenerated. In this case the typical kinetic energy
are Fermi energy cr~ ”HP/2!": and the parameter of imperfection

y~2m.n; ”Va-”c” . Further compression of a degenerate plasma leads to an in-

crease of tuperature causes total ionization of the plasma n. = coast and a re-
duction of T due to an increase of kinetic energy. It is natural that similar

optimum conditions caused by superheating of the plasma also occur with isobaric
and impact compression of the plasma. Detailed calculation of these option-s is

presented in Table 4.1 do not at all correspond to the maximal: effects of coulotnh
interaction in this case due to the restrictions considered above on degeneration
and superheating of an imperfect plasma. Moreover, the given data were frequently
obtained on different experimental investigations.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 4.1. Energy Sources and Experimental Device: Used in High-Energy Physics

 

    

      
 
  

" "‘ 72) — ' 5 m (a)
szlili)‘ “:13. “Lél‘f. ‘9‘). . '( ) M'“. Wu.
”“1 myoxu- “nu/W50 "a” un- ‘m- not». c 1

 

  
  
 

  
  
   
  
 

 

 

Xi‘an:
an no
(9)
Mum-mac 4-!0 ’
none
I M3 (11)
Btlpuluue l0 ’
Iflwpum (1 I
ma tun-mu
ﬂue - (14 [0‘ I I0’ I lo‘ I —_ IO" 10"
uue no (15)
llm'trptmuuhl no 50 I2-lo‘ I It? I l0" I0“
uupcu_

    

ynnﬁum- 0.3 I40 II2———»_—_l0'l0’ -—'I|0‘ I0"
2-‘l0' 0.3 II!) EIﬁ-IIO’O‘
Ll”: ﬁlm. W
‘" I" .

III I [In——

 

Chum. Aauglgt?u:_-2
n: (18) ﬂue c__l_t___mx_

 

 

Mam-my l0“
{a "mum:
mm:

._._ __..__.—.—__.

(21) I .
I!

 

Yuma: my D '

ﬂu m lulu-mu

3H?! III-[183

(22 pummc RIP
Elli.“

 

 

.—._

Kmm-u- l0 '
""°" (23

 

[Continued on following page]

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu OFF“ 1“. “SI". "NIX

:ontinued £10m preceding page]:

News“

 

 

 

 

 

In"...
Immu-
néﬁl... l
mu. __ ‘ .
"nun-(25
«unuuul
IIIIUUN'
um.
Any-1y
nuum( _______________ _
“(4.21.1310 5-“) ’ . 10" I0 ’ Io . '0'
unpu-
IIINDINDMD'II‘I
Mc-‘Eugxmﬂ 2-H)" 0.6
Iupun
upownwwu
"Mll;}ﬁ?llll I I0 '
r." W _
qu-ésioJa IO ’ I IMO I
.‘E'31‘.VE.__ -.____..
(31)
)lyul lum- I0 ’ 2 I
Ium launc-
nun
llr-nu$32) II) ‘
._. 1'1!“1"".‘.""'E. ._._
J||u|b(33)| I I0 .

 

 

”autumn
uy-mu

Manama-(34, 5-"? 540‘ IU'

 

 

mowing page]

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key (Continued from preceding page]:

1. Primary energy source 19. adiabatic compression

2. Finite fora of energy release 20. Penmatic percussion fuses
3. Energy density, HJ/cm3 21. combustion percussion fuses
4. 'i‘euperature, ev 22. Electric discharge percussion fuses
5. Pressure, HPa 23. Capacitor

6. Total energy, NJ 24. Rotor machines

7. Duration, seconds 25. Induction storage device

8. Output, w 26. storage battery

9. Chemical explosives 27. Rapid explosion of wires
10. Collapse of metal plates 28. Slow explosim of wires

11. Hagnetic field of 1 me 29. Pulsed discharges

12. Magnetic field of 25 HOe 30. Plasma focus

13. Explosive plasma generators 31. High-pressure arcs

14. Nuclear explosions 32. Furnace experiments

15. Neutron heating 33. Laser

16. Shock waves in solid 34. Target

1?. Shock waves in gas 35. Electron beam

18. Compressed gas

'No main problems arise in experimental investigation of a dense plasma. The first
is to find possible qualitatively new physical phenomena and the second is to find
the quantitative characteristics of a strongly compressed plasma to compare them
to theoretical models. These two problems also determine the variety of the
methods used and the objects of investigation.

4.2. Electric Methods of Producing an Imperfect Plasma

If the plasma parameters are not very high, it can be produced over a prolonged
period of time in stationary arcs and furnaces. The widespread method of creating
a plasma is the furnace method [10, 11], where energy is delivered as a result of
thermal conductivity from the solid wall confining the plasma and heated by an
external electric heater. The maximum temperatures of this type of installation
are limited to a value of approximately less than 3,000 x. At these temperatures
even a cesium plasma (ionization potential of Ce ' 3.89 eV) is ionized very week-
17 (~ 1 percent [12]). which makes reliable determination of the coulomb interac-
tion effect difficult [12, 13].

The effectiveness of this method increases sharply in the molten metal range of
parameters, where it is the main source of information about the thermodynamics of
the liquid phase and about the curve of high-temperature boiling of mercury and
alkali metals. In this case one can reach the critical point for mercury. oesiun
and rubidium, while the critical parameters of the remaining metals can be esti-
mated by similar extrapolation (10, 14]. The derived data make it possible to
formulate the modified principle of thermodynamic similarity for metals [15, 16]
and to estimate on this basis the thermophysical properties of the remaining metals
of the periodic table.

Measurements of the electric conductivity of mercury and cesim at subcritical
pressures and temperatures yield valuable information about the structure and

149

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nature of interparticlc interaction in a sparkly ionized plasma [10. ll. 17]. The
effects of imperfection are manifested very clearly here-~a decrease of density
by 20 percent leads to a decrease of the electric conductivity of mercury by a
factor of 104 [18] and of cesium by a factor of 103 [19]. The presence of an ex-
ponential increase of electric conductivity during the initial stages of plasma
compression (17] is explained by the polarization interaction of charges and
neutrals. Electron interaction with a neutral in approximation of isotropic
scattering leads to a decrease of the ionization potential by Al..-=n.h'ysq7m’.
where q is the elastic scattering cross-section of slow electrons on neutrals.
Ion polarization of a neutral yields the addition 1\I...-4M.€'u/'. , which leads
to the exponential dependence of electron concentration [17]

n,~ exm—I -l- A1,. -I- AI,,)I2hT~¢kan. (4.1)

with an exponent close to the value yielded by experiment. An additional mechanism
that determines the electric conductivity of a weakly ionized plasma is electron
localization on density fluctuations [20] , which leads to the appearance of heavy
cluster formations. Quantitative calculation of these phenomena under experimntal
conditions [18] is very difficult due to the absence of detailed data on the inter-
nal structure and interaction of these clusters. The given theoretical methods are
applicable for describing the initial sections of bonding when the electrons in the
system are few and the main type of interaction is charge-neutral interaction. In
the general case complex sel f-consistent quanta-mechanical calculations are re-
quired here that specifically take into account strong coulomb interaction, zone
formation and deformation of electron energy spectra. The influence of these ef-
fects specifically show measurements of optical absorption of mercury [21], where
displacement of the red absorption boundary and a one-third decrease of the enrgy
range between the ground 63 and first excited 6p states was recorded with subcrit-
ieal conpression of mercury. The aggregate of experimental data on measurement of
the physical properties of low-boiling metals indicates the absence of specific
phase transitions caused by bonding of the plasma [22] and by strong charge-charge
[5, 23] and charge-neutral [24] interaction. The phase diagram of low-boiling
metals thus has the customary appearance with a single critical point on the curve
of the liquid-gas interface. The possibilities of stationary methods of furnace
heating are illustrated in Figure 4.1, where the phase diagram of cesiunuthe most
popular object to investigate an inerfect plasma-~is shown. A range of parameters
with strong charge-neutral interaction is realized by this method whereas higher
heating of the material is required to produce appreciable effects of coulomb
interact ion .

For this purpose one must exclude contact of the plasma with the walls of the in-
stallation and must carry out internal heating of the medium. This method of gen—
eration is realized in electric arcs [25], for which inhomogeneous distribution of
the physical parameters through the thickness is typical. This inhomogeneity is
determined by competition of Joule dissipation of electric energy and dissipation
of the liberated heat by diffusion and convection and with an increase of pressure
it is determined by thermal conductivity and radiation [3, 26] . In high-pressure
arcs, radiant energy transfer is the main mechanism and numerical solution of the
radiative transfer equation is required with regard to fine details of the spectrum
of resonance lines, the ionization continuum and reabsorption to calculate the

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lo 10 mo iooouaF/uz)

Figure 4.1. Phase Diagram of Cesium l--saturation curve; 2 and 3--range
of statistical experiments (results of [10, ll, 19]); 4--
range achieved isentropic compression [90]; S and 6--range
achieved by incident and reflected shock waves; 7--"slow"
electric explosion [83, 84) (andegree of ionization)

Key:
1. 'mo-phase region 2. “Ia/9

physical conditions in the arc column [25, 27, 47. 28]. It is natural that the
accuracy of these calculations inevitably decreases as plasma density increases.
Moreover, the problem of stabilizing the combustion of the arc becomes acute with
an increase of gas pressure (p 2 10 mm) [3, 25]. The methods used here to sup-
press instabilities are very diverse-«hose are stabilization by electrodes [25],
by a gas vortex [28, 31], by fixed [29, 31] or rotating [32] walls and by sampling
the gas through electrodes [30, 33, 34]. These measures permit one to achieve
stable hot arcs at pressures of approximately 100 MPa although the problem of
stabilization has apparently not been resolved [3] even at pressures of approxi-
mately 10 MPa for some gases (helium and hydrogen).

The main parameters measured for stationary arcs are tthe volt-ampere characteris-
tics and the radiation emerging from the plasma. Using the equation of energy
balance. this permits one to determine the electric and thermal conductivity of
the plasma [35, 36] at low pressures (approximately 0.1 HPa) when convective and
radiant transfer can be disregarded. The most complete results have now been ob-
tained for an argon and hydrogen plasma at T - (3-5)103 K and p ~ 0.1 me. Like
data on viscosity [37, 38], we use these results for comparison with the results
of calculating the critical coefficients of a plasma (see chapters 2 and 3).

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The use of electric arcs as powerful light sources determined the great interest
in their optical properties. Transition from the discontinuous to the continuous
spectrum as a result of broadening and fusion of spectral lines and shifting of
the photoionization thresholds as plasma pressure increases [4) was recorded in
early papers [39, 40]. A further increase of pressure leads to an increase of
radiation intensity, which approaches the radiation of a black body (281. Thus.
the transport properties of a low-temperature plasma can be measured in high-
pressure stationary arcs and the first manifestations of imperfection caused by
coulomb interaction can be recorded. however, the difficulties of annealing and
stabilization of stationary arcs at high pressures and also the limitation of power
supply sources do not permit one to find electron concentrations in this manor
greater than approximately 3.1024 m'3. Stationary methods sharply lose their ef-
fectiveness upon transition to the range of higher densities and parameters of im-
perfection I‘ > 0.25.

significantly higher energy concentrations can be achieved in pulse experiments

(see Table 4.1). The pressures and temperatures developed in this case are compar-
able to or exceed the ultimate strength of the structural materials of the installa-
tions. In this case a plasma with high parameters can exist only during a short
time determined by the energy capabilities of power supply sources and the cooling
kinetics of the plasma volume. For a plasma with extremely high parameters (p 103
MPa) , one can accomplish only inertial confinement during a time determined by the
transit of its heated regions and by structural breakdown of experimental installa-
tions. 'lhese circumstances place increased requirements on diagnosis, which is a
special complex problem in this case.

The fact is that use of traditional spectroscopic methods [41] in the physics of
an imperfect plasma is difficult due to the conditionality of separating electrons
into free and bound and also due to the optical opaqueness of a dense plasma. If
the dimensions of the boundary region of a plasma are sufficiently high. the ther-
mal radiation emerging from the nucleus of the plasma volume will be shielded by
cold layers of plasma. In this case the recorded radiation carries information
about the external boundary of the plasma and a complex system of integrodifferen-
tial equations that describe the dynamics of motion and radiation transfer in the
plasma [42! must be solved to estimate the processes inside the plasma region. In
order that the emerging radiation carry information about the processes inside the
plasma, it is necessary that the path of the radiation inside the plasma exceed
the characteristic dimension on the boundary of the plasma volume. In most cases
this dimension is sufficiently large since it is determined by convective or radi-
ant heat transfer processes, whereas the path of radiation decreases sharply with
an increase of plasma density. Apparently a Sufficiently sharp boundary whose role
is performed by the shock wave front can be produced only with shock compression
of the plasma. The thickness of this front is very small since it is determined by
viscous dissipation processes and comprises several lengths of the free path of
molecules [42, 43]. As already mentioned, it is difficult to establish a specific
boundary between the electrons of the continuous and discontinuous spectra in a
dense plasma and it is especially difficult to take into account the effect of
strong interaction on the profile, position and intensity of the spectral lines
and the boundaries of photorecombination and ionization continuums. Therefore,
due to the difficulties of interpretation, detailed spectroscopic methods of diag-
nosing a dense plasma are unreliable even in those cases when optical diagnosis

is still possible.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'ﬂf‘lAl. "SF. ONLY

These circumstances force one to turn to methods of diagnosis that utilize excita-
tion of deep electron and nuclear energy levels which, due to their high binding
energy, are hardly sensitive to "weak" (approximately 1 ev) external interparticle
interaction. Among these methods, the method of pulse roentgenography [44-461,
which makes it possible to determinethe extent of absorption and consequently the
density of a plasma, has been realized in practice. The characteristic feature
of this method is the low inertia, absence of perturbations in the plasma and
independence of external interparticle interaction.

The same independence of results from external conditions is inherent to nuclear
[47] and positron [48] methods of diagnosis. In the first method it is suggested
that the method of nuclear resonance of y-fluorescence, based on recording the
Doppler broadening of the nuclear y-line excited by an external radiation source
with energy of hundreds of Rev, be used to measure the plasma density and temper-
ature. The method of positron diagnosis [48] consists in recording short-wave
photons occurring in the plasma upon annihilation of electron-positron pairs. The
y-radiation occurring in both methods, due to its short wave length, emerges unhin-
dered from the plasma and is therefore accessible to recording. Unfortunately,
these methods are still in the development stage due to practical difficulties.
Moreover, the significant time required for recording limits the application of
these methods in pulse investigations.

Thus, the possibilities of measurements in a dense plasma are very limited. Only
the more general integral characteristics of plasma pr0cesses (pressure. total cur-
rents, voltages, cmbedded energy and so on) are accessible to recording. obtaining
detailed physical information from these data must be carried out within the frame-
work of various types of limiting theoretical assumptions with use of calculated
thermophysical data. It is natural that this leads to appreciable ambiguity [49,
71, 721 of the results obtained (see Figure 4.20, a). Independent recording of

the total complex of physical parameters with possible duplication of the measure-
ment methods must be carried out to obtain reliable data about the properties of

an imperfect plasma.

The most widespread in pulse investigations of a dense low-temperature plasma are
now two methods of energy accumulation--electric and dynamic methods of plasma gen-
eration. In the first of these methods, the plasma is heated as a result of Joule
dissipation of energy when pulses of electric current are passed through the gases
or condensed media [3]. This method of generation is the traditional one in plasma
physics. The compactness of the experimental installations and the possibility of
easily varying the composition and parameters of the plasma over a wide range dis-
tinguish it. At the same time these methods are essentially related to passing
powerful electric currents and to formation of magnetic fields, which make diagno"
sis difficult and which cause inhomogeneities and development of various instabil-
ities in a moving plasma. Dynamic methods of plasma generation are based on vis~
cous dissipation of energy in the front of powerful ionizing shock waves or during
isentropic compression. Thus, extremely high parameters of an imperfect plasma

can now be achieved. It is significant that the hydrodynamics of motion can be
used in this case to measure the parameters of a shock-compressed medium, which

is an additional significant advantage of the given method in the absence of re-
liable means of diagnosing a dense plasma. However, dynamic experiments, due to
the high output of the installations, require development of expensive specialized

experimental benches and the use of remote high-speed methods of recording [50].

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Use; UNIJ

Let us briefly consider each of these methods. Pulse discharges, compared to
steady discharges, permit one to produce higher plasma parameters since they do
not require stabilization and the problem of cooling the walls confining the dis-
charge does not occur. The typical discharge times are dependent on the design
features of the installations and vary over a wide range from microseconds to tens
of milliseconds. The lower bound is selected from the condition of plasma ther-
malization and the need for diffusion of radiation and the magnetic field to the
plasma channel [3]. The maximum combustion time of the discha e corresponds to
the condition of the smallness of the thermal akin-layer 6 ~ At (A is temperature
conductivity) so as not to permit excessive heating and breakdown of the walls.

Pulsed discharges in gases are usually created by discharge of a capacitor bank
across an interelectrode gap. The most complete measurements have now been carried
out in xenon [51-53], where it was possible to measure pressure (with a piezosen-
sor), temperature and concentration of electrons (interferometrically) [52, 53] in
a rarefied plasma with tie up to 3.44024 m‘3 and 1' ~ 0.1. Bperiments in helius
were performed with less complete diagnosis [54]. The operating modes of flash
lamps, when the plasma fills a fixed volume, were investigated in detail, which
permits one to estimate the amber of electrons in the problem of determining the
electric conductivity of the plasma. These experiments were carried out with an
argon, xenon, krypton [53, SS, 56], air, nitrogen and $25 plasma at p ~ 0.1-2 HPa
and 'r - 10-30-103 1:. '

As the pressure increases, complications arise in these experiments with ignition
of the discharge, for which either a low-power arc (57, 58] or electric explosion
of a conductor [83] is used during the initial stages. This stimulated discharge
made it possible to produce arcs in hydrogen at p ~ 40 me [59], in neon (p ~ 50
MPa [60], in helium (p ’ 20 HPa) [61] and in argon (p ‘ 160 MPa) [60, 63]. How-
ever the high temperatures developed in this case (up to 45-103 K) lead to super-
heating of the plasma, as a result of which the parameters of imperfection do not
exceed values of I‘ ~ 0.3. Moreover, it is difficult in pulsed gas discharges to
determine the dimensions of the plasma channel and accordingly to estimate the
mass of the plasma. To make a more definite judgment about the amount of plasma,
one must limit the discharge gap, i.e., one must carry out the discharge in a
closed space. In this case the experimental cell manufactured from transparent
material is filled with a gas (hydrogen (64], air [65] or xenon [66]) at initial
pressure on the order of 0.1 MPa and is then heated by a current pulse to approxi-
mately 20,000 K at pressure of approximately 15 me: in this case n. ~ 1025 m'3
and r ~ 0.2. Experiments in thin capillary tubes (approximately 1 In) had to be
carried out to use optical methods of diagnosis, which has an appreciable effect
on the homogeneity of the plasma. We note that the given experiments differ ad-
vantageously from most pulsed discharges by the capability of recording the equa-
tion of state of the plasma.

Methods related to heating the condensed phase of matter are used to move to the
range of higher densities. These are capillary discharge with an evaporating wall
(KRIS), a discharge pressed against the wall by a magnetic field (PP) and a pulsed
discharge in liquids (IRZh), electric breakdown of solid dielectrics and electric
explosion of metal wires. The electric power introduced into the discharge in
these methods is consumed for evaporation and ionization of the condensed phase.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[“3310FFICIAL,USEZ(MVLV

which causes the plasma to move either in the axial (KRIS and PPR) or in the radial
directions (Ith and explosion of wires).

A capillary discharge with evaporating wall permits one to produce a high-density
(n, ~ 1023-1026 m‘3 and r - 0.1-0.2). high-temperature (approximately 20-50 103 K)
and high-pressure (up to 80 Mrs) plasma which is determined by the mechanical
strength of the capillary tube walls. The problem of the mechanical strength of
the capillary tube is eliminated to a significant degree in PPR, where the plasma
flux is pressed by a magnetic field against the channel of the material being in-
vestigated. The composition of a KRIS and PPR plasma can be varied over a very
wide range by varying the insulator material, as which quartz [67]. lithium hydride
[68, 69] and yttrium oxide [70) are used. A KRIS burns stably in capillary tubes
up to 10 mm long, which permits its use as a pulsed brightness standard with T -
- 39,000 K 1 10 percent. The use of a graduated capillary tube in [69] made it
possible to measure the paths of optical radiation in a lithium hydride plasma:
we use thses data in section 4.7.

The capillary tube was manufactured from transparent quartz filled with molten
metal prior to the experiment for the possibility of recording the plasma temper-
ature of alkali metals in experiments in isobaric heating [71, 72]. A quasi-steady
state corresonding to pressure from 13 to 110 "Pa and temperature of approximately
(4-16)lo3 K is established in the system during the experiment (approximately
240'2 second). Interpretation of the processes in this discharge is a complex
task [71]. Recording the volt-ampere characteristics and surface radiation of

the discharge permits one to estimate the temperature profile of the plasma and
its electric conductivity by solving the Elenbaas-Helier equation [72]. However,
the need for assumptions leads to the fact that the results are dependent on the
method of processing [49, 71, 72].

The maximum although not always controllable plasma parameters in pulsed electric
experiments can be achieved with pulse discharge in a liquid initiated by electric
explosion of a wire [73—75) and by additional compressed detonation of an explo-
sive charge [76]. Under the given conditions it is extremely difficult to make
complete measurements, the results are contradictory [75, 76] and estimates of

the plasma properties made on the basis of electric and optical recordings raise
doubts since they clearly contradict the equations of state plotted for this re-
gion [77].

Electric detaonation of conductors by current [78-81] is used extensively in high-
temperature thermophysics to determine the properties of refractory metals up to
the melting point [79], to determine the characteristics of the evaporation procc
ess, estimates of the latent boiling enthalpies of metals [all and so on. These
experiments are usually carried out with low initial pressure and rapid introduc-
tion of electric energy into the metal, which leads to development of diverse in-
stabilities of the volatile metal [81] and this limits the use of these methods in
quantitative plasma investigations.

Restriction of the discharge channels by diephragms was carried out in [46, 82] to
reduce the effect of inhomogeneities. The combination of electric detonation with
a cascade arc made it possible to heat a titanium plasma to T = (17-18)103 K,

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9 : 40 “Pa and ne . 10"" in”. which corresponds to I' ~ 0.5. We note that this is
the only experiment where the measured values of electric conductivity exceeded
Spitzer values.

 

Figure 4.2. Schematic Diagram of Installation for slow Electric Explosion
of Cesium [83]: l--ballast resistor: 2--capacitor bank: 3-
oscilIOgraphz 4--cesi\m ampulex S--pressure gauge; 6--thermo-
compressor; 7--argon tank; 8-—spectrograph: 9--hi'gh-pressure
chamber; lO--anode: ll--opticel windows: l2--high-speed mvie
cameras: l3--re£erence resistor

The method of slow introduction of electric power and the use of counter presstne
(p = 50 HPa) of an inert gas was used in [83-85] to suppress the instabilities
arising during pulsed heating. Setting up the experiment in this manner made it
possible to carry out extensive investigations of the themopbysical properties of
molten metals [85. 86] in the range of parameters of p up to 500 MPa and T - 5.000
K. approaching the high-temperature boiling curve. It is typical that no anomalies
of any kind caused by metal-dielectric phase transition [22] or by plasma effects
[5, 97) were found here. attempts to expand this method to the range of a "gaseous”
plasma cause the development of inhomogeneities of the plasma coltmm, the reason
for which is boiling of the fluid and development of auperheating instability [88]
caused by a decrease of electric conductivity with an increase of temperature.

The effects of boiling were eliminated in [83, 84] during ilobaric heating of
cesium in the subcritical range of pressures. A diagram 0’: the experiment is pre-
sented in Figure 4.2. The discharge occurring between electrodes was stabilized
by a gas wall of argon with constant pressure of 12.5, 25 and SO HPa. Measurement
of current and voltage jointly with optical recording of plasma expansion permits
one to determine the caloric equation of state and the electric conductivity of
cesium at tenperatures up to 35,000 K. where l‘ ‘ 0.7. We note that superheated
instability caused by the sharp dependence of electric conductivity on temperature
was also manifested here with high energy contributions. Setting up the experi~
ments in a similar fashion was also used in [85, 86).

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is typical for electric methods of imperfect plasma generation that, due to
the insufficient energr capacity of the power amply sources (see Table 4.1). a
plasma with high parameters can be produced in small geomtric dimensions. This
leads to significant inhomogeneities of the plasma and greater difficulties in
diagmsing it.

4.3. Dynamic Methods in the Physics of an Imerfect Plasma

Dynamic methods of investigation, based on hydrodynamic Inthods of heating, permit
one to find extremely high energy densities, inferior in this regard only to laser
and electron beam energy, but differing advantageously from the two latter by a
greater volune of plasma and greater completion of means of diagnosis. three
methods of dynamic generation of a plasma--isentropic and shock canpression and
also isentropic expansion of matter first compressed by a shock ane--have now be-
come most widely used.

Experiments on adiabatic compression of saturated cesium vapors were conducted
from a two-stage adiabatic shock tube [89, 90] heated to produce a sufficiently
high pressure of saturated cesium vapors (approximately 0.4-0.7 HPa) to 1,300 K.
Cesiun was compressed to pressures of approximately 5-15 an by measn of a relieved
metal piston of special design that ensures high hermetic sealing and low friction
against the wall. The absence of the two main sources of the growth of entropy--
shock waves and heat transfer-was checked in a special series of control experi-
ment... The measured pressure and volune of gas, together with the condition of
isentropic ty. permit one to determine the plasma energy and temperature. Higher
tauperatures compared to the furnace method were achieved: '1' ‘ (3-0'103 K (see
Figure 4.1). auteur, even under these conditions the electron concentration did
not exceed approximately 1024 m3 so that the coulonb interaction effects are still
manifested weakly here.

The maximm manifestation of coulomb interactions in a cesium plasma should be ex-
pected in the range of higher temperatures corresponding to the optimun with re-
spect to superheating of the plasma. Thermodynunic calculations whose results
(curves 1‘ - const and u 3 coast) are presented in Figure 4.1 were made in [6] to
establish the optimum. A method of shock comression based on this dissipation of
the kinetic energy of the flux in the shock wave front was considered [6] to gen-
erate a plasma of optimum parameters.

Carparative analysis shows that the high homogeneity and purity of plasma exchange,
the absence of electric and magnetic fields and the high reproducibility of the
results make shock waves a convenient tool for investigating a strongly imperfect
degenerate [9, $0] and Boltzman [91] plasma. An additional significant advantage
of these methods is the possibility of using the relationship of gas-dynamic char-
acteristics to the equation of state of the generated plasma. This relationship
is expressed in general form by a complex system of nonlinear (three-dimensional
in spatial coordinate) differential equations of transient gas dynamics [42] .
complete solution of which is found far beyond the capability of eyen the most
modern couputers. For this reason one attempts in dynamic investigations to use
[42] automodel solutions of gas dynamics--solutions of the transient shock wave
type and the centered Riemann rarefaction wave type that express the laws of con-
servation in sinple algebraic or integral forms. Automodel conditions (steadiness,
uniformity and so on) of the corresponding friction modes should be provided in
this case to use these relations in experiment.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“‘3 OH“ ‘I u INT 0“! \

The initial (noted by subscript 0) and final states are Rankin-Hugonio [92] upon
propagation of a steady shock burst through matter r:

nv..- v.(v---a); V.(p--n.)== D“: (4.2)
u .— u. -- i0. l p.)(V.-- V)-

Here v is specific volume, p is pressure, I) is internal energy, D is the velocity
of the shock wave front in the laboratory system of coordinates and u is the julp
of mass velocity in the burst.

Relations (4.2) written in this form, being an expression of the general laws of
conservation of mass, pulse and energy, do not contain limiting assuptions about
the properties of matter being considered. me state of the medium behind the

shock wave front is characterized by the values V, p, D, u and 0. Measuring any
two of them and assuming that the initial states 00, Va and p0 are known, one can
determine by means of (4.2) all the required hydrodynamic and thermodynamic vari-
ables. Shock wave velocity D is measurement most easily and accurately by basic

methods. Selecting the second measured parameter is dependent on specific exper-
imental conditions.

Analysis of the errors of the relations contained in (4.2) shows that direct record-
ing of density (p = T1) of a shock-compressed substance must be carried out in the
case of strongly conpressed plasma and gaseous mdia. A method of these measmme
ments has now been developed, based on recording of absorption of x-radiation by a
cesiun [93], argon [94] and air [95] plasma. High accuracy is provided [50] by
recording the mass velocity of motion with lower oompressability of the system
(condensed media). Thus, the parameters of state of a degenerate plasma of metals
[50] and of dense Boltman argon and xenon and plasma [96, 97] were determined.

This type of recording permits one to find 0 - 0(p, V).

In experiments to record the curves of isentropic expansion [98, 99] of a substance
first compressed and heated in the shock wave front, the states in the centered
discharge wave are described by Riemann integrals [42]:

a. I.
v = V]. I (duldp)Mp; u = u. — '[ p(duldp)'dp. (4. 3)
D

which are calculated along the experimentally measured isentropic curve u - u(p) .
The subscript 'n" is related to the beginning of discharge.

Making measurements at different initial conditions and intensities of shock waves,
one can determine the caloric equation of state I! - U(p, V) in the range of the
p-v—plane overlapped by Hugonio adiabatic curves. In experiments conducted up to
the present, shock wave intensity was varied by variation of the output of the
excitation sources determined by the pressure of the thrusting gas 491, 100), by
the type of explosive (w), by the throwing devices and targets [96. 98]. Moreover,
different methods of varying the parameters of the initial states were used.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. IISII‘. ()NIN

 

Figure 4.3. Diagram of Heated Shock Tube: l--photomultiplier with cathode
repeater: 2--x-ray tube; 3--pulse roentgenography circuit: 4--
thermocouples; Suvalve: 6--vacuum meter: 7--vacuue pusps: 8--
compressor: 9--membranes: lO-winding of heater

Key:
1. Plasma

A pneusatic shock tube, the diagram of which is presented in Figure 4.3, was de-
veloped [91) to create powerful shock waves in cesium vapors. The installation
approximately 4 meters long was heated to approximately l,000°K to produce high
initial pressures (p - 0.05 HPa) of cesiua vapors. The shock wave was excited in
a low-pressure chamber upon expansion of helium, argon or mixtures of them first
heated to approximately 50 We into the cesium vapor. The parameters of a shock-
cospressed plasma were additionally increased by using shock waves reflected from
the end of the tube. According to the dynamic approach, the two mechanical para-
eters that characterize shock compression were measured independently in each ex-
periment. Basic optical (91] and x-ray [lOl] methods were used to record the
velocity of the shock wave front and to nonitor the steadiness of the shock-com-
pressed plasma flow. The density of an imperfect plasma was determined by the
pulsed roentgenography method on absorption of long-wave x-radiation by the plasma.
Measurement of these two parameters, according to the laws of conservation (4.2),
is equivalent to recording the caloric equation of state of a shock-commend
plasma over a wide range of parameters shown in Figure 4.1. Experimental determin-
ation of the plasma temperature was made difficult under these conditions by ab-
sorption of light by the cesium molecules. Therefore, the temperature was deter-
mined on the basis of the caloric equation of state 0 - U(p, V) found experimentally
by numerical solution of the linear: inhomogeneous differential equation that ex-
presses the first law of thermodynamics [102]:

up + (w/aer/ap (dUIOpM’WV = T- “W

159

MWMONIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This permits one to find the thermodynamically complete equation of state of an
imperfect cesium plasma. The first data on shock compression of cesium were
found in [91, 93] and were later confirmed by independent experiments [45, 101],
where the accuracy of measurements was increased somewhat. Data now obtained in
shock tubes yield consistent thermodynamically complete information [100) about
the equation of state of a cesium plasma in the range of parameters: p - 0.15-20
MPa, 1 - (2.6-20)103 x, ne - 5-1021 to 5-1025 m-3 and r . 0.2-2.2 It is signif-
icant that, along with these results, the electric conductivity was measured by
the method of variation of Q-factor of a vibrational circuit [103].

Interpretation of a large number of experiments with cesium indicated a signifi-
cant contribution [93, loo, 104] of the discontinuous spectrum to the thermophysi-
cal characteristics of the system. This circumstance made it necessary to conduct
experiments with a plasma of other chemical elements over as wide a range of param-
eters as possible. Inert gases were selected as the object of investigation in
dynamic experiments [7, 94, 96, 97, 105] due to the fact that the absence of ex-
penditures on dissociation and the high molecular mass make compression and heat-
ing of them in the shock wave front effective, while the absence of complex molec-
ular and ion-molecular formations and detailed study of the elementary processes
significantly facilitate interpretation of the results. Thermodynamic and hydro-
dynamic calculations showed [7, 8, 105] that the optimum experimental conditions
correspond to shock wave intensities of approximately 9 km/s in argon and approx-
imately S km/s in xenon. In this case an increase of shock wave velocity leads

to superheating of the plasma, while an increase of initial gas pressure leads to
degeneration of the plasma and consequently to a reduction of interaction. Realiz-
ation of the optimum range of parameters requires that high-enthalpy working sub-
stances new to plasma physics be used. Condensed explosives were used as the
active components in the developed explosive imperfect plasma generators [6, 7, 8]
due to their significant energy capacity and speed of detonation transformation,
which leads to a high level of output of the experimental installations (see

Table 4.1). Moreover, the modern technology of manufacturing initial explosive
charges and the level of understanding and-calculation of high-speed hydrodynamic
phenomena permits one to produce a homogeneous dense plasma for several microsec-
onds in the space on the order of a centimeter, which is quite sufficient to make
measurements with high accuracy (unlike, for example, phenomena from laser heating,
exploding wires and capillary tube discharges).

An imperfect plasma generator, which is an explosive shock tube (Figure 4.4) with
condensed explosive as the active element, was developed in [7] to realize the op~
timum range of parameters. Powerful ionizing shock waves were excited in this
generator by expansion of the detonation products of explosives having high dynamic
characteristics p - 3-104 MPa, 1 . 5-103 x, o . 2.3.103 kg/m3 and u . 2.1-103 m/s
after completion of the detonation transformation reaction. The use of a specially
shaped lens and selection of the corresponding dimensions of the initial explosive
charge ensured uniformity and steadiness of the parameters of the detonation front
when it emerged from the explosive into the gas being investigated. The total en-
ergy release in the experiment was approximately 3.106 J with output of 1011 H,
which of course led to destruction of the entire device. This circumstance forces
one to conduct experiments in specially protected rooms while observing safety
measures. The results of the measurements showed the high uniformity and quasi-
steady nature of the plasma flow, which was accomplished by inertial delay of the

160

H0!‘0FF1C1AI.I£5EZ(MHLY
ma "Fl-1H“ I'N‘ "NI \

 

Figure 4.4. Photograph of Explosive shock Tube: l~~detonation lens; 2--
explosive charge: 3--ring insert with electric contact sensors
and window for x-ray measurements; 4--mirror for optical re-
cordings; S--tube for delivery of gas

shock-compressed plasma by the massive walls of the shock tube channel. Good re-
producibility of the shock wave parameters was achieved in experiments with the

given generators.

An explosive imperfect plasma generator was equipped with a complete set of inde-
pendent thermodynamic and electrophysical measurements. A diagram of these mea-

surements is presented in Figure 4.5.

The velocity of the shock wave front was measured by basic electric contact and
optical methods with an accuracy of 1-1.5 percent. The density of the shock-com-
pressed plasma was determined by the pulsed roentgenography method by absorption 0.
soft x-radiation by the plasma. The radiation source was a x-ray tube operating
in the forced mode and the receiver was a sodium iodide scintillator and photomul-
tiplier. The developed method ensured accuracy of recording density of approxi-
mately 92 percent, high time characteristics (5 10'7 second) and the absence of
perturbations in the plasma flow. The plasma temperature was measured by the

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I
in

H

-‘—‘—'.:.n
F;
a»:
-
Ei‘e
V ‘
. e

 

Figure 4.5. Diagram of Measurements in Explosive Ilperfect Plasma Generator:
l--power supply of X-ny tube; 2--oontrol unit: 3--oecillographsx
4--differential amplifier) 5--x-ray tube) 6-mirzor: 7-potential
and current probes for recording electric conductivity: 8--ex-
plosive charge: 9--generator channel) lO--probes for measuring
velocity of shock wave front; ll--filter and attenuator; 12--
high-speed movie camera; l3--direct current source) unphoto-
Nltiplier with scintillator; lS--power supply of electric con-
tectss 16--velocity recording oscillogreph

l. Blast

brightness method and will be described below. Recording the velocity of the front
and measuring the density determine according to laws of conservation (4.2) the
equation of state of a plasma 0 - 0(9) V), which together with the measured temper-
ature of ‘r - Np. V). represents thermodynamically complete infatuation [94] about
an argon plasma at p - (1.6-5.3)102 an, 1- : (15.5-23uo3 x, r = 1.3-2.2 and
news-3.91026 m'3.

Due to the high level of electric conductivity (approximately 105 Win). it was
measured by probe methods having high spatial resolution and relatively simple
realization under conditions of a single dynamic experiment. A four-point scheme
[105] (see Figure 4.5) was used to eliminate the distorting effect or pre-electrode
electric layers caused by flow of the strong transport current (approximately

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
103 A) tlnnwln the plasma. The dimensions or the plum probe were measured by
roentqcnogrqmic and optical metth. The linear nature of the volt-aspen char-
acteristics shown that the developed scheme of diagnostics does not lead to viola-
tion of the isothermal nature of the plasma and eliminates the influence of pre-
electrode effects--the main deficiency of probe methods in a dense plasma.

A wide range of parameters of imperfection was encompassed by the measurements
(see Figure 4.19) from I‘ = 0.3, where the difference between theories is slight
and there are other data. to l‘ = 7. where most theoretical approximations diverge.
This range was investigated by using different gases-air, neon, argon and xenon
in ranges partially overlapping each other and other measurements.

The parameters of an inperfect plasma close to the maximum possible for a nondegen~
erate plasma were achieved [96. 97) on linear explosive rectangular shock wave
generators. A diagram of one of them is presented infigure 4.6. Under these con-
ditions the ionizing shock wave occurs upon expansion of metal and polymer targets
first compressed to approximately 105 MPa by linear explosive throwing devices
whose operating principle is based on acceleration of detonation products of metal
or polymer strikers, into the gases being investigated. Special attention was de-
voted during development of these experimental devices to the symmetry of the gen-
erated shock waves (asynchronicity S 10-7 second), reproducibility of parameters

(S 1 percent) and also the steadiness and uniformity of the gas-dynamic flow. which
was ensured by eliminating distorting rarefaction waves from the lateral and con-
tact surfaces of the generator couponents. 'me amplitude and duration of the shock
waves in a plasma were varied by using explosive systems with different dimensions
and brisance and also by variation of the material and thickness of the strikers.
The highest permeters were achieved in a device (see Figure 4.6) with total energy
release of approximately 3O-l06 J and output of 1011 R that accelerates an aluminum
striker to 5.92-104 m/s. Additional expansion of the velocity capabilities of gen-
erators was provided by using easily compressible polymer materials and also by us-
ing the effect of evaporation of metal targets in the discharge wave [98].

Joint independent recording of the two kinematic parameters-—the velocity of the
front and the mass velocity of motion of the plasma-was made in experiments on
these generators. The measurements were made by basic electrocontact and optical
methods. Open electrocontact sensors recorded the wave front with accuracy of
approximately 99 percent on high-speed oscillographs. The mass velocity (error
of 1.5-2 percent) was measured by closed sensors of special design that do not
react to the shock wave in the plasma and that are triggered at the meant of ar-
rival of the heavy contact surface. The system of sensors was arranged so as to
take into account the possible bending of the shock wave and to monitor the param-
eters of the control pressure pulse. The optical method of measurements is based
on recording the glow of the shock wave, variation of the intensity and cutoff of
this glow upon reflection of the burst from a transparent obstacle. The plasma
emission was scanned and recorded by photorecorders and electro-optical
transducers.

As a result of the measurements the calorie and thermal equations of state of an
imperfect argon and xenon plasma were determined over a wide range of parameters

[96, 97): r ~ 10-2 to 5.2, p = (0.3-3.4)102 HPa, 'r = (5.2-26no r and n. = 2020
to 3-1027 m‘3. It is i..teresting that a plasma with density of 1.3403 kg/m3

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! (WHOM. USE ONLY

     
 

- ‘ ‘
fad
—> — /////////////////////

Figure 4.6. Diagram of Experiment in Explosive Rectangular shock Rave
Generator: l--detonation lens: 2--explosive charge: 3--
metal striker; 4--experimental assembly: S--target; 6--
investigated gas: 7--electric contacts and pulse shaper
unit; 8--high-speed movie camera; 9--electro-optica1 con-
verter: lo-oscillographs: ll--synchronization and blast
unit

that exceeds the critical density (1.15-1013 kg/m3) and approaches the density of
the liquid phase of xenon was produced in these experiments.

The characteristic feature of experiments on dynamic regeneration of an imperfect
plasma of inert gases is the possibility of making optical measurements [106]. The
determining factor here is the circumstance that the thickness of the viscous

shock wave is much less than the length of the path of light radiation in the
plasma. Therefore, thermal radiation has the capability of emerging unhindered
from the plasma peace and yields direct experimental information about the equilib-
rium temperature and absorption coefficients of a shock-compressed plasma.

The temperature of the shock-compressed plasma was measured by the brightness
method [106]. A diagram of the experiment is presentedin Figure 4.7, where ex-
plosive rectangular shock-wave generators were used to produce the plasma. The

164

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dimensions of the plasma layer enclosed between the wave front and the contact
surface increases in time-~6 ~ (D - u)t--as the shock wave moves in the gas being
investigated. In this case the radiation intensity of this layer increases by
the law [42]

J J.l| — elm-611ml. (4.5)

which permits one, by recording the value of this increase, to find the absorption
coefficient of a plasma at selected frequency v. be the plasma moves further, its
thickness becomes greater than the typical path of radiation K31. In this case .
the shack wave front radiates like a black body Io which determines the tuperature
of a shock-compressed plasma.

(2)

' ¢ ..5 ' -5 .5 mm .v ‘
. -C"¥?;—+vf“‘7f“/f““i;
..J‘l':" "

_. furl",

4m;

   

      
  
  

Figure 4.7. Diagram for neasuring Optical Properties of Plasma [95]: 1--
oscillographs; 2--photomltipliers; tin-attenuator; 4--adjuet-
ing laser; Sumirrors; 6--filters: 7-target: 8--strikern 9--
explosive charge

1. Laser 4 . Plasma
2 . Light 5. lens
3. Photomultipl ier

Thus, analysis of the presently available experimental material shows that the most
complete experimental information on the thermphysical properties have been ob-
tained for a cesium plasma and a plasma of inert gases. Therefore, it is these data
that can be used for quantitative comparison to the results of theoretical methods
developed in Chapters 1-3.

4.4. On Condensation of an Imrfect Plasma

(he of the most interesting qualitative conclusions of the theory of an ilperfect
plasma is prediction of the capability of stratification of a strongly compressed

165

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plasma to phases of different density. In this case the plasma phase transitions
are predicted in different physical situations-4:1 a strongly compressed degenerate
[107] Wigner crystal) and Boltsman plasma [5, 23]. during metal-dielectric transi-
tion [22), upon netalization of vapors, upon formation of clusters [24], in media
excited by optical radiation [108) and so on. The presence of this interesting
physical effect would qualitatively alter the customary appearance of the phase
diagram of matter [5], leading to the appearance of new phase boundaries (Figure
4.8) and states with unusual physical properties. Specifically. plasma phase

reactor and would require a search for new schematic versions of this device. For
this reason, primarily to conduct a quantitative analysis of available experiments,
one must determine the general qualitative characteristics of behavior of a strong-
ly compressed plasma.

Speaking of plasma condensation [2, 5}, it has become a custom to refer priaarily
to a series of papers of M. Cook et al [109), w are in the author's opinion, abnor-
mal effects were determined when the detonation wave emerged from a condensed ex-
plosive to the free surface of a charge. Investigating this process by leans of
high-speed measuring equipment, the authors observed with good reproducibility

plasma cluster slightly changed its shape during flight and passed through glass
tubes without visible breakdown of then, which was related in [109] to the stabil-
ity (in the terminology of the authors of [112]) of the generated plasma, 1

 

Figure 4.8. Phase Diagram with Regard to Probable Plassa Phase Transitions
[S]: a, b, c and d--critical and triple points (the dashed lines
denote possible variants): '1', 2h. 6, P and SNP--eolid, liquid,
gas, plasma and strongly imperfect plasma, respectively

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

inadequate for conclusions about plasma phase transition, the more so since there
are no direct measurements of density-~the main characteristic of the detected ef~
£ect--in [109].

The pulsed roentgenography method was used [95] to record the density of a gener-
ated and detonation plasma. The results of measurements showed the absence of
abnormally high density of the plasma cluster. The results of electrocontact re-
cording of the wave and mass velocities D and u with subsequent calculation of
density by laws of conservation (4.2) lead to the same conclusion. The measured
density of the plasma was 8-12 times more than the density of air at atmoapheric
pressure, which is in good agreement with calculations of the state of an air plas-
ma famed behind a strong shock wave front. It is significant that this calcula-
tion was made by ordinary formulas of plasma thermodynamics [5] without using any
concepts of phase transitions.

The authors of [109] emphasized repeatedly that formation of a plasma cluster is
unrelated to the medium surrounding the explosive but is determined by processes of
chemical ionization in the detonation wave. Prom this viewpoint the absence of a
gaseous environment is a favorable circumstance and can only intensify the effect.
However. experiments conducted in [95] on expansion of detonation products to a
vacutm: led to the absence of a plasma cloud, which indicates the relationship of

the effect to the external environment.
m’x “I"

15

   

Figure 4.9. Thermodynamic (a) and Optical (b) Properties of Plasma Cluster:
0 and D ~-x-ray and electrocontact methods, respectively, of
recording equation of state; 0, O, 0 and x-~optica1 measurements

Key:
1. M/s

The values of static electric conductivity measured by probe methods (the diagram
of experiment in [95] is similar to Figure 4.5) of a plasma are in good agreement
with quasi-idea) gas calculations (see Figure 4.19) when using the composition of
an air plasma [1101. Recording the thermal radiation emerging from the plasma
makes it possible to estimate the radiation characteristics of the plasma and to
find its temperature. The data (Figure 4.9, a and b) are also described well by
plasma theory.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem of the decay of the pressure wave on the detonation product-air boun-
dary using semi—empirical equations of state of detonation products and the Eugenio
adiabatic curves for air was solved in [95] to determine the velocity of motion of
the plasma cluster. The derived value of velocity (approximately 9.2-105 We) is
in good agreement with the measurement results and does not require the use of ad-
ditional doubtful concepts on the "reactive thrust" [1091 upon recombination of the
metastable phase. Finally, study of the dynamics of plasma motion showed [95] that
the plasma stability determined in [109] is a simple manifestation of the inertia
of a massive glass shell—an effect wed in an explosive shoe): tube [7] for inertial
confinement of a plasma. This circumstance was also the main reason for the erron-
eous conclusions of (95] about phase transition and about the existence of ”binding
energy" and "internal pressure“ in a dense plasma.

Thus, the experiments and analysis of available data show that the thermodynamic,
optical, electric, hydrodynamic and mechanical properties of the plasma cluster are
fully described on the assumption that this cluster is formed by coapression of air
in a strong shock wave front [95, 113], occurring upon expansion of the detonation
products of a condensed explosive. The enmrated properties of a cinch-commend
plasma are easily explained by existing theories of a strongly irperfect plasma and
therefore the conclusions of the authors of [109] about abnormal properties of this
plasma cluster, related to the quasi-crystallinity of the plasma, is erroneous.

Papers have appeared quite recently, in one of which the observation of phase
transition in a high-temperature dense plasma is preliminarily reported in [114]
and in the other of which it is more specifically reported [115]. It is related

in [114] to abnormal expansion (an increase of thermal energy and temperature at
1-10 ev/atom) upon transit of the matter to the channel after a powerful shock wave
passes through it. lbwever, there are no direct measurements of density in these
experiments and temperature was apparently recorded through the optically thick
layer of an air plasma and the region of the discharged substance and the flow was
distorted by the effect of discharge waves and is known to be transient.

The conclusions in [115] about plasma phase transition were made on the basis of
observations of the abnormal behavior of ms in polyvinyl chloride and yttrium
oxide. The dependence of pressure in the discharge on the length of the capillary
tube, instead of a straight line (the usual path), have a form similar to the iso~
them of a real gas upon intersection of a two-phase region. however, here as in
[115], no direct measurements of density were made, which, together with the ab-
sence of calculated data on the rather coaplex thermodynamic corposition, does not
permit one to correctly interpret the experimental results. All this does not give
one the basis to assume that the hypothesis of phase transition [114, 115] is suf~
ficiently substantiated.

of special interest is the search for thermodynamic anomalies in metals, where
along with "plasm" phase transition, phase stratification caused by overlapping
of electron wave functions and metallization of vapors, may be manifested. How-
ever, recordings of the thermodynamic and transient properties of a plasma of low-
boiling metals (mercury, cesium rubidiun, potassium and sodium), made on furnace
installations (10, 11], showed that the phase diagram of these metals in the vicin-
ity of the boiling curve has ordinary appearance with a single critical point.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Due to collectivization of external electrons, the binding energy and consequently
the paramters of the critical point of most setals are sufficiently high. Fur
exaaple, for copper ph- - 750 “Pa and Th: . 8,400 K and for tungsten pk, I 1,600
We and '11“. = 21,000 K [16]. This circumstance leads to appreciable thermal ion-
ization ('11., becomes conparable to the ionization potential of setals) of the metal
vapor on the boiling curve, which creates favorable opportunities for aanifestation
of coulosb interaction effects. On the other hand, the high critical para-stars of
the metals make it impossible to use stationary sethods here and advance to the
forefront pulsed and primarily dynamic sethods of investigation.

whereas recording of phase transitions is trivial under quasi-steady conditions,
this problem requires special consideration in dynamic experiments. The possible
hydrodynamic effects during shock and isentrOpic comression of a plasna with ax-
bitrary equation of state were analyzed in [116]. The appearance of these effects
would be an indication for plasma phase transitions.

According to theoretical analysis [5] , plasma phase transition should have been
manifested primarily in cesium due to its low ionization potential. Therefore. in-
creased attention was devoted to cesium in the experiments [11-13, 72, 83, 84, 90,
100] and a plasma of this element has now been studied in most detail. However,
amorous detailed experiments on adiabatic and shock compression of a cesiun plasma
did not reveal any thermodynamic or other anosalies. (The values of. electric con-
ductivity close to those typical for metals. found in [72], were subsequently re-
duced by one-half by the authors of [71]).

The dynamic method of isentropic discharge. based on plasma generation upon adia-
batic expansion of condensed matter first compressed in a strong shock wave front,
was realized in [98, 99] to study the thermodynamic properties of metals over a
wide range of the phase diagram. A schematic diagram of this experiment is pre-
sented in Figure 4.10. p

  

Figure 4.10. Diagram of Method of Adiabatic Expansion: H—-adiebatic shock
curves; s--expansion isentropic curve: K--critical point: The
regions of phase mixture are cross-hatched

1 . Plasna 2 . Gas
169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR oFl-‘IC‘AL USE ONLY

inq and evaporation of.
to select the optimum

1 metals in an extensive range of the phase diagram from
including the range of a

ondensed state to an ideal gas,
itical and two-phase states. This experimental
ion of state [1181 that described the data of

mi-espirical equat
rrect asymtotics to mom

nodele at extremly high pressures and teaperatures.
s of this structure that do not utilize concepts
the experimental results on high-speed expansion of uranium

121] and lead [121: 122).

The results of optical seasur
pressed metals are pres
[122] were mainly interested in the kinetics 0

data indicate the absence of phase

totals during their isent
transformations different from the

mus, the aggregate of data obtained up to
ristics of metals during their e

variation of the characte
experiment did

the gaseous states. The
curves and any hydrodynamic anomalies which could
natal-dielectric transition or phase

kind caused by
An example of the phase diagram of copper

stratification of an imper
is presented 4 11 [121) , where the parameters or the critical point cor-
respond to se

 

int: S—-isentropic

lam-critical po
I the liquid-

sion curves V0 - 0.114 m3/g; the region 0
hatched

vapor mixture is cross-
ion, the method of.

Phase Diagram of Copper [121]:

Figure 4 . ll .

'slow' electric explo-

Along with the method of adi
86]. aeoord-

sion of conductors at high pres

ing of density. temperature, pressu

possible to determine the thermphys

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mlyhdunum, ninhiun, load, tuncmton and uranium!) over a wide range of parameters

p -. 5-105 Ml'a and 'r -: 8,000 x, i.e., up to practically the curve of high-tapers-
ture boiling where further heating is accompanied by development of superheated
instability. no results clearly indicate the homganeity of molten metals and
the absence of a dielectric liquid phase at high pressures [5, 22]. ﬁne nunsrous
results of explosions of metal conductors by electric current also indicate the ab-
sence of these types of effects [46, 80, 81].

Thus. the considered experinental information rather specifically indicates the
homogeneous coaposition of an imperfect plasma and the absence of appreciable phys-
ical anomalies in its behavior.

4.5. Comparison of Btperimeuta'! and Calcualted Data on Thermodynamics

The specific methods of generation and diagnosis described in sections 4.2-4.4 per-
nit one to investigate the thermodynamic properties of a dense plasma of different
chemical elements over a wide range of pressures and tenperatures.

The presently available experimental data, which can be used for quantitative com-
parison, are related to a cesium, argon and xenon plasma. Data for a cesim plasma
encompass a wide range of the phase diagram (see Figure 4.1) and are more detailed,
but simultaneous measurement of the caloric and thermal equations of state under
conditions of extremely high values of the parameter of ia'perfection are typical
for experiments with an argon and xenon plasma. Based on analysis of sections 4.2-
4.4, it is this experimental information that is used for cospariaon with the re-
sults of different theoretical approaches described in Chapter 1.

from the viewpoint of the engineering applications considered in this paper, the
main conclusions following from the results of this cosparison are that the method
used for practical calculations (see section 1.6) describes the experimental infor-
mation with an accuracy close to experimental even for the highest of the achieved
parameters of imperfections (see Figures 4.12-4.18). since approximation of the
second group coefficient md "zero" approximation of the pseudo-potential model of
a plasma (section 1.3) in the considered range of parameters yield results essen-
tially coinciding with the present method (see the inset on page 31), the conclu-
sions are also applicable to these theories. At the same time the existing diver
gence from experiment goes beyond the bounds of its accuracy, with regard to which
it makes sense to carry out more detailed analysis to determine the physical nature
of the observed difference.

Experiments on cesium were conducted on installations of three types-~a shock tube
[100], an adiabatic compression tube [90] and by the method of exploding a cesium
wire in an inert gas atmosphere [84]. The data are related to different regions of
the phase diagram (see Figure 4.1), but partially overlap on the boundaries and
agree with each other in the range of experimental accuracy. They all demonstrate
one fact with different degree of clarity (directly in [84, 100] and indirectly
[90]): the experimentally measured enthalpy Mp, V) in the region of incomplete,
but already appreciable ionization is systematically reduced compared to the values
(see Figures 4.12-4.16) predicted by traditional theories (see Chapter 1). It is
typical in this case that the data of [84) , insufficiently accurate to determine
the noted effect in the range of single ionization, have satisfactory accuracy to

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

 

” 2:5 5 7.5 mm (2)

figure 4.12. Caloric Equation of State of Cesium Plasma (V - 200 cs3/g):
the values of the parameter of imperfection I‘ and the degree
of ionization a are noted; the band for the smoothed experi-
mental function H(p, V) (i 5 percent) is cross-hatched [100):
l--ring (Debye) approximation in large canonical group (1.84.
1.85); 2--approximation (1.26-1.30, 1.33) upon selecting the
extent of the electron-ion pseudo-potential and the boundar-
ies of the intra-atomic states equal to -k'l'; 3--approximtion
found in section 1.2 (1.64.16): 4--approxilntion of ideal
plasma with atoms in ground state

Key:
1. kJ/kg 2. MPa

determine it in the range of the beginning of secondary ionisation. The most
clearly indicated tendency is manifested upon comparison of theoretical values to
results having higher accuracy in measurement of the caloric equation of state

u(p. V) in a shock tube (Figures 4.12 and 4.13). What follows from this fact? he
noted in [1001, despite the fact that the divergence is seemingly lov (approximate-
ly 20 percent) . it cannot be eliminated within the considered approaches, selecting
one of the traditional coulomb corrections for isperfection and using known methods
of limiting the atomic statsun. At the same time the agreement of calculations on
an ideal plasna approximation to statsum QC. - 2 having no correct substantiation
of any kind to experiment was unexpectedly good. Nevertheless this coincidence
made it possible in the first experimental paper [91) to scene the need to reduce
the corrections for interaction of free charges, which is equivalent to the appear-
ance of additional repulsion unaccounted for by traditional approaches in a strong-
ly compressed plasma.

The theoretical approximations considered in Chapter 1 permit one to achieve better
agreement with experiment compared to traditional methods, using sequential ap-
proaches. The approximation of section 1.2 provides good agreement with experiunt
in the range of small degrees of ionization (see Figures 4.12 and 4.13). This was
the result of considering the higher terms of the asymptotic expansion of thermo-
dynamic potential [23] by degrees of activity. The effect is primarily related to

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

, Wkly/k8 E

(Inf-p»

  

a a: I 1,0 1,5 Mm (2)

Figure 4.13. Caloric Equation of state of Cesium Plasma (v - 1.000 “3/3):
l--approxination of second group coefficient [26, 32]; 2 and
3--the sane as in Figure 4.12

l. kJ/kg 2. HP.

 

Figure 4.14. Thermal Equation of State of Cesium Plasma. The band of
experimental error is cross-hatched [100]. See Figure
4.12 for notations

Key:
1. We

a significant (approximately 3:92) energy shift of the ground state of the aton,
union differs considerably from the results of previous pepers ll, 123). Tranc-
lated to the framework of the traditional 'chenical" model, this approximation dif-
fers from that of the second group coefficient [124] by appearance of a new tern
proportional to nano‘l/z with sign corresponding to repulsion in the Sacha equa-
tion and equation of state (1.45-1.49). Of courae, interpretation of the theoret-
ical approximation found in section 1.2 in terns of the chemical model is

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONIN

conditional due to the ambiguity of the approach itself to this model (section
1.4), but nevertheless it helps to better understand the physical meaning of the

observed phenomenon.

  

«W new/0(2)

Figure 4.15. Isentropic Congression of Cesium Plasma [90]. The points are
experimental data corresponding to the following initial con-
ditions: Onto - 993‘C and P - 0.7 “Pa; Auto - 970°C and
P - 0.5 HPa: Onto - 1,016°c and P - 0.59 “Pa; Onto - 993’c
and P - 0.6 “Pam «to - 1,016'C and P - 0.425 HPa

 

Key:
1. MPa
0 10 20 ’Imn'wﬁ'ﬁa
Figure 4.16. Caloric Equation of State of Dense Oeeium Plasma [84]: cross-
hatched field of values--experilnental data: carver-calculation
by the method of Chapter 1: A--ionization energy
Key:
1. J/g 2. Hk'n3/kg

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agreement with experiment in the range of developed ionization (see Figures 4.12
and 4.13) is achieved by empirical selection of the electron-ion pseudo-potential
0:1 (r) playing the main role in approximation (l.24)-(l.33), a decrease of the ef-
fective percentage of which is equivalent to the appearance of additional repulsion
in a strongly imperfect system (l‘ 2 1) (see section 1.3). Use of this approxima-
tion shows that the derived effect of free charge interaction is considerably de-
pendent on the ”individuality" of the chemical element and thus the parameters for
the pseudo-potentials should be selected for a specific elmt. There are no ex-
perimental data that permit one to follow the variation of parameters upon transi-
tion to other alkali metals, hydrogen, uranium and so on.

Until now we have considered only the caloric equation of state Mp, v) and the
thermal equation of state 13“], ‘1‘) was also found on the basis of preliminary exper-
imental information (H, p, v}. In the considered range of parameters the latter is
slightly sensitive to selection of the theoretical approximation and is easily de-
scribed (Pigure 4.14) by nest of them.

    

“Ha—s44. uJ..._. L

'0 410.2410; 1.0 2 34-3 to mom:

 

Figure 4.17. Thermal Equation of State of argon Plasma (p - loo-2,000 "Pa and
1' - S,000-23,000 K): 1--experimenta1 results of [94, 96]: 2--
calculation in appmixmation (1.84-1.85) for each experimental
point pgksp and Tekgp) 3. 4 and S--ca1culated isotherms of
16,000 and 20,000 K in approximations: 3--(1.26)~(1.30) and
(1.33); 4--with additional consideration of second and third

virial coefficients of argon [151); S--model of restricted atom
(section 1.5)

However, for the experimental results obtained by explosive methods on investiga-
tion of a superdense argon and xenon plasma (up to densities typical for the con-
densed phase). this behavior of the equation of state p(v, 'r) is not typical [94,

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

96]. Traditional methods do not describe the experimental data here (figure 4.17).
At the same time the caloric information H(p, V) found by independent measurement,
the same as in experiments with cesium. has a distinct tendency toward a decrease
compared to the calculated information (Figure 4.18). However, the nature of this
effect may be different in view of the considerably higher plasma compression.

1)
mug -—

   

20 '

10

a I 2 J 4 amn'uaT/nu)

Figure 4.18. Caloric Equation of state of Argon Plasma: l--see notations
for Figure 4.17; 2, 3 and ducalculation for each experimental
point V (pmp. Hgksp) in approximations: 2-41.84) and (1.85);
3--section 1.2; 4--section 1.2 in approximation of restricted
atom (section 1.5); 5--calcu1ated isotherm '1' - 20,000 K in ap-
proximation (l.26)-(l.30) and (1.33)

Key 2
1 . kJ/kg

Actually, the interparticle distances under the experimental conditions are almost
an order less than in experiments with cesium. Under these conditions, along with
strong coulomb interaction (1‘ - l-S), considerable interatounic interaction is man-
ifested which leads to a shift and deformation of the electron energy levels of
atoms and ions [125]. Calculations made using self-consistent field methods (sec-
tion 1.5) demonstrate the specific role of excited states of atoms and ions in
these conditions. The shift and deformation of energy levels found in approxima-
tion of the restricted atom model in a superdense plasma correspond to the appear-
ance of additional repulsion; it is natural that the results of these calculations
are considerably dependent on the specifics of electron therms of chemical elements

and are more important for highly excited states.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFWIAI. USE ONLY

approaches by introducing additional effective repulsion and reducing the contri-
bution of bound states not described within the framework of the traditional method
of calculatiOu.

4.6. Cos..arison of Experimental and Calculated Data by Transfer Coefficients

Host attention was devoted to electric conductivity in experimental investigations
of a low-temperature plasma due to the considerable ambiguity of theoretical pre-
dictions and the extreme importance of these characteristics for solving numerous
applied problems. An additional circumstance that attracted experimenters to this
problem is the relative simplicity and good perfection of measurement methods and
also the possibility of making measurements under the most diverse experimental
conditions. Therefore, very extensive experimental material has now been accumu-
lated that was obtained for a plasma of different elements in a wide spectrum of
installations using different recording uthods. Part of this material is presented
in Figure 4.19, which is schematic in nature for some experiments due to the quantum
effects in a dense plasma and the difficulties of determining the coulomb contribu-
tion to the unnamed electric oonductivity.‘

In early experiments [2). the achieved parameters of imperfection did not exceed
approximately 0.1. However, due to the partial ionization even in these cases, in-
accurate consideration of electron-atomic scattering led to a difference of measure-
ments from theoretical values, which was erroneously related to the manifestation
of coulomb imarfection. Subsequent uniform processing of the experimental data
[126] by the Frost method (2.97) with detailed analysis of the elastic electron
scattering cross-sections on atoms led to the agreemt of measured values to
Spitzer theory [142). This range is noted in Figure 4.19 by the cross-hatching.

only very recently when dense plasma generators appeared and the physical processes
occurring in them became understood. is a result of these investigations informa-
tion was obtained about the electric conductivity of a plasma over a wide range of
parameters from an ideally plasma state where there is good agreensnt of theory and
experiment up to extremely high values of r, where most theoretical approximations
lose meaning and where the experimental results are the basis for construction of
physical models of electron transfer in a dense unordered median [127-129]. It is
significant that most parameters of imperfection among those achieved up to the
present are close to the maximum values possible for a nondegenerate plasma.

The aggregate of experimental data now obtained (Figure 4.19) quite definitely in-
dicates a reduction of the measured values of the electric conductivity of a

For example. the degree of ionization does not exceed 0.1 percent at maximum pres-
sure under the experimental conditions of [13], making the determination of 3 in-
possible. In this case curve 7 in Figure 4.19 reflects the fact of the presence of
measurements [13].

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Manama

’

n?" I 40010" 1 agar

  

Figure 4.19. Coulomb Component of Elect: ic Conductivity of Imperfect Plasma
o‘ - rim/ab: calculations: lueccording to [142]: la--accord-
ing to the method of Chapter 2; 2--according to [129]; 3-ac-
cording to [143]; 4--according to [144]; S--according to [145];
6a and 6--according to [128]: 7--according to [127]: eminent”
1--[52, 63]; 2--[146]; 3--[65, 66]: 4--[57); 5-4103); 6-463,
82]; 6a--[46]; 7--[7l. 72]; 8-483, 8-”: 9-4105]: Dusk: 0-
neom Onargom 0--xenon

strongly imperfect plasma compared to the results of asmtotic theories of Chap-
ter 2. The available qualitative divergence between different groups of experi-
ments is related both to the actual noncomformity of primary data and to the role
of quantum effects [5] and difficulties of determining the coulomb component in a
weakly ionized plasma. The latter circumstance is typical for experiments with
cesiun [71, 83, 103), where the contribution of neutrals is especially high due to
the large electron scattering cross-sections on stuns and the insufficient degree
of plasma ionization.

A plasma with a high degree of ionization was produced in experiments on dynamic
compression of heavy inert gases [105] since the directly measured values of elec-
tric conductivity were determined by scattering on the charged component. This
circumstance considerably simplified interpretation of experiments by reducing the
effect of ambiguity in the thermodynamic composition and cross-sections of ele-
mentary non-coulomb processes. It is natural in this case to use the dimension-
less graph of Figure 4.19 to compare the measurements of [105] to the theory of

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I000 ”0” mt

PigUre 4.20. Electric Conductivity of Alkali metals: a--isobar of cesium
p - (12.5 1 0.5) ”a: b--isothern of cesium 'l' - 4,500 K; c--
isobars of lithium, sodium and potassium p - 27.5 an: exper-
inental data: dashed line--O--(12, 71]: -----[82]:A--[103];
U "[7211 0-4130]: E "[49]: —--ca1culation by method in
this paper

electric conductivity (Chapter 2). It is obvious that the results found in differ-
ent gases (argon, xenon, neon and air) are in good agreement with each other and
permit one to follow the effect of coulomb interaction on electric conductivity
with continuous variation of the parameter of imperfection over a very wide range

r = 0.3-7.0. The quality of theoretical description of experimental data [105] by
the methods of Chapter 2 are illustrated by curve la in Figure 4.19. It is obvi-
ous that the theoretical approximations used in Chapter 2 describe well the weakly
imperfect range and have acceptable extrapolation properties.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the same time direct comparison of the measurement results to calculations of
the total electric conductivity is more feasible, especially in the case of the
need to take into account different elementary processes of carrier scattering in
a partially ionized plasma. This comparison was made for the alkali metals in
Figure 4.20 a, b and c. The experiments for cesium were carried cut on different
installations [71, 72, 83, 103, 130] in an overlapping range of parameters. The
experimental data are adequately well described (approximately 30 percent) by
calculations made by the method of this paper (with the exception of data of (72])
within this range. Outside this range, in the low- and high-temperature range,
the experimtal data are qualitatively different in nature. The results of [103]
found in a shock tube have better agreement with theoretical curve. mesa experi-
mental data are also more reliable since the thermodynamic parameters of the plas-
ma are also recorded here simultaneously with measurement of electric conductivity.

Compared to measurements of electric conductivity, the measurements of other trans-
fer coefficients are related to extremely great complexities which determines the
extremely small number of corresponding experiments in a dense plasma. Specifical-
ly, there are absolutely no reliable experimtal data in the literature on the
tramport properties of the plasma with appreciable imperfection. neaeurements of
the viscosity and thermoconductivity [34, 38] of a plasma made by electric arcs

are related to low pressures (p = 0.1 MPa) and do not permit one to estimate the
effect of inperfection on these kinetic characteristics. Good agreaaent between
calculation and experiment (Figures 4.21-4.23) indicates the applicability of the
method of Chapter 2 to describe a quasi-ideal argon and hydrogen plasma and the

reasonableness of the values of the cross-sections of elementary processes used in
this calculation.

4.7. Comparison of Experimental and Calculated Data by Optical Properties

Compared to thermodynamic and transfer characteristics, the optical properties of

a low-temperature plasma are characterized by extremely strong dependence on the
specifics and the concrete structure of electron energy levels of the chemical ele-
ments of the plasma. Therefore, measurements made in a plasma of chemical composi-
tion close to that of a plasma of wrking substances must be used for quantitative
comparison and experiments with other substances must be used to determine the
qualitative effects of imperfection.

Conducting optical measurements in a plasma of working substances at full-scale
pressure and temerature for a gas-phase nuclear reactor is related to great diffi-
culties of preparation and diagnosis of these media. For this reason the number of
reliable measurements in a plasma of alkali metals, uranium and the required mix-
tures is extremely limited.

A pulsed electric discharge in a graduated capillary tube was used in [69] to cre-
ate a lithium hydride plasma with pressure of p - 37 We and temperature of T -

= (3-4)°104 K. The light absorption was recorded in the visible and near ultravi-
olet regions of the spectrum. The results of msuring the absorption coefficient
and the optical thickness of the plasma layer with dimensions of 1 cm are presented
in Figures 4.24 a and b, from which reasonable agreement of the calculated and
measured values is obvious, although some excess of measurements over calculation
is observed.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

    

0 2 4 6 a mr,1o_'K

l'igure 4.21. Viscosity of Argon Plasma of p - 0.1 mm; experinental data:
0'41”]: O and A“I38]l —--calculation by the method of
this paper (Chapter 2)

l. g/cm-s

 

5 7 9 n 1,10'x

Figure 4.22. Thermal Conductivity of Argon Plasma (p - 0.1 HPa): points--

experimental data of [140}; lo-calculation of [139]: 2--oalcu-
lation by method of duapter 2

Key:
1e "/(n'x)

Electric explosion of a potassiun wire in a glass capillary tube and a pulsed po-
tassiua-heliun arc of wall geometric dimensions were used in [131] to measure the

absorption coefficients of potassiun. The absorption coefficients of a potassium
plasma were found in these experiments for the visible region of the spectrum at
teaperatures of s,ooo-11,ooo K and pressures of 0.4-0.9 HPa, where the main ele-
mentary processes are photoionization of the atom and absorption in the spectral
lines. The derived results are found in Figure 4.25, where satisfactory agreement

(within the range of experimental accuracy) of the measured values and those cal-
culated by the methods of chapter 3 is obvious. The results of these experiments

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7 v n 7,10%

Figure 4.23. Electroconductivity of Hydrogen Plasma at p - 0.1 m: 1--
experinent of [141] ; 2--celculation of chapter 2

are distinguished by a significant aspect: they were found by two completely inde-
pendent methods with different time characteristics, which considerably increases

eration of imperfection only within the conponent composition of a plasma (Chapter
3) is sufficient to describe the OXperinent in the indicated range of pare-store.

Comparison of calculations of the optical properties of a uranium plasma to exper-
innt. which are known not to have even approximately established accuracy due to

New effects which lead to neasmmnents of the optical spectrum can also be mani-
fested in a plasma with an increase of plasma density, along with known broadening
of the spectral lines and shift of the photoionization thresholds [4). Thus, the

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”on
”"0"- us: On:
44.134" \ LY
5 ~. ""

5 ML

2

2

/
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ur'm

557017,!“
a

 

            

500 Amos

. . J.-.

b 6 ‘/ a .9 f,!0’l( 600

o C f

Figure 4.25. Absorption Coefficients of Potassium Pleas: Our-emits of
measurements upon explosion of potassium wire: O--resulte
of measurements in potassiun-helim are; solid carver-calcu-
lation by the method of Chapter 2

It is natural that the corresponding spectral lines also disappear in this case.

The given effect was obviously manifested in experiments of [130] on dyrnanic com-
pression of argon (Figure 4.27). It is significant that the effect of deformation
of energy levels also describes the thermodynanics of a strongly cal-pressed please
(see sections 1.5 and 4.5). However, we note that the opposite effect is observed

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

 

Figure 4.26. Spectral Dependence of Absorption Coefficient of (Iranian Plane:

F-experimental data from [132]: curve--ca1cu1etion by method of
section 3.3

”ﬁfn

 

Figure 4.27. Absorption Coefficient of Argon Plasma (‘1‘ - 20,000 K and l -
- 6,000 A): Inexperimentel data [136]: 2--celculation by
restricted atom model (section 1.6): 3--free-free transitions;
4--£ree-free transitions and photoionization: Sueaperinental
date for weakly imperfect plasma [133, 137]

with an increase of pressure in [59] . in which the optical properties of a neon
plasma were investigated (p 1 50 We and ‘r a 18,000 K).

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

WPHYSICAL PMPERTIES 01’ MING MEDIA O? GAS-PHASE NUCIEAR ma

Moscow mmrrzrcnrsnra SVOYS'NA mocam SR!!!) GAZOIAZNOGO YADERNOGO mm in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 1 Aug 80) pp 190-289

[Clupter S from the book 'Thermophysical Properties of Working Media of the Gas-
Phase Nuclear Reactor”, by Viktor Konstantinovich Gryaznov, Igor' L'vovich Iosilev-
skiy, Yuriy Georgiyevich Krasnikov, Nina Ivanovna Kusnetsova, Vladimir Ivanovich
Kucherenko, Galina Borisovna Lame, Boris Nikolayevich Win, Georgiy hlekseye-
vich Pavlov, Eduard Yevgen'yevich Son and Vkadinir Yevgen'yevich Portov, Atomisdat,
1,800 copies, 304 pages]

[Text] Based on the concepts outlined in previous chapters, the thermophysical
properties of different substances, which are promising working substances of a
gas-phase nuclear reactor, were calculated. The calculations were carried out in
the temperature range of 4,000-40,000 It and in the pressure range of 0.1-50 MPa.
The composition, thersodynamic functions and transfer coefficients of a plasma of
alkali metals of lithium, sodium, potassius, cesium and uraniun are presented in
Tables 5.1-5.5. The thermoph vsical properties were calculated on isotherms for
pressures of 1, 3, 10, 30, 10". "‘ and 500 atomspheres (0.098, 0.294, 0.98, 2.94,
9.8, 19.6 and 49 Ma}. The enthalpy of an ideal gas of atoms at 0 K was taken as
the beginning of reading of enthalpy. The thermophyeical properties for mixtures
of potassiun and uranim and potassium and hydrogen are presented in Tables 5.6
and 5.7. The calculations were made in the same range of tnperatures as for pure
substances and at pressures of l, 10, 100 and 500 atmospheres (0.098, 0.98, 9.8
and 49 nPa). Results corresponding to the molar content of uraniu in the mixture
K + U I 3, 10 and 50 percent and potassium in a mixture of K + H; I 3, 10 and 50
percent are presented, which is equivalent to a mass fraction of potassiul of
0.843, 0.600 and 0.143 in a mixture of K + U and 0.375, 0.683 and 0.951 in a mix-
ture of x + H2. This selection wan made to improve the possibility of interpolat-
ing the transfer properties for the case or other fractions of the considered
chemical elements.

Calculations for pure uraniun and fo: a uranium-potassium mixture were limited only
by the case of the gaseous phase. ‘lne parameters of the proposed uranius condensa-
tion boundary are presented in Table 1.6 (section 1.6).

The behavior of the spectral absorption coefficient for the substances and eixtures
or them considered in this paper is presented in Figures 5 1-5.14.

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Representation of mnerical values determined in the following manner: the note-
tion ~.1272 + 02 denotes the number -o.1272-102 while the notation .7243 - 03
denotes the number 0.7243-10‘3 and so on, close to the machine representation. was

used in Tables 5.1-5.7 containing the results of computer calculations.

 

 

Figure 5.1.

(0 60 so . v-m‘fcu"

Elementary Absorption Procesces of PotassiuJ-nydrogw Plasma

(P = 20 ups and 'r 6 12,000 K: the potassiu impurity was 3
percent by volune): luphotoionization of hydrogen; 2--photo-
ionization of potassium 3--photoseparation of a" intros-free
transitions in fields of hydrogen aolecules: 5--free-free tran-

sitions in fields of hydrogen atone; 6--frse—free transitions
in potassium fields; 7--free-free transitions in ion fields:
8--absorption in potassiun lines: 9--abeorption in hydrogen
lines, Lyman series; lO--nolec.:lar absorption of hydrogen: 11--
total absorption coefficient with correction for induced

emission

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
    

\'
w 30 ”10:10.4

Figure 5.2. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Lithium at 50 MP: (values
corresponding to 'r - 30,000 K were increased by an order)

 

u-Io'ﬁcu“

Figure 5.3. Srectrel Absorption Coefficient of Sodium at 50 an

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

r-10".cu"

Figure 5.4. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Sodiml at 1 HP:

""6044 '-

 

Piqure 5.5. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Potasaiu at 50 MP:

189

FOR OMCIAI. IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      

10 20 y-muw

Spectral Absorption Coofficiont of Cosiun at 50 MP:

 

Spectra]. Absorption Coefficient of Uraniun at 50 MP:

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.8. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Urenim-Potassiun Mixture
(3 percent potassium by volume) at 10 MP:

    

V'IO',"CM"

Figure 5.9. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Hydrogen-Lithim Mixtures
with Different Volumetric Content of Lithium Pressure of
50 MPa and Temperature of 15,000 K

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.10. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Hydrogen-Lithiun Mixture
(3 percent lithim by volume) at 20,000 K

K,,cu"ﬂ-‘- --‘ ———.__..._. _.__ -.-‘ ..-.._._ .-_

  
   

10‘

.J '—-L——l—¢l . |
20 40 so Im v~to'.’cu"

Figure 5.11. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Hydrogen-Lithim Mixture
(1 percent lithium by volme) at 100 “Pa

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.12. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Hydrogen-Petunia! Mixture
(3 percent potassium by value) at 1 MN

«WWI,

 
       

7" 90 v~o' ,m'

Figure 5.13. Spectral Absorption Coeffient of Hydrogen-Poussin Mixture
(10 percent potasshn by volt-ac) at 20,000 K (values corre-
sponding to p - 1 MP: are reduced by an order)

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 5.14. Spectral Absorption Coefficient of Hydrogen-Potassiu Mixture
with Different Volumetric Content of Potassium Tapereture of

15,000 K and Pressure of 10 MR

194

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
‘1‘, K .-

p, 0.098 "Pa ~-
31, 1026 .‘3 .-
h, kJ/kg -

e, kJ/(kg-K) --
H, g/Inole -

o, Ito-f3 --

r ..

n. poise --

X', 102 W/(III'K) '-
x: 102 w/(m.x) --

AR, H/(molO-n

o, 102 OI/m —-

a, 102 A/(mdt) --
Dab! 10 kg/(m-s) -
on, 3 kgI/Z/ml/Z --

DT, 10 kg/(m-e-K) -
A., 102 "An --

x3, 104 w-eZ/kg-m --

AT, 102 w/n-x --
h;r kJ/kg "’

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

List of values Presented in Tables

temperature

pressure

concentration of component i

enthalpy (1.82)

entropy (1.83)

molecular mace

density (1.81)

Debye parameter of imperfection (1.1)

shear viscosity (3.91)

coefficient of transport thermal conductivity (2.90)

coefficient of thermal conductivity 1; - X' + Ax (2.90)
and (2.98)

coefficient of radiant thermal conductivity (3.1)
electric conductivity (2.97)

thermelectromotive force

effective diffusion coefficient (2.86)

effective electric diffuaion coefficient (2.86)

effective thermodiffueion coefficient (2.86)

effective coefficient of thermal conductivity determined
by formla (2.86)

effective coefficient of thermal conductivity in formulas
(2.86)

effective coefficient of thermal conductivity (2.86)
derivative of enthalpy by mace fraction of element A

molar fraction of uraniuu in K + 0 mixture

molar fraction of potassium in K + a; mixture

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. . . _ . I

 

 

 

 

 

 

82.. 3| 8% 6+ 83 _ 8+ 8% 8+ wa _ 8| 88. 8| 82. _ «x
8| 28| 3| §..| 8| §.| “ 8| 8%.I 3| 58f _ 8| 29f 8| 8:. ‘ a
8:. 8:. «an _ ten 88. 88. a... 32. o .
8| 3»... 8| 8: 8| 2:. SI 82. SI 82. 8| 8:. 8| 82. "4
8| 8:. 8| 32. 8| 22. 8| 82. 8| 8.: H 8| 82. _ 8| 9:. k
BI 38 8| 88 m 8| 83 8| 5% 8| 88. n 8| 38 _ 8| 23 _.
3+ 3:. :8. u 28. 88. :8. m 8.8 82. ._
8| 3;. 3| SR. m 8| #8. 3+ 82. 8+ 8.8. " 8| 9%. 3+ 83. n .1
8+ 88 8| 38 _ 8| 88. 8| 88 8| .8.» _ 8| :3 8+ :8 m a
8... 58. 8+ 88. _ 8| 8:, 8| 88.. _ 8+ 82. _ 8| 8.; . 8| 89. _ 8
8| :2. 8| 8:. . 3| can _ 88. _ $3 m 8| 8:... _ 8| 88. m 8
8| 3:. 8| 8: _ SI 82. -al 28. 8| 8:. 8| 82. _ SI 88. . u...
3| 22. 88. m SI 38. 8| 8;. _ 8| £8. . 3| 88 “ 8| 8:... n ”3
8| 58. 8| :2. a BI 38. _ SI 88. “ .ol "3”. 8| 8% _ 8| 8.... _ -3
8| 8:. 8| 8:. m 8| as. .. 8| 28. _ 8| 83 . 8| 23 n 8... 8. u .3
8+ 88.. 6+ 88. " 3| 82. _ 88. _ a: m 5| 3% m .ol #2 m 3
8| 8.; . 8| 83 _ 8| 8:. _ _ L

8| 88 8| 2;. 8| 32 . 8| 8.3
. 8.83!“

196

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
o... 88. 8+.89. 8+ 88 3+ saw 8+ 88. 5
6| anal 3| 8«_.| El 85 3| 38 8| 8:. a
8+ 32. 8... 5.. 8+ 88 3+ 88. 3+ 83 9
8| 3... 8| :8 8| 8% 8| 3:... . 8| 83 ”.8
cl 8:. 8| 82. 8| 88. 8| :8 8| :9 u.
cl 8:... 8| .3... 8| :3. 8| 8.8. 8| 88. c
.—
z
n
x
a

8+ «8.. . .5. 8:. $3, 38

0+ :2. 5+ :8. 3+ 3.8. 3+ 38. 3+ 88.

8+ .24 8+ 8% 8+ :8 8: 38 8+ 58

0+ 30.. 3+ «3.. 3| 3:. 8... K2. 8.... 38

8+ 82. 89. 22. 3| .2... BI 82. “

ol 88 8| 82. 3| 8% 3| :3. BI 88. m3

8| 3% 8| 88“. 8| 88. 3| 38. 8| 8% .3

.T 32. 8| £8 3| 3% 8| :8. 3| 88. -5

ol «8.. 8| 3.. 8| 2...“. 8| 83. SI 88. .3

a... 22. cc. :2. 3| 2.... SI 88.. _ 3

T 82. 8| 5.. 8| 8»... 8| 82. 8| #8. . L

38815

lllllllllll

09— on — o. _ a _ _ m
lllcl|iua1‘.llll|
8+ 88.. 8... 85
3| 82. 3| 8%.
8+ 83. 3+ .2.
SI .33: SI 38.
8| 8%. SI 53.
8| 33. 8| 2%.
wk». 83.

3+ 38. 5+ .83.
3+ 28. _ «or 83
i 3+ 83 8o 33
88. m8”.

nol 3t. SI 93
SI 52. 3| 8:
81.38 3| 8?.
6| :2. 8| Ban.
3%. A32.

8! 8:. _ SI 53.

3 8°qu

3+ can!
8| as.
3+ 88.
8.. 8:.
SI 89..
8| 23..

8?.
an 8%.
3+ 88.
3: “8.”.
SI 5%.
8! ”an.
SI 88.
8| 8»...
8| $3
El 83
8! 3mm.

...__——-—._ ..————..—_._————_

3+ 23.
3| and».
8+ 32.
not. 8a..
«OI. 89.1
8' 1.8.

88.
a... 88.
8+ 88.
3+ 88
8r 9..” u.
8| "8....
8| 8%.
SI 88.
8.. 93:
8| 92.
8| 5:.
s- 82. 8+ 88.
8| “Sn 8| 8;.
8+ 3:. 8+ 2.2.
SI 88. 8| 8;.
SI and. SI 89..
8| 08.. 8| 8:...

88. 3%.
3t! :3. 3.? B30.
8| 8% 8| “8....
3+ 38. 3+ 2...»

.39.. «8..
8| 3:. _ 3| 58.
8| 2%. 5| “an
8| $3 _ 3| 8?.
5| :8 _ 3| xx.

33. _ 3| 9»...
3| can . 3| 8:.

x 82:
m
on ._ u“

_
3 6.233..
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500010014-0

FDR ()lt'lM1Al. US!" ONLY

 

 

 

8+ 83 8+ 28. . 8+ 82. 8| 82. 8+ 88. 8+ 88. _ 8+ 83 «4
8| .8... 8| SE 8| 82.21 88. 8| «9.... 8| 53. 8| :3. a
8+ 2.2. 8+ 08.. 8| 8...... 8+ 894 8+ 88. “ 8+ 88. 8+ 3.8 9
SI 88. . 8| 82.. SI 83 8| 88. 8| 8:. _ 8| 82.. 8| 38. u.“
8| 88. 8| :8. _ 8| 3: 8| 88 8| .83. _ 8| :8. _ 8| 3%. _ 8
8| 2:. 3| «on! 3| 3—,... 3| 9%. 3| «an. 8|. 2mm. _ 8| :1. .-
8... $3 8... 82. _ 8+ 33. “ 8+ _8_. 885. _ 89 _ 83 v ..
8| :8. 8+ 38. _ 8... -98. 8+ 88. 8... n3... 8| .. .L. _ 8.| a: . 3.
8| 8:” 8+.88. 8| 8?. _ 8+ 23 8+ 88, _ 8| 88. . 8... 82 _ a
8+ 88. . 8+ 33 _ 8... 82. _ 8+ 88. 8+ 88. _ 8| 88. _ 8+ 38. u a
8+ 88. _ 8+ 82. _ P1... _ ”Sq 8|. 88. _ .ol 88. _ SI 38 _ 8
8| 2:. 8.| 9.8. 0 8|: .._ 8| 8:. _ 8| 8: . Slaw: " 8| 8.. m m3.
8| 8.8. 8| 88. _ 8| 2....» . 8| .9... 8| 2: m SI 88. _ 5| mun... ” .3
8| 88 8| 8.... _ 8| #2 8| 83 8| 9.8 _ 8| 83 m 8| 9.: . LA

88 | 8:. ._ “28.. 8| .3... 8| 3." “ 8| .8. _ 8| 28. m .3
8+ 88: 8+ 8:. :2. 8| o8... . 8| 83.. _ 8| £2 3

89.. 8:. _ 98.. _ 8| 2?. 8| 8% _ 8| 83. 8| 9%. I.

x8878
oou _ a.“ _| 8.. on _ .o. _ n _
Evian
no 6383.". m

 

|||||lll1l|||||

H0095 Eon;

2—.m Dania.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500010014-0
3... 08¢.
3| «3....
«a... a”
3| «8..
3| 03..
3| 33.

5+ 8%.
.0... v8».
«0+ 03”
no... «mvo.
._0+ «30.
3|. «02.
5| 3.»...
5| 03—.

020.
8+ 80”

«0+ 03‘.
«0| 08%
«0+ 33.
3| «2...
SI .03.
8| 23.

“0+ 30—.
5+ 03».
«0+ «g.
3+ 080.
3+ 3:.
«0|. :«N.
«0| 32.
3| 83.

33.

«vs.

«3”

«0+ 8»!
«0| 5»...
«0+ 89”.
3| :2.
8| 03—.
8| 023.

3+ 3!.
.0... «3n.
«0... 03.“.
3+ @000.

«go.

8| no.0.
MOI 1.2.:
8| n30.
:2.
«no!
at...

no... 03”
«0| .«n«.
no... «09.
8| «5—.
3| 00m...
8| «tn.

. 38.
8+ «:3.

«0+ 502...

no... 002..
00:.

3| Gown.
vOI mvt.
«OI ans.
.5' noon.
._ol :3.
~°| 30».

3+ 82.
SI :8
8+ 3....
8| :2.
SI 92.
8| 8%

«.8.
8+ 39.
8+ 88.
8+ 58.
8.! :8

«0| :nv.
8| 00;.
nol «05.
SI 33
3| :2.
"0| 33.

3802's

3+ 0_««.
«0| 08“
«0+ 09%.
«0| 003.
«0| 2.8.
8| «.2.

«03.
.0... «v8
«0+ «00¢.
8+ 8:.
3| :1.

8| 38.
5| 80...
8| «an.
«0| «.8
8| 2.3.
«0| 28.

8+ 8:.
«0| 28.
«0+ m8!
«0| 2:.
«0| 32..
oQI 01.0.

g.
5+ 02».
«0+ 2:.

8+ nv«_..

«0| 8:.

"0| 20..
SI 30”
«0|. «3—.
«9| .03.
n0| 3«n.
8| 003.

.1‘

¢<”2t- cared

 

201

MOFHGALIBBONLY
x805!»

_

8+ 28. 8+ 82. 3+ 22. 3+ 88. 8+ 8: 8+ 88. ««
Bland 8I88. 8|§q 8|.8.. Slug. Sign a
8+ 58... 8+ :8. 8+ 82. 8+ 3.8. 8+ 88. 8+ 88. a
El .8“. 3| 3.8 8| 89 3| 3.... SI 58. 8| 88. a,“

7 SI 88 SI 88 5| 8;. 3| 82. $1 32. SI 88. k
8 8| .8... 8| 8:. 8| 8% 8| :2. 3| 2:. 3| :8. :
8+ .3... 3+ 82. 88. 2.9. 83 8:. .8

. 3+ 3.. 8+ 5.. 3+ 2:. 3+ 88. 3+ 83 3+ 28. 2
8+ 28. 8+ 88. 8+ 88. 8+ 88. 8+ 38. 8+ 28. a
8+ 88. 8+ 28 8+ 8:. 8+ 82. 8+ «8.. 8+ 8:. ..
8+ 82. 98... 32. 3| :3 8| 82. _ 8| 83 _ 8
8| :3. 8| 88 3| 8:. 8| .8». 8| “8” _ 8| 82. _ :5
3| 8%. 3| :8. 8| 5:. 8| 3:. 8| 8;. :l 88. _ .3
8| 82. 8| :8. _ SI 38 8| 22. 8| 2?. 8.| “8“ . :3
85 3.8 8| 8R. SI 82. 8| 83 8| 8% _ -5

83 28 8| 38 SI 88 _ 8| 8:. _ 3| :8. 3

3:. 88 _ 6| 8:. _ SI 88 8| 88. . 8| 88 .. n.
8... 5..
«0' .30.
8+ 05.9
.0' 09W
.0] .03.

3.! 9‘3.
.0... 0:...
.0... 89.
8+ «.00
00+ 03..
.04. «80.

«0'30”.

gloat...
«.183.

00+ 0000.
«0' .00..
«0' 003.
3' 003.
3' >03.

00' 01v.
.0... .0...
.0... v3...
«0+ 8%.”
00+ 08...

08...

8| son”
00' our...
00' :00.

:3.

03¢.

3+ 0....
«0' 30m.
8+ 30..
3| 3....
.0' 80...

8| 00...;

.000.
.04.. 95v
«0... 003.

. 8+ 08..

3' 20¢
00' 8.0.
'0' to“.
on.”
.0' 0.0.».
on.“

3.... 00.0.
«0' 68».
00+ 58..
3' 30".
3' 30....

8|. 0.0..

.80.
“0+ 850.
«0+ 800.
8+ #3..
.0' g.

00' 0000.
SI 02.0.
8| 980.
.0I 80%.
3' 0.0..

. .0l 3?.

00+ 080
«0' 839
00+. 20..
.0' ova“.
3.! 000a.

00' «8..

008
.0... ﬁn.
«0a.. «2v.
00+ 03...
.0. 20”

60' :00.
8' '00..
00' '00..
.0' 00...".
«0' 08..

_0| non”

x082lk

 

5+ 00:.
«0' 30¢.
«0+ .004
“0' 80..
.0' .8..

3| .30.
5...

5+ 83.
; 8+ 8:.
3+ 32
SI 33

8| 88
0.’ 80.
8| 8:.
8| .5.
8| Eu.
8| 8“...

3+3.
«0'08!

8+ 82..
8| 2:.
8| 5..
3! 28.
3| :8.
8+ 83.
8... «at.
8: «8..
8| En
8| :2.
3' a.
8.. on...
. 8' g
_ 3| 2!.
SI 33

'.—. "
.4.-.—
3+ 89.
«0| CL...
«0+ 93—.
3| :3
3| 9‘
8| g

8.78:.
am .8".
8+ 88
8+ 82.
8+ 32.
8| «.3...
3.. 38.
8! 5....

23.

E.»

-33.

 

 

3+ 83. _ 8w 8:.
SI 28. m 8| :8.
8+ 2:. _ 8... 2:.
6| out. 3| .«8
3| 2...». SI 28.
8| 5.... . 8| $8
3:. 83.

3:1 :3. 3+ awn.
3| anon 3L. ozn
8+ .3. 84 3:.
u. _ EH

SI 83 . 8| 3?
8| ﬂ..." _ 8| 3.
3| 3v... _ 8]. can.
. 39.. m 89
SI as 3| 5:.
.3. _ s...

84. 3.2.
8| «3.».
3+ 32.
8| 8%.
3| 9.2..
8| 92..

«ac

EL. 89...

«on! 39.
8| 5..
3| 3%.

8| can.
3| 03.

8| OLN.

3L $3..
8| .8.
3| :3.

s01 82
8| n8».
8+ 22.
5| «nun.
3| 83.
Gel s2.
80..

_ 3+ 83..
8.1 n3”...
8| 8!.
8| 0:".
00' 010.
9| :8.
3| «3b.
.80” 82.

_ 3| 092..

V3883
||||||||I||||||||||l|||
_ .. _ _ u .

on

k. .01..“

 

8+ 3:.
8| 28
3| :8.
3| 3%.
3| M30.
81 RX...

won! 22.

«0| mac.

8| 01:.
mm| 2'“
8| 3v”

m uo| 33
vol. no.”

vol «on». .

8+ om»...
«cl am.

_ «3 3..
_
_

3+ Suﬁ.

«0| 3!".
3+ *3”.
3| «3”
3| .3".
vol 2:.

3| n2»:
.01.. 23.
«a... 89
3+ _8_.
«GI 38
:| «8m.
_ Z1 38.
_ :I 88

3| «ﬁn
8| 8:

‘ucloo:

_
POI om TIAI. USE ONLY

|/

3+ 88.
3| 8:.
8+ 83

32.

82.
8| 8?.

88.
8+ 88.
8+ 83.
8+ 82.

83.
8.... 39.
.al 58.
8| :8:

vol. 33.
g.

BI 88.
3“».

8+ 29.
3| :2.
no... 0—8
32.
50..
8| 3%.
:9.

3+ 2.3.
8+ ”nun.
8+ “now.

2.3.

2| «.3.
3| can.
8| 08—.
3| «35.

2am-
3' 32.

28

8+ our... 3+ 8:.

3| 5.. 5| o8:
8+ can. 8+ 08..
.SI .3 3| 33.
8| 08¢. 3| 28.
8| 3;. BI 83

83 82.
8+ .8... 8.... 8:...
8+ 22.: 8+ :8.
8+ 33. 8+ at“.

:2. 8| 28.
2| 83. 2| «“0”
8| 3?. SI 88
SI 82. _ SI 32.
8| 82. 8| 2.8.

8:. gr av.
8| 8:... _ 8| «2».

8:. _ 8| «3'.

8+ 8:.
8| «So.
84.. 0:...
3| 33.
3| 83.
8| 82.

”8—.

5+ 2.3.
8+ 3:.
8+ 88
3| 32.
2| Sou.
SI 33.
:l «0:.
8| 3:.
3| :3.

3| 080.
3| 9:.
x 08 walk

Q‘ “I hcké‘bu,“

 

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

;

8+ 02v.
.3' «6:.
8+ 38”
out.
32.
8| =3.

:3.
3+ .30.
8+ .«on.
8+ can”
00:.
8| gﬁ
vo| vet.
8| «v3.
3| 8'”
«.96.
3| 83.
33.

8+ 23.
3| 3:.
8+ Sou.
82.
08—.
BI 03...

9.8
3+ .8...
8+ 38
8.... 83
88
8| 82.
8| :2.
8| 3:.
3| 3:.
.83
8| 5.".
83..

8+ 88.
3| 3:.
8+ so“.
3| 8:.

8....
MOI 88.

non...-
8+ 83
8+ .82
8+ 35
8:.

8| 8:.
8| 0%..
3| 32.
8| 36m.

:2.
3| 82.

22.

5+ 88.
3| 35.
8+ 08“.
3| «b8.
3| .5.
nol g.

«nag.
3+ 23.
9+ own?
84.- 3'“.
3| 3;.

8| 3a..
8| one.
2| 3:.
8| 020.
3| :3.
8| 0%..
3| :3.

8+ ego.

. 3... 82..

8+ 33”
3| 82.
3| 38.
3| an“.

3| 036.
3+ n55.
«0+ 58v.
8+ 03“.
3| 32.

«3| 5:.
8| «8..
2| 52.
3| 30“.
3| 33.
3| 8-“.
3| 3:.

¥8°onlk

«0| 58.
3+. 02—.
3| 93.
3| 9;.
3| :2.

3| .3...
31 :3.
«0+ 3v.
8+ an.
8| 2:.
SI 32.
:l 2:...
II :2.
:I Son.
3| :8.
3| 82.
SI In”,

 

8| 38.
8+ 50..
3| ohm».
3| 2:?!
3| 09...

8| g
8| Ex...
8+ 9......
8+ 83
8| $2.
SI 82.
«.4. «:2.
El 82.
2| 38
8| 8:.
8| «mun.
8| 8:.

"" I-J‘I .
433345;. “‘“Zc. csarl’e.’
.4

 

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8.? 38.
3|. 38.

"oi—3n.

noun—«8.

3+ 83.
3+ Sun.
8+ Son.

.8»:

alga.
nolg
Blozn

8' can.

:9.
9| «8o.
:9.

3+ 05
3| ”3“.
3+ 095.

2a.

8.1480.
32.

.8+ 83.

8+ «3v.
8... cg.
.2“.

8| 88.
8| 8:.
SI 82.
8| .«2.

. :2.
SI 82.

:2.

8.? bag,

3' 83. .

3+ 3mm.
3..
3—.
col 3’:

68—.
3+ 0:».
8+ av.
8+ men.

02:.
2' 0.8.
8.! ca.
8.! 32.
Sal 39:
8|- «3“.
5| 080.
ool g.
3' 58.

8+ Ova...
SI 82.
8+ 83.

82.

8......
8i 8:.
3| .8».
5+ ”3‘
«0+ 89.
8... «2a
8| 8....
3| n8».
8| 3o“.
.8! :3
«TI 23.
moi-.83.
SI 83
3|. «8..
8| «8“.

8+ 88.
3| 3:.
8+ 88

«n2.

«8:
8| 88.
3i «3..
8+ :3.
8+ «he
8+ «ﬁn
SI 82.

2' RN.”
3|. «.th
Sal mug.
2. 38.
2|. v8“
«cl. 008.
8| v3!
«0|. 8%.

x 089'.»

3| 80..

8? nova. \
8:.
8:.

9139:

5|. 2a.
3+ 23»
«0+ «84
8+ 33.:
8|. gm.

2! 88.
8|. 3
2|. 89.
2' "av.
2| 88
8| .28
8' 8:.
8| :3

3| 3:.
8+ and".

«8...

a «8..
”our 98.

8| 5—.
3+ our”.
8.7 sun»:
8+ «In.
SI 08..

o?! 18..
3| ovum.
2' 3.0—.
2- 33.
MT! :0“.
8' 300.
hall :00.
3| $8

 

 

207
83
8| 8:.I

8:.
8... 8:.

«Olga. .

8| 3:.

5+ :8.
8+ 83
8+ Eh
3+ 88.
8+ 38.
SI 82.
SJ.- nod—n.
8| 38.
SI 32.
8+ 32..

3| 32.

 

3+ 88 8+ 88.
3| 32.! 3| 8»?
8.8. :8.
8| 8:. 8| 8...
8| 8:. 8| 8:.
SI 22. 8.] 88.
8+ 8:. 83
. 8+ .8” 8+ 38
3+ 2:. a... an.
8+ 8% 3+ 88.
8+ 8—. 3.? has.
8| 5” BI 83
:2. SI 88.
8| xv... 8| «8....
8| :3. 8| 28
3+ .3». 3| out.
8| 83. 8| «.2...

_
_.
a

8+ 8g 8+ 39.
3| 88.I 8| .3... .
82. 3+ 33.. .
SI 32. 3| 3..
3| 82. .SI 08..
SI 32. 3| 32.
33.. a
8+ 28. 8+ 8“”
8+ 32.. 8+ 38
3+ 38. 3+ 85.
3+ 03“. :8.
8| 0%.. 3| a”
«0| 3:. 3| nan.
3| 32.. 3| 3..
SI 82. 8| mé.
man. 3:.
8| :2. 3| 3:.
3.80th

3... 38
3| «van.
8+ 00:.
«0| 8...
8| .3“.
8| an.

- .8.+8««

3+ mam.
3+ Noon.

3| 89.
3| on»!
8:4 83.
8| 23
8| an.
_ 8| 83.

8+ 82.
3| vnvh.
3+ 5..
8| «8“.
8| «3..
8| 8.2.

03—.
84... n5
.3.+. 02%
3+ 98.
3| 88.

8| 8:.
8| 9......
8| 38.
SI .83

_ 3| 8:.

8| umoﬂ
28.
3| goal
8.... 38.
3| an”
8| :8
8| 8:.

3+ 02.“.
8+ *9“.
3+ 08».
3+ 5..
8+ 88

3| ha

3.
3| 80—.
3| “wow.
3.? .68.
3| :8.

3+ 83.
8| 83.-
3+ g
8| 58.
8| v5
8| 8:.

3+ 32.
«o... «3”
3+ 2:.
3+ 03v.
8+ «2—.

3| .08.
3| 3:.
8| .3n.
3| can”
3.1 was".
3| 30“.

3+ 28.
3| 3:.
3..- ~80
8| 8—.”
8| :3.
8| 83.

3+ 3—.
3+ 5
3+ 085.
3+ :9.
3+ :3:

«GI 32.
3| 0.2.
«0| 3:.
3| «3..
3+ 32.
3| 3:.

8+ 8:.
3| 18.
3... no».
8| 8r.”
9| v9.”
8| 3:.

82..
3+ ZN.”
3+ 83.
3+ 33.
34 20—.

8| 3“.
«0| 3..
3| 32.
3| :3.

vu—v.
3| :3.

8+ 88.
8| 3!.
8+ 88.
SI 98
BI 83
3| 9:.

0:».
8+ 53”
3+ Boo.
3+ 89..

29..

3| 3.3.
3| «02.
3| 93”
8| oven.

. 13..
3| E3.

{215's

3+ 8:.
8| :8
3+ 8...
SI 38
8| 3:.
SI 32.

.03.
3... 8a.
3+ 9.3.
3+ 93.
33.

8| «nos.
3| 32.
00' 03v.
8| 9:.
3| 08».
«0| 32.

3+ 88‘
8| 3:.
3+ 38
8| 3.8.
8| «3“.
SI 23.

'8“.
8+ 016.
3+ :8.
3+ 33.
3| 88.

8| 82.
8| «8..
8| «3..
8|.83.
3| 32.
8.. 28

‘00.:

. u
i act-“XL- rat

in

55%;

209

F0! Ol-TICIAI. [SE ONLY
3+ 8»...
3| gal
8+ 32..
8| Sun.
8| 33.
8| n81

8+ 02”
8+ an“
3+ 82.
3+ 83.
8+ «3”

SI 38.
28—.
8| :3
.8...
6| .«3
5—.

 

3+ 33.
3| 30o.
3+ 03—.
8| 33.
«0| man”
3| 82.

5+ 28.
8+ «an.
8+ 9:.
3+ 38.
SI 08%

3| 98
3| 093.
«0| «59..
8| 33.
3+ can“.
3| «.3».

8+ 33.
8| .52.
3+ «30.
8| Son.
SI 39..
«0| 82.

3+ mum...
§+ 3a-
3... 33
3+ 08o.
3+ 33.

8| can"
BI. 58.
8| 32.
3| «3!
3+ 8:.
3| 3:.

8+ 38.
ncl 3..
«of :2.
8|. 29.
8| 83.
8| 3:.

3+ 80..
8+ 3—“.
3+ 2.8.
3+ 81..
3+ 30—.

3| 32...
8| 3&0.
3| 33.
3| $2.

28.
3| «03.

.

no... can. .

8| 38
8+ 03—.
8| 89.
3| 33...
«0| 32.

8:.
3+ 8—“.
3+ 83.
3+ :2.

want

3| ma.
3| 35.
5| 38.
8| 83.

«8..
8| 33.

u. glh

3.1 can.
8| 38.
8+ «8—.
8| 23.
3| 33¢
8| 52.

39.
8+ .3”
3... 5.
3+ 0.3.

32.

mo| 33.
8| 03¢.
a?! “now.
«all “94.
3| moon.
8| 034.

3+ 82.
SI 82.
8+ :2.
SI 25.
SI 28.
8| $8

83
8+ 32.
8+ 22.
8| :5.
SI 8...".
8| P5.
8... 9:...
8| 38.
8| 23
8| an“.
8| 8%

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.3... 3:.

3| 23
8+ «LN...
Slang
8| 2.3..
8| 5..

3+ C.”
8+ on.”
3+ «N3.
3... 88.
3+ 035.

SI 88.
3| 03..
8| m3”.
82.
3+ 28..
Saw.

8+ 8R.
3| 3:.
8+§..
3| 83
8| g
8| 22.

3+ 82.
8+ 38
8+ 83
3+ 9.8.
8+ 8%
8| :8.
SI 83.
8| 92.
SI 28:
5.4

.Sl 3.9

3+ 02..
SI 08—.
8+ .8“.
8| :3.
8| :8.
8| 5—.

3+ 2:.
8+ 88.
3+ 38.
8+ 22.
3+ 82.

8| :2...
8| :8
8| :3
. 3| 88
88

.3|§

3+ 33.
«cl 2:.
8+ 8r.”
8| .33.
8| v8».
3| «3..

E.
«a... :2.
3+ 88.
8+ 85.

30”.

3| g3.
3| «2”

.3| 8“.
3| out. .

SI. .80.
3| .02.

K glk

3+ 88
8r 8:.
«0+ «8”
8| 2..»
SI 88
8| :2.

«.3
3+ 3..
8+ 32.
00+ 03—.
8| ¢8q

8| who».
8| 3:.
3| «3M.
8| 3R.
3| 8»...
8| «20..

8+ 80..
8| "8..
8+ 88.
8| 3..
«0| :3.

2133. _

RX...
3... 03—.
3.7 3:.

8.180”.

.3I who“.

SI 03»:
3| 3am.
ocldsuﬂ
SI 83.
8| nan.
SI 33

 

(
K

Q£‘°£L. Flt-r90

 

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+ 88.
SI 33.
8+ 2a.
8' 53».
SI 83.
3| .3...

5.? 3
8+ 33.
3+ lbw.
8+ on...
8+ 05—.

8| 8:.
8| 9w...
8| :8
8a.!
8+ :8
3:.

«a... 02“.
8|. 5:.
8.... 3m”
«0' 33.

.8188

8| an...

3+ «8”
8+ 09!.

3+ 03o.

3+ 85.
8... «one.

«on: as
«0' 83.
3' 03.0
30”
3+ 82.
8—"

8+ gov.
3' 1.2.
8+ «80.
«0| 018.
8' 32.

5.1 2:.
8+ mag.
3+ 080‘.
8+ ”8-.

 

8... 8a.
«GI 03—.
«0+ «36.
8| atQ
8| 38.
8| 32.

3+ 2:.
8+ 32.
3+ 2.8
8+ .82.

33
8| 3%

vol 33.
8|. out.

8| 3:... _

98—.
3' 0:4

 

3+ 82.
SI 83
8+ 3:.
8| 3;.
SI 88
8.. 3.5..
.96
8+ 82.
8+ “8..
8+ :2.
83

3' «v3.
3' 39¢
3| :8.
3| 8'“.
SI 83.
5| g

x glh
3+ 28.
8| .3”
8+ 83.
3| 3:.
3| 3—.
3| 3!.

3+ 08“.
3+ 3—.
3+ 23‘
8+ 2:.
8+ 32.

3| 8...”
3| 3:.
3| 8»...
38.
3+ 3.9
3.2.

 

8.7098.
3'85.

8+88.

3| 82.
3| ”8—.
3| 3:.

3+ 82.
8+ 82.
3+ 88.
8+ 92.
3+ 39.

8| 95v.
8| 3:.
8| *0”

23.

8+ 0:”
3| 3w».
8+ 23.
3| 32.
3| 9.2.
8| 28.

3+ 5..
8+ 82.
3+ 83.
8+ «8”
3+ 33.

3| 002.
8| 8““.
3| 00:.

v3“.

3+ 82.
3| Ion.
8+ «no».
3| vsmﬁ
3| 03...
3| 3.

93¢.
8+ 22.
3+ 95-.
3+ and“.
93:

3| 38.
8|. 8%.
3| 20».
3| 83.
3| on”.
3| 35.

3+ 83.
«9| «.8.
8+ ”30.
3| «5..
3| :3.
3| 030

g
3+ 32.
«0+ 8:.
3+ 30”
82.

8| «an».
8| «an.
3| 5:.
3| to»:
3| «3—.
3| 3m.

x 3-Ih

8+ 83.
3| can.
3+ 38.
8| 83.
«9| 33.
8| «1...

33”.
3+ 99.
3+ 32.
8+ in.
3| as!

8| «an.
8| 33.
SI .02.
3| 3—.
«0| :2.
3| «NS.

8+ 2:.
SI 23.
8+ can:
3| .3.
3| was
vol. 88.

a“.
8+ 3:.
8+ 3:.
8+ 25».
3| «3....

«0| 3:.
3| «3..

2188..

8| 03».
3| 93”
3| 38

~ O
¢<”SH F.<'£oo

.,r
I

zééi-

213

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR ONO“. USE ONLY

|lllllll|||ll

3+ 096.
8| 8:.
8+ :8.
3|. 8a
5| 22".
8| 35.

3+ 33.
8+ 32.
3+ 33.
3+ 0.8.
3+ 32.

3| 32.
8| n5
«0| g.
3| nqu.

:8.
3+ 32.

Son.

 

8+ 8.».
«0| 003.
8+ 88..
3| 88.
3| 38.
8| 28.

3+ 30..
8+ to:
5+ 88

3.... 28.
5+ .23.

SI 82.
8| 3nd.
8| :9.
2| 82.
3:.
on»!
2:.

3+ 88.
«0| 33.
3+ «8..
3| 86”
3| 85“.
8| .8.

3+ .3".
«0+ 2.3.
3+ .53..
3+ 88
5+ m3”.
8| v5.
3| 8mm.
8| 88.
2| 8»...

2n“.

«“2.

can.

3+ 83. 8+ 8:.
SI 39.. «0| 2:.
8+ :3. «0+ 88.
3| 2N” 8| «60..
3| 8.“. 3| 32.
8| .2! 3| 3a.

002. 3:.
8+ our... 8+ «8—.
8+ 8:. 8+ 03—.
3+ 38» 3+ at...

«2?. 5—.
3| on.” 8| :2.
8| 3.8. 3| so“.
3| A52. SI 38.
3| 3:. 2| Zoo.
SI 88. 8| 0%”
3| 83. «0| 3:.
3| 38. SI 38.

v— §~Ih

on

8+ 030.

«0| 88.
3+ 96».
8| :2.
3| 82.
8| 92—.

8'“.
«0+ 3:.
8+ «8..
8+ 08!
3| 88

8| :9.
8| .33.
8| :3.
kl 08h.

.Slnaq

8| 92.
8| :8.

3+ 89.
3| 53.
8+ BNO.
8| 38.
«0| 030.
3| '2».

_ 3:.
8+ 5:.
8+ 2:.
8+ 8%.
3.! 8:.
8| :2.
:l 83
8| 3:.
:l 3...».
SI 33
5| 83.
8| 3%

[than

214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+ 83.
«0| g.
3... 82.

3| 3.».

3| who».
9| «8..

3+ 30—.

«0+ on... .

8... H80.
3+ can.
3+ 83.

8| 33.
3| 2.4
SI 34”
2| on“
83.
2o».

. 3.3.

3+ 32.
8| :8.
8+ 8:.
5| 3:.

3| 9.3..

8| out.

~O+ 8N—.
«0+ 002.
«o... 32.
8... 30a.

. 3+ can“.

8| 18v.
3| ca
3| :9...
3| «03.
«8.
08—.
33v.

 

3+ 003.
8| 02k.
8+ 3:. .
3| 3;.
3| 9:.
8| 83.

83.
8+ 32.
8+ «NZ.
3+ 83.
3+ 3:.

3| 88.
3| 83.
3| Sun.
«.I «40..

«Qua.
SI 23.

:3.

oo—

8... 23.
«Ol. 80.
3+ «8—.
3| 03....
3| can.
8| 2:".

«8v.
«0+ «.2.
8+ 39.
8+ .3!

38.

nol “urn.
sol «3v.

.8138

2| :2.
5| 8?...
3| an.
.3' «2|:

 

8+ gm.
8| can».
8+ «3..
3| 5N.
._O| van”
8| 08..

30“.
8+ 02..
8+ 22.
3+ 03v.
3| 88.

8| s02.
8| 8:.
5| n23.
3| 20..
3' Son.
«0| 82.
5| 8'“.
z gﬂlh

8+ 8:.
8| 05:.
8+ «.08.
3| c2...
3| 82.
3| 3:.

.3...
8+ 8....
8+ :3.
8+ 8:.
SI 38

8| vs!

. 2| 3:.

col coca.
2| coma.
8| 98».
3| 89.
SI 62....

n

‘IIIIJI

8+ 009.
8| 0.9:.
8+ 96».
3| 3!.
3| 3:.
3| and.

3| 329.
«0+ 3:.
8+ 32.
8+ 3:.
«0| 33.

8| 3:.
2| $8.
3| 0. 3. l-z
2| at. In:
SI 88 t2
SI 22. .7.
8| ”an _ u.

j? 4:”2t. ckrbu:

|||||
. _ _ _ a _

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

3+ 8“!

3|. ave.

.8+§

3' 30¢
3|. «'8.
3| 800..

3+ 3:.
3+ 82.
8+ 5..
8+ 39.
3+ 89.

8| cone.
3| 32.
81.38.
3] ant...
«.2.
a3“.

3+8”

3' 3:. .

3+ 83.
3| v2.
3| 205.
8| 33.

«a».
3+ was”.
8+ 9:.
3+ .8!
3+ .09.

vol. 33.
8|. 38.
3| ova
8|. 9...“

80m.
3‘ 39.

no”.

8+ 93..

8+ 3:.
3| .3”
3' 30M.

8| .02.
5| 0%.
«of 3:.
«0+ 3:.
3+ 03».
3| moo“.

8| «3%
2|. 8:.
mo] 32.
8| 8:.
8| 8mm.
3‘ $9.
«on: 33.

 

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+ as“.
3| «3—.

8+ 2.2.
3| :2.
8+ 38.
32.
39.
8| San.

39.
8+ an...
3+ 8:.
3+ 88.
8+ 3:.

3| 08a.
SI 82..
BI 03».
8| 030.

3a"
5| 39.

8+ 32.
3| 98..
no... 821..
3| ovum.
3| «80.
3| m3».

33.
8+ 3:.
«0+ 03..
8+ 33.
«2......

3| 32.
8| 33..
8| «mud.
3| ohm».

31.
8| 3n?

3:.

8+ 23.
3| 32.
8+ o8q
SI 38.
3| 8%.
8| noon.

8!.
8+ 3:.
8+ 53.
3... $3.

9.2.
S! 32.
SI 23
BI 33..
SI 89.
SI 89.
8| 3....
8| 5?.

8+ 88
«GI 33.
8+ .«2.
3| 2.3..
3| :32
8| 8°».

93—.
«0+ 3:.
3+ 2:.
3.... 83.

a 8| can.

8| «or...
2| 9F...
8| 2.3.
col nan.
3| :3.
le Sac.

.ol—vz.

x Seal.»

a

col— 23.5.33 60 60:50:00.

8| 2.2.
8+ 82.
3| on»!
3| 39.
8| 33..

3| 300.
8+ 3:.
no... 82.
3+ 23.
3| «3..
2| 8?.
II 33.
2| .3“.
3| 83.
8| «out
8| 39
3| $9.

 

2.17
8+ 23. 8+ 28. .l I .3
SI. .52. 3| was. «0' 88. «on! «on. a
8+ 83 8+ 88. 8+ at... 8+ 3.. o
SI 38. SI 82. SI 53. SI 38 r
8| 9.8. 8| «3. 3| 8%. 8| :3. a.
8| 2;. 8| 5.. SI 28 BI 83 c
32. SI 2.2.. 8| 9%. :T. 3%.. ._
8+ 3:. 8+ 2:. 8+ 5.. 8... =2. 2
8+ «.5. 8+ 3:. 8... 92. 8+ 82. .
8+ 2:. 8+ 2...». 8+ «3». .3+ 22.. _.
.81 :T 22. El .22. SI 89. q
8| 8;. 8! 83.. :I 83. 2| 9.x. 1::
:l 38. 2! 83 2.. as. I :2
8] 83. 2T 23. :I as. 2.. 3:4 L2
. 3| :8 3| 82. 3| 8.... _ SI 82. L2
. 6| 23. 8| 3:. SI 39. SI 3:. _ . L2.
_ 3| 5... 3| 3:. 8| 82. 8| 8: .z
:T :3. 3| 8:. SI 83 8| .8... _ u.
x 8081 .
lllll‘lllllll—III
on _ a. _ n _ _ _ Ila..-
Illlnlllllllllll‘lllu.
I..|.|......|.m||||I||.III...||_|IIII
3+ can”
3|. 33.
8+ 83.

an.

.3“.
«GI 02:.

294..
8+ 3:.
«0+ 32.
no... 88.
8+ 2L...

8| mean.
50' 20..
8|- Onwn
«OI 080

68.
8|. «on».

89. .

8+ 82.
5| 0:“
3+ 38
. 2—”

v00“.
8' n2..

03..
«0+ 9:.
8+ 32.
8+ 33.

«000.

8.. 88
SI .8...
8|: 30..
SI 88

:2.
8h 22.

82.

8+ ago.
3' 58..
8+ 0.1...
32.
8:.
3' «can

22.
8c 8:.
«or 32.
84 83.
Son.

5: 38
2| 83
59' 8."
8| 3%.
SI 88
8| 23
SI 8;.

3| «3..
8+ Son.

BE.

8:.
no] g.
5' 5:.
8+ 32.
«0+ «.9...
8+ 9:.
8' 38.

8| BC.
5' 08..
SI 83:
8|. 8n”
8' 9.9.0
3' on&.
3| :3.

8| 8:.
. 3+ EN
SI 88.

3' 3nd.
8' have

3| can!
8+ 68—.
8+ «3..
8+ 03—.
3' 03m.

. 2| :8
:I 08..
3' 03..
8| 3:.

.SI 88.
SI 33
_ 8| 88.

K gel-n

3' 03..
8+ 53..
.Ol. 03.
3|. :3.
no. «”2.

5| 3R.
8+ 2.8.
«0+ «8..
8+ 82.
«our «18.
«TI «8n.
«7| 0.3
no] 23.
8| 3:.
8| 3:. .
«OI ”tn.

3| 8:.
3+ 8:.
SI. 83
8| 9%.
BI 83.
3| 8:.
3+ .«8
8+ 88.
8+ «#3.
8| man".

1' 3cm.

2' .35.
00' 23..
3‘ 80”
SI 98:.
8| 3:.

. C
a<“ZL. r‘lced

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+ 8m"
3| 58..
. 88.
3| 8Q“.
. 8| 01..
«3| 3.2.
3+ can...
«04. «08.
3+ 3».
3+ .8“.
«0+ 8C.

8| 3%.
3| 9%.
8| 33.
3| won“.
3| :2.
_ 3|81.

 

 

3+ 32. no... 8:.
3| 3%. 3| 33.
3+ «8.. 3+ 32.
«GI 83. 8| :2. .
8| 32. «0| 82..
«3| *3. 8| 82.
3+ 80.. 2.3.
8+ 800 «o... boon.
3+ 8&1 3+ 080.
3+ «RN. 3+ 3v”
3+ 33.1 3+ 3:.

8| «has. 8| 08—.
8| «own. 8| an!
8| 2»... 3| g.
3| 23. 3| at”

83. man...
3| 8;; 3| an”

v. 25ka

8+ 08o.
8| 3:.
3+ «on.
3| 3:.
«0| «3.
«0| «n3.

«an».
«of an».
.9? :04
3+ 34.4

«02...

3| 82.
3| 83.
3| $2.
«cl 3—.
3| some
8| 0.9.

_

3+ 0:". u

3| 8!.
5+ Ron.
8| 8!.
8| 2!.
SI 3:.

85

8+ 38
8... BS.
.6... 3R.

. 3:.

3| «we...
8| 05.1
3| 38
8| 33.
3| 3..
8| :3.

Q
d

cleats. chrou

 

3.3 I 5 9.31.3 gunuavom no nanﬂaoum «signage—F

.n.m manna.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8... 33‘
8| :8.
8+ En
«cl «8..
8| 8“...
.8! 93..
3+ 33.
8+ “an
3+ 3:.
3+ «nun.
«of 02.».

ring.
38
3| «no».

34.. 2.8.
nol «3..
3+ 83.
8| n+8.
«GI 52.
«cl '8”.

3% 83.
8+ :8.
3+ 29.
we... 23”.
3| Em.
No] 33.
5| 8:.
8| «an».
8' :63.
8t 32.
3| amp...

8.... oma
nol «8“.
34. 23
«0' 99%
«0| «2”
«GI 23..

8+ 82.
«or 88.
8+ 0:».
3+ «con.
8+ 83
8| $2.
8| 82.
8| .23.
SI 22.

Son.

. 5| :2.

no... 22.
0? can.
3+ 3:.
«cl onvu.
«0| .8”
«GI .92.

08a.
«0+ Ron.
8+ :3:

.5... 88.

:8
8| 3.2.
8| «:2.
8| 82.
SI 38.

32.
8| 2.3

v. 88's

 

 

3+ 3:.
3' v8!
.0... Bo.
«OI can“.
«ol 33.
SI 03—.
:3.

no... 33.
3+ 35.
3| 81..
.03.

3| «3...!
vol .«2.
3’ 8a..
. 8| «3.
SI 33.
«QI 3v.

3+ 82.
8|. 030.
«0+ 2”.
8' av“.
«OI at".
3' avg.

29.
8+ 28.
8+ .8...
3+ 29..
3| 8E.
8| 3h.
8! 33
8| new
8| 3.”
SI 82.
SI 88

on:

again. ck}.

 

221

POI OHIO“. USE ONLY
3+ 8:.
nol g
8... so...
8' ”an.
3' 82w
«0' 08..

8+ Gnu
8| «In.
8+ 83..
8+ n80.
8+ 8:.

8| 88.
8| :8.
«0' an!
3' 33.
3... v8..
SI. 38

8+ 88. 8+ 88.
8| 38. BI 88
8+ 8:. 8+ 82.
8| :8. 8| .38.
8| 3:. 8| 8?.
8| 3:. 8| 88.
3+ 3:. 3+ 22.
8+ 8:. 8+ 8a..
8... 83.. 8+ 93
3+ 38. 3+ 88.
8+ 8.” 38.
8| 3:. 8| 8:.
8| o8... . BI 38.
8| .88. 3| 2;.
8| 2.2... 3| “8..

38. * 6| 8‘
SI .81 SI 22.

a 88!.

8+ 33.
8| 3:.
8... 8a.
8| 08...
SI man.
8| «8».

33.
3+ 28.
3+ 003.
3+ 8k

96".

3| out.
3' «08
00' as.
8' :3
5' 82.
«f 23.

8852.8.

004.:

Qtnzl- :RJ'

 

.n.m CHAIR
3+ 82. 3+ 88. 8+ 8...... 8+ 8:. 8+ 8.8 _
BI 82. 8| 3;. 8| :8. 8| :2. 8| .32. .
8+ 83. 8+ :8 8+ 38”. 8+ 88 8+ 83. n
8| 88. 8| 83. 8| 2:. 8| 8:. 8| 88. n
8| 8%. 8| 83. 8| 3. 8| :8. 8| 88. m
8| 3.. 8| .3. 8| 8:. 8| :8. 8| :3. .
8+ :3. .8... 2:". 34 11...“. 3+ 3:. 2.5.

8+ 83 8+ 83. . 8+ 89. 8+ 9.3. 8+ 88 u
3+ 82. 3+ 83 3+ 83. 3+ 88 3+ 28. _
3+ 83. 8+ :3. 3a 88. 3+ 82. 8+ 83 _
8o :3 8+ on... 3.. 83. 3+ 82. B».

. 32. BI 88 8| 3%. 8| 88. 3| 28. _
3| 8%. 8| .62. 8| 8:. 8| 22. 8| 3:. m
3|. 33 3| 3:... 8| 88 8| :3. 8| 8:. m

83. as 82. SI 39. 5| :8.
3+ 29. 3+ 82. . .8". 82. 3| 2.8. .
88. ova” «34. 5| ”5. SI 28' .
x El.—
Illllllllullllllll
can — eon _ oo. _ on _ o. _
jl

Illlllllllllllllll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3+ 8N".
8| 3:.
8+ 88
—Ol vNZ.
3| 9:.
8| 3:.

3+ 08..

3+ n53. .

3+ 35.
8+ moon.
«0+ 89d

3| was.
3' 82.
3| 8.8..
2k.
3+ :3:
an;

3... 88
SI 8:.
8+ 8:...
3' .v...
:T 8:.
8| 82.
3+ 88
8+ 88.
3+ 83,
3+ :8.
8+ 88.

.ol :2.
8| 28.
«0| :3.
88.
8+ 82.
:8.

8+ can.
8| «3...
«04. :3”.
3| 3:.
3' an...
8' 88.

3| .3”
8+ 85.
3+ 83.
3+ 38.
.04. ‘3»:
8| 8?.
8| 88
8' 68”

82.

23.

88

8+ 3.. 8+ 83
9| 08“. 8| 8'".
«0| 8:. 8+ 034.

.OII 08—. 8' go.
3| 32. 8| 85
. 8| 8%. 8| 88.
3| 3:... 88
8+ 88 8+ 2R
3+ 33. 3+ 88.
3+ 32. 8+ 8......
3f 3—. 3.
8| 8?. 8| 8:.
3| :3. 3| 32..
8| 8:. 3| 3:.
BI 82. 8| 28.
35. 8| «8n

3| 5... 8| :8.

x 88!.“

3+ can.
3| ovvn.
8+ «5v.
«0' 38.
«0' 05.
8| .3”

33.
8+ 89
3+ 9:.
8+ 82.

32.
8| in
8| 2?.
8| 32.
8| 2:.
8| 8:.
3| 8:.

8+ 80”
«0| 8a.
«0+ 22v.
8| an.
8| 8;.
3' «a:

3—H
8+ 08”
3+ g
8+ 82.
3.| 83:

8| 83..
SI 38
SI 39..
8|. 88.
8| 38
8| 38.

 

l||llll

in
at ganth 94.3.38:
ma OFFKTIAL USE ONLY

8+ on...
«9| :2.
8+ no.0
3| 2,”
3| 03”
8| «8—.

8+ 83..
8+ .33.
8+ :3:
8+ KS.
8+ 38
2| 92.
5| 88‘
3| «nun.
3| 32.

2.8.
3+ a.”

«Eu.

«0+ 02%
«0| 8:...
«o... 33.
3| 0:“.
8| .2".
3| 38.
3+ 32.
«0+ :0”
3+ 33
B... 5.2.
no... «000.

2| g.

«0| 3»... .

3| as.
8| 3.3.
85.

003

3+ 25%
3| 33.
8+ ugh.
5| 2:.
3| 32.

8| m2!

5+ 82.
8... '3“.
8+ 8%.
8+ 32.

2.3.
2| n98.
8| :2.
8| Son.
3| 8n?
SI 83.
3| 3.3
BI 38.

3+ com”
8| 03».
8+ 680.
3| «N2.
3| «5..

8| «8”
. .03.
«0+ 8—”
3+ 29..
8+ 32.
«IN.

2| 3.».
3| one
SI «03.
8| can”
5| comm.

«OI Suﬁ
SI .09.:

v. 252'.»

 

8+ 26".
8| an”...
8+ 08o.
«0| 99.8.
«0| :3.
8| .35.

8+ :8.
3+ eve.
8+ 30..
3| awn.
2| o3!
8| :0”
8| 9:.
8| 5—.
5| 08..
8| 53..
3| 03—.

8+ 2:.
3| 85
8+ 89.
8| 8:.
8| .3».
8| :2.

.8”
«0+ 32.
3+ £3.
8... Bow
BI 03%

2| 83
8| 3:.
SI 82.
8| 83.
SI 83
8| :2.

. 8'83.

 

225

MOFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«0+ 82...
8| 83.
8+ 93
SI 8?.
:1 BS-
3] 38.
8+ «can.
8... 9%
8+ :5.
8... 2b..
8+ 5..

9| 2a....
3' 5.3—.
8' mg
«GI 300.
3+ 38—.
3+ 92.
3+ 32.

8+ 22.
8] .03.
8+ was
5.! 3.3..
31: 93v.
8| «‘3.

. 8+ 8:.

8+ .94
8+ 35.
8+ 82.
3+ 83.
SI 83..
SI 39...

«0| Boa.

8+ 33.
8.! 3v.
«6... 38.
.3' 34M...
5| can.
8| :9.

8+ 22.
«0+ our.”
3» «to.
8+ 3:.
Sun 88
2| 3:.
8| 88.
8| 5..
3| 3.9.

:3

82.

:8.

8+ 88
8| :8
8... 83
SI 28
BI 28
3| 894

82.
8+ 33.
8+ 82..
004.» if

88.
2| 88
8| 8."
8| :3
8| aka.
8... 2.3.
S... :8
3| «so

8+ 3:.
SI 89.
8+ 88.
.3' :2.
5|. 8:.
nOI. 33.

030.
8+ 98.
3+ .8».
8+ tun.

8—H.

SI. 88..
8| :9.
8| 8“.
8' 38.
3| 2.0”
«cl '08.
5| «SN

3 gSIh

8+ 88. :4
SI 88 a
8+ .88. o
.8! 82. 3
SI 82. .4
3| 8.x. e

8:. .—
8+ 82. z
8... 88. .
3.1 g i
6! £2. a
SI 32. :x
8| .52. U.
«ml :8. _ J.
8... 3... . L.
8.. 89. _ .x
3| 9.8. n x
SI 88. _ I.

 

226

m omcw. us; ONLY
8+ 82.
8| on“
3+ 32.
3| 3:.
3| 3:.
8| 80¢.

3+ :2.
«0+ n?”
34.. 58o.
3+ 32.
«0+ 08—.

.3I anon.
3| 23'.
8| 8a..
8| 32.
3+ vs“.

33.
3+ 3—.

 

8+ 83».
3| 80.
8+ 32.
3| For;
3| .2»:
8| 93.

3+ :2.
8+ «an.
3+ 008.
8+ 08“.
3+ 002.:

~b| 98”
8| van»:
rdl 38
no| 0:”
5:.
30a
:3.

8+ 33—.
8| 9.8.
8+ ﬁﬁ
3| 3;.
3| 8.".
n¢.| g

.8... .

8+ 03”
3+ out.
3+ 3v”

8...»:

«0| 36..
3| mg.
5| n02.
3| 82.
3| avg.
8| «IQ
3| 3P...

8+ 82.
8| coon.
3+ 3..
3| g
5| or“.
8| 82.

39”
8+ 32.
3+ .85.
3+ 3mm.
82.

5?! 2.2.
8| 3v...
3| Eb”
rel n30.
3| 39”
8| 80».
3| a.”

x 982'.“

8... 8:.
«9| 3%.
8.7.2.3
8| 2:.
3| 2:.
8| 82.

9..
8+ 08..
3+ on;
3+ «03.
3| not.

3| 3..
8| _§.
3| 3.
8| 82.
«0| g.
3| :9”.
«0| g.

3+ 8%.».
8| 8?.
8+ 9?.
3| 3:.
3| 3:.
8| 3..

3| 83.
8+ $9.
3+ 098.
3+ cg.
3| «8—.

3| 08—.
8| ”3..
2| 2.3.
3| 0.8.
3| 83
8| 98.
8| 894

Q
0‘

:4 caulk CRIB”

“L":

.|
xxxx

227

FOIOFFIOALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

3+ 98—.
8| «.2.
21' 08”.
E1
03—.
«0| 08..

3+ 3:.
3+ 3."
3+ 33.
3.1 38
8+ «85.

8' 93.
vol 28
8.! 38.
2.! 08¢.
3| km.”

58”

8+ 8.0.
.Ql 32.
no... 20“.
3| 3%..

SI .86.
8‘ «In.

«a».
«0L.- 08”
3... 008.
8... E
5.7 80“.

5' 1.3.
8|. go.
vol. Emu.
2| 8;.
3| 82.

”can.

3| 8.9..

9.2...

8+ 82. .

«OI 32..
8+ «3—.
3|. 52.1
SI. 88.

«Q.- vg .

32.
8+ «00..
3+ 3.
8+ 25.

8:.

3+. 08..

8|. an.
8+ 3:.
5| 2
SI. 88,
RT 1—“.

8+ 88‘
8+ 3.9...
8+ 85
8+ 38.
SI 83

SI 33.
2| :9.
SI 39.
2| :2.
8| 8.8
SI 38
3| 8:.
SI 33.

3+ 82.
«0' 93.
8+ 08..
5| 3
3‘ 3m“

8.! «2;.

5+ 3.3
8+ 52.
3+ ”a.
8+ «.9;
3.! 8:.

2... 5...
2| «.2
:I 30...
:I an...
3... 8;.
8... $2.

3| «3.. .

«On! 00:.

gents. earns:

.21:

 

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8+ 2:.
3'68“.
8... «an.
53..
63—.
8| «.2.

09».
«0+ 03”
‘54. 350.
8+ an.
3+ «8r;

vol. 39..
3| n03.
8| 9.8
sons.
5|. «3».
won».

8... 83.
5|. aw
8+ 53.
«8..
«8..
8| 804

8:.
8+ 82.
:1. Sr.
8+ 83
3+ 32.
8| 89.
BI 83.
8| .3».

88
3| :2.

$8

8.1 2a
3| 3..
8+ 3%
5| 8'.
”a! 33
8.! .03.

89.
8+ :2.
3+ 8K
8... 9.9”.

«v8.
8| :3
3| £2.
8| .5.

$1.

Slocum.

uni.

8.+ 8:.
8| 8k.

8... 82. .

5| :8
SI .82..
8... 8R

SI 38.
8+ 3...
6+ 23.
8+ 82.
.0' one”

3' v8?
8| «8—.
3‘ :8
SI 88.
8|. .03.
«0| no»!

8+ 22.
«GI 85.
8+ 5..
5| .8“.
3| «3“.
3' 32.

3|. :3.
«0+ 3:.
8+ 5..

8+ at“
8' a

2|. 83.
no... 82..
8|. 88.
8|. «as.
8| an.

. 8:. as...

ugnzh three:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

34 85. 8+ 83
SI :8 5... 2...
8+ 85 8+ $8.
8: an.
9;. 82.
8| 3: 8| “8..
93 38.
8+ 82. 8... 82.
3+ 82. 3... 3r.
8+ 33. 8t 33.
8+ 3:. 3+ 82.
3| «8. 8| 2:.
8| 83.. SI 83.
SI 82. SI 88.
:89 29.
SI 8.3 8| 3:
33. 88

8+ 30.. 3+ 8a
.0! «3.. 3| «8..
8.... 30.. 8+ mar...
5| «3». .ol a
SI 33. SI 83.
3| 03». 8| 8%.

82. 3| «.5
8+ 82. 8+ 30..
3+ 98‘ 3+ 38.
3+ 33. 8... can.

on.” .ol 3.
8... 38. 3| .8..
8| IL... 3.! “on”
8| 1:». «cl .83.
SI :3. 31 33.
8| 82. 8| :3
5| van. SI 82.

v. 988-;

3| 88.
8+ 32.
.Ol En.
3| 80."
8| «8..

3| 3...;
8+ 3:.
8+ 8:.
8+ 58..
3| 8:.

.TI 88.
oQI .86
«0| 03..
«GI 03..
8| «8v.
8| 9:.

«9| 58.
no... 08..
5.! as
:1! 58
3| 08..

6| 8;.
«0+ 08..
8+ 82.
8+ 8a..
9| 8%

2| 33.0
8.: «8.
8|. :3.
8‘ 97...
«on. word.
8| n3...

0
:0!

xéxxx Q-ﬂn

‘K

1L- rkl'ua

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SI 82. SI 82.
8+ 88 8+ .2...
8... 88. 3| 8:.
SI 88 SI 33
8| 8:. 8| .28
SI 88. SI 88.
8+ :2. 8... .5.
8+ 8:. 8+ 22.
8+ 8:. 8+ «.2.
. .5. 6| :8.

2| 88. «.l 88.
8| it. 8| .8»
3| 82. SI 83.
8| :8 8| «28
8| 3.8. 8| 32.
8| 83. SI 22.

a §3Ik

3' on...
8+ «3..
:Yl 38..
3' 83.
vol 23‘

3' 38
«0+ 82.
«a... 82.
8+ ”3..
3' Bk...
2' $8.
nol .80.
«0' 82.
3| «8”
3' 508
3| .8.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

8| 88. 8+ 88. 8+ 8% 8+ 82. 8+ 88. f
8| 88?. 8| :8. 8| 88. .8: 32. 8| £8 a
8+ 88 8+ :8 8+ 28 8+ 88.. 8+ 88 9
8| Sﬁ. 8| 88. 8| 82. 3| :8. 8| 8:. ua
3| nae. 3| 3 . 3| 32.. 8.! 33. 3| 88. .4
8| 28. 8| 88. 8| 8:. 8| 88. 8| 88. _.
8+ 88. 8+ 8:. 88. 88. .83. ._
8+ 82. 8... as... 8+ 89. 8+ :2. 8+ 82. 2
8+ 5.. 8+ 83. 8+. 83. 8+ 8:. 8+ 3.. .
8+ 28. 8+ 88. 8+ :8. 8+ 88. 8+ 88. 8
8+ 8.” 8+ 8:. 8+ 88 8+ 8:. :3 8
8| 88. 8| 88. 8| 62. 8| ”5. 8| 88 m0

:3 8| 8:. . 8| 3.... 8| .8? 8| 8a.. .0
8| 88 8| 88... 8| 3:. 8| 82. 8| 83 Lo

88. 8| 82. SI 23 8| :5 SI 82. .6
8+ 88. 28. 82. 8| 88. 8| 5.. O

88. 8| 8.... SI 88. 8| :3 SI 88.. u.

$3-5

 

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
8:.
BI 83
3... 3n
SI 22.
8| .3...
8.. 83.
3+ 88.
8+ 82.
3+ 8:.
3+ 82.
8+ 22.

§_.
Sou.
_¢| go.
«so.
.04.. moon.
28.

con

98».
8| 3..
5... can.
8| 2:.
8| 82.
8| «.3.

. 3+ 89.

8+ 08..
3+ m9...
3+ 3:.
8+ «a.

3| 8.”.
5| 28».
3| :2.
coo...
3+ 2mm”.
at.

6+ 8:.
8| 8....
3+ 8:.
8| 2:.
£1 3..
8| 38.
3+ 2.8
8+ "5.
8+ ﬁe.
3+ 8:.
8+ 95

8| 0&8.

3| 82.
8| nouns
3| no.5.
El 89.
3| can.

 

8+ 92.
8| :3.
8+ vaz.
«0| .3“.
8| 1...”
no| 23.

92.
3+ 3:.
3+ gﬁ
3+ 82.

3;

3| 3..
3| 2:.
8| 3:.
«0| 850.
3| omen.
«0| «2.0.

8+ 20v.
8| 090.
8+ 32.
«9| 80“.
«0| ”8—.
RY! g.

2.3.
3+ 82.
3+ noon.
3+ 82.

23.

8| 8.“

8| Sam.
8| :3.
«0| «32...
8| 35.
«0| «3m.

.|
LGOOJt‘f Q-Ehzl-o FRXOU:

233

“OFFICIAL IRWIN
83.
8| 02”
8+ 03..
8| «a;
8| 30*.
SI 90—.

3+ 200.
8+ «:2.
3+ 0!»...
8+ 58..
8+ 8:.

3| 3.

3| 35.
8| ”.3.
wg.
3+ 33
a;

 

3+ .39.
00' noun.
«0+ 32.
8| g.
«0| En.
«0| 82.

8L: «.8
no... 8a..
.0... 20—.
3+ 30—.
8+ ”are

3| 5%..

3| 3:.
3| :2.

“2."
3+ :6“.

3+ 80a.
8| 2.0..
8+ 22.
8| .8?
«0| 300
«0| «8—.

3+ g
8+ 8:.
3+ 32.
3+ 82,
8+ :3

«0| 23.
BI «03.
8| 9:
3:.
g.
3:.

8+ 08..
8| 3:.
8+ noon.
8| 2.3.
SI 23..
9| 83.

8+ 3:.
8+ 8:.
8+ .2...
3+ 82.
3+ 82.

8| 33.
BI 38
SI 88.
3| when.

88
81 88

«0+ 8a...
«0| 32.
8+ wan”
«0| «3..
«0| «2'.
8| min“.

3+ «03.
8+ 03..
5+ 82.
3+ 3.”
3+ P...”

vols

col 8—”
vol 90».
3| 03”
3| 00”..
3| bow“.

xgolk

8+ 83.
SI 32.
3+ 28.
«0| 99.
8| 3“
3| 33.

80».
3+ 33.
3+ 93”
5+ 32..

33'

8|mﬁ

8| «as.
8| 3.3.
3| who“.
3| RE.
3| 2.2.

3+ 3:.
8| 3:.
8+ as”
8| 3.
«0| 3
8| «51.

03v.
«0... «“3.
:1. «5
3+ 3:...

«PS.

8| «3.
SI 2.9.
8.! 5n
8| 3....
SI :3.
8| 9»...

.f

O cue-IEL. ckaf'ou

obbJ“
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3... 3:.
. 8| 3.

«0+ g
8| 8:.
8| 3.
8| 8:.
3+ 060W
00+ 3:.
3+ «3—.
3... 08..
no... can.

3| 303.

3| :8
3| :9.
2| as.

83:
.3+ .3.

3+ 83
3| :8.
3+ 5a.
8| 32..
8| 3».
3| 3—.

3+ and».
8+ 5:.
3+ 98—.
3+ on.”

«0+ 29. .

3| 39.
3| 8:.
«0| ‘3.
2| ”Mon.

«08.
3+ 32.

003.

.3... 0N8.
8| :00
3+ :8

8| :1.
8| 3a.“.
«0| ”8..
3... n3“.
8... 82.
34 3.2.
3+ «3
no... ”no“

8'88.

8| _8~.
8| ._«t.ﬂ
2| 39.
RE.
8:.
"8..

8+ 38
3| 8:.
3+ 3:...

«GI «35.
«0| «as.
no| Eu.
3+ 93..
81.1 03..
3+ 5..
3+ :8
3+ 8?:

vol man.
an” 8.0.
nol 38
2| 33.:
3| 8:.

:2.
3| 0E.

8... 2:2.
8| 002.
8+ vhﬁﬂ
8| v.03.

«OI a3.
3| $8.

.3... 93..
3+ 003.
3+ 89w
3... 980.
3+ 03—.

vol 3:.

8| Eh
SI 88.
2| EN
3| :8.
:T 2:.
8| «xx.

 

.xglk

8+ 08.
«GI 38..
«0+ 29¢

«also»:

«Q! 23.
8| be.

0.3.
3+ 53.
3... a
3... 39.2

98v.

slog

8| ”2...

8| 80"
2| 0:“.
5| ovﬁ.
8| «3.».
~O| avg.

3+ 08v.
8| 8—.
8+ 8».
«0| 08¢.
8| 2....
8| 0:“.

3v.
8+ 22..
3... av“.
5+ 33.

82.
8| 3:.
8| 89v
8| «3..
2| 82.
8| «03.

«0| Rug.
8| 82..

 

235

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llllulllllllllllllllllll'lllll

3+ 3'”
8| 32.
«0+ 83,

3.| on...
3| 3...
«VI 58..

3+ 08v.
8.... 08..
3+ 30..
3+ v08.
3+ tho.

3| ban,

8| 83.
3| .3”
N.I :2.

0.8.
3+ 88.:
...0+ 3..

8+ 22.
8| 9:.
8+ 88.
3| 3..
3... 5...
8| 3:.

3+ 2...;
8+ «3..
3+ 3:.
3.... «con.
8+ v30

8| coon.

8| 0.2.
8| 39¢
«.I on...
8:.
3+ as...
:9.

3+ 30..
3| +3..
3... 03.
”VI in...
3| on...
3| 38..

3+ on“.
8+ 03..
3+ 5..
3+ 38.
«0+ 39.
8| 0!".

8| 2"
8| 8»...
2| new.
a
.2...
own".

8+ 8:.
8| 3.”
8+ 39.
3| 3..
.0' 08..
"9| 03».
3.... 8!.
«0+ 3.0.
3+ 08..
3+ 3mm.
3.? .«vv.

8..- 82.
8| 8:.
8| 8.2.
2! 9.2.
SI 88.

.3| 000..
3| .03.

3+ 03.”.
8| «5”
8+ 83.
8| .38.
«GI 89

6.193.

2.8.
«0+ 38
3+ NZ”
3+ 33.
3+ :9.

3| 96..
8| go.
11! on...
2| 0.8
3| «Ron.
3| 0.0M.
3| owe».

a. 3|...

3+ 0.8
«0| «9”
No... O30.
«0| 3.
«0| 33.
3| 3.4

38.
3+ in.
3+ 8.“.
3+ «.3.

83.:

21:2

8|.m.v..
8| an.
2| mg.
3| «3..
8| 0a
3| «3....

8+ 20...
«0| va
8+ ”Ev.
8.... .a
«0| 891
3| 8....

35.
8+ o8“.
3+ 23
3+ :8.

Ex.
.3! 89.
8| 8.“
8.... 88
2! 2......
8| 89.

.1‘

653‘ Q‘s-.2. £34100

I
O

obi:

 

236

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PO. 06110“. USE ONLY

«0+ 2:.
8|. 3—.
8+ 23‘

3' 2““.
5' no”
8' 3—.

.3+ 8“.
8+ 82.
3+ 3:.
3+ «25.
«3+ .2».

.3' 3—.

«3' 9.2.
3' 03—.
3' 38.
3+ 03-.
3+ 0:”
3+ _8..

«3+ 33».
«0|. «”8
3+ 3.0.
3|. at”
3' «2”
8| «5:.

8+ 08”
9... van
5+ 32.
3+ 33
8+ .3“.

SI 38
no' 08..
SI 5..
SI 88
at.
.83.
89.

8+ 2.8.

.2188

«0+ .33.
3' 09“

SI 88,
.SI 82.

3+ 32.
8+ 88.
3+ 92.
3+ 33.
8+ «0:.

8| t3.

3| 33.
«0' 89.
SI 30;.
@094
03“
«3“

8+ a
«9' an.
3+ 3:.
3| :2.
3| 3..
3| 38.
3+ 53..
8+ 33».
3+ 13.

3+ 8:. .

3+ ugh.

00' 8.1.

8| 3.8
3| 8%
8| 82.
3| 8;.

3| 2:. .

3' 33.

3+ 88
8'33.
«3+ :8.
3' :2.
3| 3«_.
a? g.

008.
8+ 8”.
3+ 8““.
3+ 33..

gm.

8' :3.
«GI 30”
8| 3..
3' $08.
3| 83.
8| 8»...
3|: 33.

x RUG—IR

£1. 88
8| 5”
3+ the.
«3' 88.
8| 23.

8'02”.

«3+ 88.
3+ 3+”
3+ 83.

Ban .

8| 300.
3|. 3.3.
2' 035.
3. 3..
3' «30.
3| n22.

8+ 32.

SJE.

«3+ 39..

8| .8».
«o. 08k.
3' «8—.

n8”
«04.. 98.
3+ 33”
3+ :3.

.3' no.0.

cal 03».
:l 931
3| «3”
OT- 23.
«0' 33.
8| 82.
3' 38

m .Illllll-
.

.3

 

237

FOIOI'FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«0+ 8:.
SI. 28
8+ 3:.
SI 23‘
SI 88.

H 8| 2:.

3... Eu
8+ 83
3+ 82.
3.+ 38
84.88.

SI 82.

nol has
8|: :9.
5' «can.
3+ 80..
3+ §_.
3+ 83.

 

3+ 22.
«9| San.
8+ and.
3| 8““.
3| 83.
«OI. «3—.

3+ §..
«0+ a:
3+ 03..
3+ s03.
«0+ 33.

8|. 20—.

3| «3”
3..- .39
scl mg.
who!
98
who...

9+ 2 3.

81 3..
8+ 28.
Si 38
SI :8
8| Ba.

3+ «8—.
8+ .8».
3+ and“
3+ 33.
3+ 08¢.

3| ha”
3| 03..
8| :«ﬁ
SI .50”
so“
82.

38. .

3+ 88
8| 8%.
8+ 88.
3.. 8“
3| 3
8] $8.

32..
8+ was.
.6... a
3+ 29..
3... an.

90' 28..

8| 35¢.
8|. 8;.
«0| 3!.
3:1 38.
3' 58..
5|- .ooQ

8+ 80..
8.! 8:.

8+6? .

.01.. 32.

. .5' v52.

8| 28

8+ 88.
3+ 38
3+ 33.

8|!“
nan-3!.

.8! 8:.

Slum:

album“.
«Olga
5'68”

xgslh

Q
d .

~ u'
gait. :44 bis

 

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8... E
«GI 05.
3+ 3:.
3| Ere

.3' 33:

8| 8:.
3+ 8...
8+ 38
8+ 82.
x? 83
8+ 88

8|. .0.”
3| 8:.

8| ﬁe. .
.8! .5».

3+ :2.
83.

. 5+. «3..

3+ 83.
silt—o.
8+ 8:.
3| :9.

3|! 94.2..
«8| 0a..

3+ 9.2.
8+ 20».
3+ 38

3+ 206. .

8+ n9...

8' 8.”
8| .3”

8.! 3:. .

3' v0.3.
58v.
82.
63v.

3... 88.
80 SB.
8... «8..
6| n8:
6| :9.
SI 23.

88
84 :3.
3+ «2”
3+ 53.
3+ 33.

3| 8a..
8' 38.
vol 85.
3| 395.

3
3' «8a..

93

8+ 3.2.
SI 88.

8+ 8:.

5' g
3| :8
8| :8.

38
«0+ 580.
3+ .08.
3+ 02.6.

Sn. 8:.
3|. 82. .

8' the.
00' 23.

Sign .
SI 82. .
Sloan .

5| 8c.

. 8+ 22..

8488.
8+ «8:
Elana

3'3.

nol 85.

88
8+ :8.
8+ 8'”
3+ .2”.

83

3'30.

2|. E...
21.8...

.8.| .8“.

3'. so“.

.3nukavﬂ

3.83:.6. .

3%...
813...

.8... .88

3' 03—.
.31.:3.

.noldaﬂ

. 88.
8+ 28.
3+ 88
3+ g.

- 2:.

8| :8
slat.
BI 29.
“7.82.

Eldon. .
”818......

. 8.... out.

 

8.189.
«0+ E.
3' 83.

.0nl 83.
no] 22.

.ol 8;.
3+ 03?
3+ 88
3+ 8:.
3| 83

SI 82.
67.82.
2.... 83.
8| 8:. .
SL894
8| .5
SI 83

 

.‘_ . ' .
aoooﬁdli‘ “2.2‘. ear..£‘

 

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
iii-It;

3... 28
SI 82.
. 8.... 82.
6| .«8.
8| «8w
8| :2.
8+ 8:.
8+ 82..
a... 88
3+. 8:.
3+ 8K
8.. .88.
8| 8R.
3| 28.
8| 3..
8| $3.
38.

38”
28a

8.783..

8... 8:.
8! 33 8| 8a..
.- :8... 82. 8+ 32.
3! E... .6! .8».
6| 2:. :1 38
8| .8... 8! 88.
$8 82.
8+ 38 8+ 88.
3+ 38 8+ and
3+ 88 3+ 23
a. 8.2. . 8a..
8! 8:. 8| .3...
8| 8:. :I 82.
. SI 38. 8... 88
SI 88 8.. 3:.
8| 8:. 8| 3:.
SI 23.. 8| 3:.
8.. :2. 8.. 2:.
SI 83. 3.... 82.

x Seals ..

. 8+ 2.3.
SI 3%. .

ma... 8:.

31%.

.3..- 88
BI 38.
3.. Eu
8+ 23.
3... «E.
8+ 22.

- 5:.
8.... 8:.
2| 32.
2.. 3.3.
SI 88
8... 83.
8.. 82.
3| 82.

«c|._omn

 

 

8+ 8!...
3| «9».
no... :5
3| 8"”
3| moo”
8| 89d

5' .3m.
«9+ 83.
.0... 83...
no! 53..
3| anon.

:I. 89.
9| 8:.
:I 32.
BI 88.
8.18%
8| 8:.

81 $2. .
«0' to...

‘Q

\
.. ‘ ‘
chanih :hJ‘ou

I
d

abbb

l
o

 

nuochucou.

.v.m Dania.
3+ 08». 3... Son. 8+ 93». 8+ ooh. 3+ 82. .8... 03..

8| ta. 8| 8:. 6| :2. 8| 32. 8| 88 8| ﬁn.
8+ 88 8+ 33 8+ 88 8+ 3:. 8... 82. 8+ 22.
32. 82. SI 83 SI 33 SI 88 3| 8%
5.. R2. 3| :8 .SI 38 3| 88 6| 2.8
£1.88 8| .3. SI 22. 8| 8:. 8| 8:. 8| 88
- an. 82. 83. . :8 82. 8| 2:.

8+ 33. 8+ :3. 8+ 83. 3+ 33. . «0+ «3». 8+ «80.
3+ 3.” .3... 39. 3+ 9+” 3+ 3o“. 3... g . 3+ 83.

3+ 31 8+ 8:. 8+ 3.. 3+ :2. 3+ 32. 8+ 34”
3+ 82. 3+ 88. 3+ 28 g '1.” 3| 3.
3| 2:. 8| nZG 8| IVS. 3| 3:. 8| 88 3| 8‘.
nQ| 33. 8| 3 3| are 8| 3. 3| 33. 3| 8:.
3| our... 3| an. 3| «8.. 8| 030. 8| g. «GI 82.

«2s. «as 82. 3| «a. SIAM: 8| :3.
3| 33. 3| 02.. «0| 82... 8| 28. 3| 93” 3| :3.

1:. 38 82. 3| 0:9. 3.... 32. SI 39..

.x 98,8 [5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-8+§....

3| 3..
8+ 23¢
80..
8..
«0| 8“

83¢
8+ «08.
3+ 3'”
8+ «60..
«0+ 3..

3| 03..
.o' g.
9.3.
3' 80..
«So.

 

8.? 68¢.
.o' 82.
8... g
3...
8...
8| .9...

88.
8+ :8.
8+ 88
8... 82.
6+ 29.

an 8.”
5' on“
"3..
«0.! 23.
«2h.

8+8“...
3.! «.3.
8... 3”

3| 88.
.0.” n89
«9| “8..

g
«o... 53%.
3... EN
8+ 8.”
3+ and“

”0' .3”
3' 0.2...
3' 83.
8| «03.

$3.

8+ 6.3. .

.ol 3..
no... not.
.0. saw:
3.! 83.
«6| «NC.

«3..
8+ 88
6+ 8;.
8+ 95.

:8.
8| 88.
SI 33.
8| 2:.
BI 88.
3| .3...

21. as”
..o.l 90..
3t .81
3| g.
5| :9.
8' one"
. 82.
3+ 2.9.
3+ 83.
3+ 8"
5..

8' Va.

3| 3.
8| .39..
3| 98“
.Ol hr...

9. 988'...

8+ 88
«9| .g
8+ 8...

5| .3»:
.o'. 83.
31- 33.

.0' 992
8+ 3.
3+ 1.8.
8+ 36m.
3' 2.3

8' 8m”
8| :2.
3' 80..
h?! «80.
«0| :9.

8+ 3..
«OI 3:.
«0+ v08.
8] .0“

.738
3.22»

.6. 8.6.
8+ .80.
3+ a!

$08..

an 22.
8103.4
3| 88.
3”: 82.
8| 8......
SI 82.

: §

L080!) azw’II-n rI<-3'ba.§

 

242

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[’0' OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 

8+ 33. 8+ 02.. 3+ 83.
SI 38. 3| «v.3. 5| 95.
9+ «8” 8.? 83. no... .22.

  

8:. 3! 32. SI 88.
82. SI 8k. 8... 88.
3| 3%. 8.- 3...” 8| :2”
. . 82. 3:. 8| :8.
8+ «.2. 8+ 83 8+ 88.
3+ «.8». 3+ 88. 8+ 89. .
8+ :9. 8+ 32. 8.... 83.
8+ «8.. . 5,... 82.

 
 

            
     

3| 82. 8| onus. «9| 23.
5| “on. 8| 32. 8| 32.

 

3| g 8” «3.... 3| «09.:
3| 82. 8| Ian. 8| 92.
03—. 3| Son. 3| 08—.

 
    

 

x galh

8+ 2:.
5| 83.
8+ 8:.
3I 2:.
SI 30'.
3| 32..

SI 82...
8+ 23...
3... a!
3+ 2.8.
3| :31

3| Rﬁ
3| 3—.
3| 63..
2| «n3.
8| one.

.9904“

.:|
0000 crazi— f-‘lt

                
                    

L

 

 

243

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+8;
SIS? 8|?3
8+88 8+93
Slag Slag
8183 8l$§
SISS SUSS
3% 33
8+38 8+8§
3+ 8:. 3+ :2.
90+ 58.. 3+ «03.
8+ 82. 3+ 83. .
Slag 8l38
SI88 SI8?
EM .8:
Slﬂﬁ six?
x88ls

3.

S .5

3+ coco.

8+$8
SIB:
8+28
SISS
8183
Slaﬂ

83.

8+ 3—” .

3+ 2N...
00+ 22.
3+ 52.

8I8$
Slag

3| .30
8| Iva.

3+ 2.9..
«9| «5..
«0+ who“.
8| 3;.
«0| .3”
«GI 83

3+ g
3+ 5—.
3+ 3..

8:.

8| :3
"0.303".
8| :2.
«0' 08..

     

.5

ts. :kJ'bo

.3
233:) Q£n

244

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3+ 2.1.
8| 2.8
«GI 83..
8| 3?.
3| 93...
8| 8.!

3+ 3...
3+ 3a.
3+ 3....
3+ 03..
8+ 88

8| .3.
..6| a...

0.8.
8' 9...».

3+ O80. .

8| “on” «OI 3n“. .
8+ «8». 8+ 5.
«0| 08». SI 33.
3| 33... «0| 003.
SI 33. 8| 89.7
g 39:
3+ 8.“. 8+ 2.”
3+ «3.. 8+ .8..
3+ 52. 3+ “Q.
«0+ 8... 3+ :8
8| 88. 8| 3.6.
3| 3. BI 83..
no” .°|.o..«o.
5| 28” 3| 3....
u. g '5

«0+ 8a..

8+ 8...».
8| who”
8+ 8mm.
«0| «.2.
«6| 92¢.
«cl 3.

0....
8+ 32.
3+ .92.
3+ 52...
3+ 20..

8| OBN.
«cl «3v.
3| 3.“.
8| 99.

8+ 83
SI 82.
8+ 82”.
«0| 9.8.
8| 93....
8| 8%

8+ .90..
3+ ”3..
3+ 2.0“.

8| .5”
SI 22%
8| :3.
8| ”3“.

Q
0. .
‘oDiJiJ canZl— exJ'bo:

24S

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3+ an.
SI 83.
3+ E0.
8'. :8.
«GI Emu.
8| 3;.

200.

8.798“. .

3+ ”8—.
3+ 82.
.54 tau.
n~| bout.
8| 2b”.
El «0.3...

.8”
SI 83.

3.788..

«OI anon.
«0+ «ohm.

«cl 020.
«0' 83.
8| g

_80.
no... 22.
3+ 32.
3+ 3N.
3+ 38

3' 2.2.
no. 88
.3' 8:.

. 3| 25m.

Zvl 8:.

K glk

8+ on...
«OI coma.
«0... N8!
8... «08.
SI 2.3.
3' “RB.

«2v.
8+ :2.
8+ 03..
34.- 00v“.

#0:.
3| 83.
3| 2....

8| 3:. .

SI 32.
3| 3:.

8+ 39.
8| 2“
8+ 8:.
8| .8...
SI 82.
8| can

88
8+ :2.
3+ 3»...
.oo 8%

in.
:I New
8| 8n...
8! can.
8| 5n
SI 98..
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_ _O+ 8'1

3| _8_.
3+ 32.
3' ~02.
3| 32.
«0| 505.

8+ «RN.
8+ moo”
8+ 8:.
3+ 3.”
3+ 32.
:I 03—.
8' man.

33..
3+ 33.

«0;.

_
_
_

.0... 0006.
«e... 83.
8+ 82.
3| :2.
8| 8:.
8| 38.

8+ «3..
8.1.32.
8+ :2.
3+ new“

con

 

_0+ 88.
SI- :3.
8+ 00“..

8.4. 32.
SI. 82.
3| 39.

8+ 82..

8+ 08—.
3+ 8a..
8+ .9".
«0+ 53.

:I 85"

. no'ovnn.

«61.
$9..
09. _.

r. .3

8+ 83: 8+ 32.
«0| 8.». «0| «2'.
8+ 88. 8+ 82..
3' «02. 5|. 8:.
8| 8:. 8| 3:.
«0| 2.8 «0' v2.”

.83. 83
8+ 33. no... 82.
3.1 .9... 8+ 3:.
3... my“. 3+ and.
8+ 38. 8+ 82.
:l 3?. :I 22.
8| 9%.. 8.| «2N
8| :2. 8| «SN

23. 3| 3—“.
SI 33. SI 33

3 go. I h
m on _ 3

8+ 2a.
SI 83
8+ 35.
SI 82.
SI 88
8| 82.

88.
8+ 82.
8+ 82.

3+ $9...

89.
SI 82.
8| 82.
SI 28.
SI .33
8| 38

3... 08¢...

8| 88.
«0+ can.
3|: 83.
«all 35o.
8| ~02.

g

91. «NE.
3+ 32.
3} g...
3:.

2' 20".
8| 82.
«0| Sun.
nol 8:.

_ «GI 23.

Q
fang

7.!— 93¢

8

.3,
:3le.) a!»

E

247

FOR OMGAL USE ONLY
3+ 82.
«0| 068.
8+ 3:.
SI .88”
3| 2.8.
«OI can.

Sub.
8+ 82.
.3... 82.
3+ 3:.
3+ «03.

3| ave"
8' an”.
3' 890.
3' =2...
3' 8:.

8+ 080.

.8! 89.
84 38.
5' 68..
3|: «5:.

«cl 32.

90v.

8+ 99.
3+ 3..

3+ 98—...

3+ 83..

8' 030
8' «5a.
3| 3'“.
«cl :3.
3| ova.

v— §«_ '8

 

3+ 8mm.
«cl 08....
«0+ 93.
3| 33.
«0' En.
3| as

. g
8+ 8:.
3+ 0.2.
3+ 02¢.

83‘

8| 3:.
8|. 3....
8| 38.
8| .30.
«0' 23.

8+ 3:.
«0+ «v3.
3| s.
«ol as.
8' RUN.

3:.
8+ 98.
5+ 88.
8+ 3:.
«8..

SI 08..
SI .9...

i

DDT-’13 ﬁ-{uil— ck

«roe-3‘

. 8

248

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.8....88..

SI 82.
8+ 88
8| 8:.
SI 83
8| .8...
3+ 82.
8+ 82.
8.... 82.
8... 5..
8+ 88.
2| 82.
8| 88
SI 38.

«0+ 83.
8| aaﬁ
8+ 3.”

3| «3....

SI 29.
SI 33

3+ 82.
8+ 23—.
3+ 53.
3+ 0.3.
3+ on“
2| Sun.
8| :8.

SI 33.
«an.

«3%
8m!

3+ 82.
3| «2:.
8+ .32.
3| 2.8
8| 88.
8| 8‘.

3+ 20—.

-8... “2.

3| .3...
3+ at...
8... 82.
2| 9%.
8| 8?.
3| 8:.

2a.

8| :3. .

8m"

8+ 23. 8+ SR.
«cl SR. 3| 8%:
8+ 83. 8+ 83.
SI 38 3| :2.
3| 5'” BI 32.
«9| 82. 8| 3%..

38. . g
8+ 32. 8+ 98.
5+ «02. 5+ 32.
3+ owl. 3+ 33.
8+ g g.
2| Sou. 2| 83:
8| Son. 3| 33.
3| 93". 8| 3:.
5| van SI 22.
8| .«3. 8| 50%
BI 23. 51 2.8.

x 803 '5

 

8+ 3:.
8| 5:.
8+ 83.
3| 2:.
5| :2.
8.» 82.

8—H
8+ 590.
3+ 3—”
8+ «3..

39d
3| .52.
8| has.
«0| :Nv.
NO| «8—.
vol :3
8| 33.

8+ 88.
wol 88.
8+ 88
8| 3;.
8| :8.
3| 88.
- 82.
8+ 2.8
3+ 28
3+ 8:.
SI 88.

2| :9.
con: 0%.
8| 53.
8| 8:.

slaﬁ .

8| 2am.

ZI- chorus:

O
O
O
0

O
_ O
UbDDIJ cc»

I
o

249

POI! Ol-TICIAL USE ONLY
ma omcm. use on“

.8+§

6| 8.”
8+ .8”

32.
SI 33
SI 88.

a0...- 03..
8+ 18..
3+ :3.
8+ E
8+ 3.9
:I g
c?! :8.

.80.

«an.

3:.
3+ 82.

no... 38
3|. 22.
3+ anon.
3| once.
8| 3.
8' 82.

.04.. 28—.
8+ mg.
8... 32.
8+ 52.
8+ 3.2.

Sal Ft.
vol. 8.».

Ion. .

3| 83.
3' 13..
3..

8+ 8:.
3| 3....
8+ :2.
SI 23.
3| 8:.
8| Eu.

.«Nﬁ
«or 98.
3+ as.
3+ 8:.

3+3.

a?! mag.
vol 83.
3:.
SI 83.
8| g
20”

3+ 96—.

«all 8.6.
8+ 2:.
3' men.
3:1 +36.

. 3| 8;.

. '8',
8+ 83
5+ 28
8+ «9..
3+ :3.
El 83
8... Sn...
3| 2.8.
8| 89..
8| 82.
SI 33

3+ 95
8' .5.

. 8+ :30.

3|. «2”
3|. 3.“
nol 2:.

ha.
«.1. g.
3... 52”
3+ :2.
g.

2] 8%
3| 3....
SI 22.
8| 38.
8| 33
SI 83

¥§8Ih

3+ 68..
8|! «30.
8+ 82..
.0] 32.
3' 30—.
8|. 83.

«59..

8+ 02.
3+ 3n“
8.... 52.

.83.

no. 8—“.
3' 33.
«0.! Sun.
3' «5.
8.! 38
8| 3.

8+ 85¢
8| :3
«0+ 33.
_Q| .02.
3|. 2.2.
3' 22.

SI. 32..
8+ 3:.
8+ 0:“.
8+ 32.
3| 3:.

8|- :3.
3| 23.
8”. 3:.
3| #3».
8| ~n-Q
«GI 83

it... chores:

O
of
9335:: an»

. 3

 

250

can omcw. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8W8.“ .

SI 88
84 88

3:.

.82.
SI 82.
3+ 82.
8.... 88.
8+ 8:.
.8... 22.
8+ 3.4
81 8:.
SI 38.

20'.
SI 82.

«.188.

3+ 03...

8+. 33. 8+ 32.

3| 3—. 3' .62.
8+ «08. 8+ and...
SI 8.2.. 3| :8. .
8| 8...“. SI 98». .
8| .99 8| R8
360. on...
.«O... «68. 8+ g.
3+ 03—. 3+ 82.
8+ 82. 3m! .01.
8+ 83 3+ .8...
60' 22. _ hGl 82.
8|: 30». 8' was.
82. 8| 88.

SI 08.. «0| who...
8' ward. 8| «3.
3—... "no”

3+ 2:.
3| 08—.
3+ n02.

SI .38.
3' has
8|. 28

. Sou.
no... vans.
3+ an.”
3+ 5:.
3+ :2.

«0| hon—x
00' «80.
3|. Sou.
nol o2...
3| 3:.
3' «so.

3+ 83.
3| g
8+ 82.
3' ma”
3' 3m"
MOI _8_.

«37
«0+ It.
3+ :3.
8+ .82.

32..

so. am
3' .80
«0| 83.
3' 2.8.
811 08....
3| 5..

v. gnulk

8+ Er.
SI «35.
8+ E0.
3| 3““.
5| 3
8| 2";

3| 3%
8+ 8:.
3... .3”
3+ $2.

82.

8|. 8“"
8| ovum.
SI. 08”
8|. 39.
8' 23.
8| «3».

8+ ova
«0| 83.
8+ «2».

SI 2:.
SI at...
3| 8%.

3| g
3+ 82.
3+ RUN.
8+ .22.
3' 31....

8| «2...
8| 8%
8| 8%.
8| 8.9.
8| 2:.
SI 28

I
d

z... “I...

‘ f

.:t
33:33:: Gen
8+ an“.

El 3....

8+ 3:.

3| 33.
SI 33.

8‘93“... .

32.
«a... as.

3+ nan. .

8+ :2.

88.
8! 2.2.
8| $8
SI 85
3| «.8.
8| 3a..
SI 33.

 

3+ 83..

.8.In§m.

8+ 8:.
8| :8
SI 98
8| 8:.

8:.
8+ 3.
3+ 39”
3+ «8..

gm”
3| 88
«cl :2.
«cl 3mm;
3' g
8| 8:.
.3! mag.

x galh

SW 608.!
«0| 2.2..
«0+ 88.
:3! 3mm.
3| 3.

.colnao.

3.! 83.
8+ nus,
3+ anon.
3+ «2”
3.! 98.

«0|: ~Nz.
8.. 82.
8.. 82.
8| .3...
8.. ea
8.. .8...

s... 82.
SI 88.
8+ 22.
5t and
3.. 28
3| 3:.

slog}

3+ 23.
6+ g
3+ 8'“.
3.. 8%
3| any...
nol 28..
8r 89.
8.. 88.
:I 39.
SI 3:.

It... shine:

:I-
:aaai»: mg.

0 1

'0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3+ 8“.
3| nova.
3+ «:5.
32.
32.
3| 82.
8?.
8+ .52..
3+ 32.

3+ 82.
«6+ 23.

8| 3km.
3| «9“
02.".
8| :3
3| tau.
33.

8+ 02%.
3| 82.
8+ «8”

82.

32.
8| .3».

38.
8+ g.
3+ 83.
8+ 80”
3+ can!

8| 29.
3| Rn.
3| 005.
8| 39.:
8| 32.

Son.

8+ 20..
5| 8:.

8+ an.

53.
«8—.
8| iv.

38

. 8+ :2.

3+ ovum.
3+ 3“”
3+ 92”

.8! 86

3| 03—.
3|. Son
3| 83.
8| «3”

22.

3+ 88.
3| _8_.
8+ «81

3| mums.
3| «3».
n¢| who”

.2...

«0+ «03.
8... .05.
8+ moo“
:05

”9| ha.

.8|_ovo.

«0| 8?.
3| 89..
8| 38
3| 93.

8+ 83
3| 2:.
8+ 22.
SI 83
SI 83
MOI 3:.
8| 8:.
3+ «8%

3+ SR.

8.... 32.:
2.2.

8| 32..
8| «8Q
3| 03».
8| o2”
SI 88.
3| 89.

v— §3Ih

8+ 05$.
3| 32.
8+ 3:.

5| 03v.
aol «a.
3| an

3| 3:.
«0+ a.
3+ 88.
3+ but".
3| 83.

8| can».
8| :8.
3| «m3.
8| «8...
«7| «3.
«0| 8:.

8+ 3:.
«0| 0‘”
8+ .30.

3| a».
SI 28.
vol ago.

5| on.“
8+. 83¢
3+ 32.:
3+ a».
3| 8:.

8| «was
8| 8:.
8| man.
8| 58—.

:l as .

8| 3!.

 

“k

Zl— three

.3
:8 '
12:33:.) egg.

0 |

 

253

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
40040 OFFICIAL [BS ONLY

Table 5.6. numphyoical Properties of Petunia-0min 4414:0020:

 

       
   
   
   
   
   
   
        
     
       
     
   
  

      
   
 

"(1) (2) M. 00 .
I l0 I” I”
1-4000 K; 00:09;
M .4032 +02
g .4202
. .2440 +04
.4 AM +0!
44; —.2404 +04
r .0400
' 4| 1290 —02
12’ .4404 —02
A, .4404 -02
0 .4000 -4 04
a .4010 .01
"w .—.4440 —m
”4': 0.496 — m
"4": «.1904 —00
*u 0:400 +04
1' 5-.2004 ----02
l: .4120 +04
14,, . :4000 +00
1-0000 K; 00-044
M .0020 +02 .4220 +02 .4422 +02
4: .9404 —04 .4044 +04 .4000 +02
. .4014 +04 0422 +04 .0000+o4
: .0410 +04 .4100 +04 ' .4249 +04
4.; —.4451 +04 —.0420 +04 -.2040 +04
r .4501 .9232 .2414 +04
4| .4001 --02 44004 -02 .4040 -02
2' .2400 —02 .2044 — 02 .4004 — 02
4, .2440 "-02 .2400 ——02 .2004 - 02
o .4200 +02 .1404 +04 .4400 +04
a .1204 --00 .1040 —03 .4000 -00
”no —.4401 --02 —.4004 —00 _.4129—02
of, 3242 -- 01 .4424 —01 --.0200 -00
"3 .2045 - 02 .4494 ---02 .4001 — 02
M4 .1000 404 .0000 +04 .0010 404
1,. ”.1340 -02 —.004:4 —02 —-.4414 --02
10 .0040 +04 42.04 +04 .2121 +04

  

.7Jl0 +0.1

 

.5210 +02

 

.3l20 +0!
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

fable 5 . 6. [Cor"1nuod]

Am. 00
""""" l

 

—__-____—____—_———_—————_————_

Tum K; “H-396

M 3420 +02 .3042 +02 .4495 +02 .4324 +02
9 .0310 — 04 .1154 .0042 +04 .4194 +02
0 .0344 +04 .5492 +04 .4310 +04 .4000 +04
4 .0449 +04 .5443 +04 .4491 +04 .4404 +04
4.; ._.0434 +04 —.0291 +04 —.4001 +04 -3132 +04
r .4503 .4044 +04 .2332 +0! .0023 +04
44 0340 -—03 .4414 —02 .4041 —02 .4500 —02 g
’3 3445 --02 .4010 .-02 3000 —02 3509 ...02
‘0 am --02 .4200 —.02 14904 - 02 3122 --02
o 3“,“ +02 .I905 +02 .II7I +02 .I007 +02
4: _ 1m .. “2 .4010-442 .533. m m —m
Duo —.4320 - 02 -- 4000 --02 — 4000 —02 —.4099 —02
95 .4494 - 01 .2124 .-01 .4090 —01 .1434 —00
41f, .3400 02 .2404 .-02 .2309 --02 .2340 -—02
‘44 .4324 +02 404444 +02 .9414 +04 .0029 +04
2' .—.1049 —02 .—.4444 04- —- 9441 —02 _1094 --02
145 .0904 +04 9142 +04 .1114 +04 .1024 +04
794 .4520 +04 44230 +02 0000 +04 .0440 ,

TH7WK'. “1-3%
44 .2049 +02 .3435 +02 .3900 +02 .4404 +02
0 .4000 —04 .0903 .1025 +04 .3900 +02
0 - .4240 +00 .0452 +04 .0030 +04 .0303 +04
4 .0129 +04 .5054 +04 .4154 +04 .4302 +04
0; —-,4224 +00 —-.0403 +04 -5041 +04 —.0452‘+o4
r .3040 .9140 .2294 +04 .4920 +04
0| .3994 —03 .9004 —-00 .4434 ——02 .4019 —02
1' .4440 —02 .0210 —02 .0020 —02 .0412 —02
4, .4320 —02 .0404 --02 .0940 —02 .0009 —02
a .4400 +02 .3303 +02 .2394 +02 .2040 +02
4: .4091 —-02 .4945 --02 .4403 —02 .1400 —03
0..., —.4404 --02 -—.4044 --02 —.4929 —02 —.2o40 —02
n", .5400 --01 .3120 —-01 .2000 —01 .4320 —01
of, .3120 0-02 2022 --02 3092 —02 .3199 —02

. M4 .4041 402 .4004 +02 .4404 +02 .4312 +02
1' -.-.042.0 “-02 .-.4200 —04 —.4423 —04 _.4240 —04
14‘ .4200 +00 .4049 +00 .4012 +00 .4432 +00
4" 3130 +04 .4010 +00 0900 +04 .4210 +04

__——___'—————_————————’—_—

[Continued on following page]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continued]

Nun-K." I
"w. I :__ l ___:_0 :00 I 000

Thu” K3 00-3%

 

M .2420 +02 .2044 +02 .300: +02 .300: +02

9 .3124 -0: .4011 0100 + 0: .1130 +02
0 .:414 +00 3000 +00 .1040 +04 .0133 +04
3 .100: +0: 00:0 +0: .400: +0: .4032 +0:

0' —.:420 +00 -.:002 +00 —.1040 +04 -.0110 +0:
r .3::0 0000 2:32 +0: .43:0 +0:

1. .2013 —01 .1000 —03 .:3:: ~02 .:000 —02
av 50:0 —02 .0001 —02 .:010 —o: .:043 —0:
I: 0220 —02 0100 —02 .:000 --0: .1000 —0:

0 4:0: +02 .4010 +02 .3010 +02 .3:10 +02

0 .2200 —02 .2110 —02 2:4: —02 .:420 —02

0..., _.1012 —03 —.:410 —02 —.:041 -02 —.2::0 —02

05 0010 —01 .4420 - 01 .2000 —01 .:101 ~01

05 _.1043 —01 .2210 —02 .4204, —02 .4000 —02

:0 .:432 +02 2:03 +02 2:31 +02 2023 +02

11 ——.3003 —02 —.::02 -0: —.:141 —0: —.:004 —0:

‘0 .:000 +00 2340 +00 .2003 +00 .2302 +00

0‘ .:0:0 +00 3400 +01 .:140 +02 2000 +0:

1-:000010; 00-390

M 220: +02 .2010 +02 .3004 +02 3400 +02

1; .2104 - 0: 3:1: .4022 +0: .2401 +02

.:10: +00 .:04: +00 .::40 +00 0420 +04

8. .1430 +0: .0420 +0: 030: +0: .4020 +0:

0, -1000 +00 .-.:412 +00 --.::00 +00 --.0020 +04

r .200: .0242 .:101 +0: .3301 +0:

, v: .:203 -01 .4401 -—03 .:000 —02 .:011 —02
11 .1300 —02 .:20: -—0: 2:40 —0: .:000 —0:

1:, - .14:.:- —02 .:303 —0: 2:00 —0: 20:2 —0:

o .0201 +02 .1200 +02 .0204 +02 .1021 +02

:1 .2001 ..02 3003 —02 34:0 —02 .4300 —02

um, —.2014 .-03 —.:024 —02 —.2:00 —02 -—.:040 —02

of, 2:00 — 01 .430: —-01 .:040 —01 .2130 —01

of, _.:10: «.02 0300 —-03 .0400 ~02 .4040 -02

1:" .0000 +0: 2:20 +02 .3400 +02 3234 +02

u -.:400 .02 ...121: -—02 —-.2:04 --0: —.:004 ~0:

1" .2043 :00 .3113 400 .4003 +00 .4040 +00

0,. .1910 .. 00 .2000 +04 .1000 +02 0000 +0:

 

[Continued on following page]

256

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4d]

W. 00

I

Tr- 4204!) K: a" -3*

.2249 4-02
.2200 -- 0|

2048405.

.7672 +0!
-—.46l6 +05
J“!

.9268 -- 04
.9049 --02
.0849 - 02

.6400 +02
.1432 --02
---.lﬂ75 — 03

74475 --00
—- L558 --02
- 3464 -I OII
-—.IM2 - 02

.5510 +05
.5050 +00

.2222 4-02
.4774 --0l
2:405 +05
.7933 40!

--ll45.'| +45
.93l6 —0l

.IMJ -- 03
Jul --0l
.44I2 ---0l

.7543 [-02
.4l0l --02
~50“ - 04

- .0404 09

-.0707 03
-- 2H?" [02

- -..'ll2l 0.1
.634!) 4‘5

   
 
 
   
   
 

2351 +02 .2144 +02
2440 .2002 +04
.4054 4-05 .4405 +05
.0143 +04 .5504 +04
—.40.11 +05 _.44.40 +05
.4400 .4340 +04
moo --0:4 .0030 —03
.4500 .-04 .2050 —04
.4001 —04 .2012 -04
.0042 .4-02 .4400 4-00
.4044 .02 .5454 -02
_— 5044 01....4505 —02
24422 —-01 .0400 - 01
—.0451 .—04 .2140 -02
.4404 402 :4550 +02
—.4401 -.02 —.4140 —04
5204 4-05 .1401 +05
.4040 +05 .2100 400
1-4500044; 00-044
.2254 402 .2455 402
.4055 .2440 +04
221.4 405 .4050 +00
.1045 404 00.14 +04
---.4550 405 —.4054 +05
.2042 .0000
.2243 —04 .1013 —03
.2205 —04 .4251 --04
2.105 --04 .4214 —04
.4004 +03 .4540 +00
.5101-—02 0055 "02
—.2021 .—04 --.4000 —02
.1520 «00 .2004 --.01
—5404 um .4402 --0.4
-—.4022 02 .4204 402
— 2140 --02 —.4310 - 04
.1100 05 .4450 +00
5.420 +05 .4010 +04

3820-44]?

  

 

.3I67 +02

.4000 +02 .

.4243 +05
.6000 +0!

—.l246 +05
.2848 +4" '

.I6I0 —02
3605 —0l
.3576 —-0l

.99l0 +02
.5726 —02
--.2|06 -02

.l972 —07

.4475 —02
.447I +02

— 25$ --0l
.00" +45
.2!!!) +02

.2799 +02
.4269 +02
.I6I2 +15
.5350 +0!

4-1504 +05
.4004 +04

.l409 —02
.5878 —0|
5&5 —0l

1593 +03
.8970 —02
-—.l943 -- 02

.2522 —01

.6520 --03
.4293 +02

—.2744 —0|

.l366 4“
.I460 +03
M .2211 -1 02 .2225 +02 .2209 +02
.1 .1310 ---01 .1310 .1110 +01
11 . 2020 +00 .2027 +00 .2021 +00
0 11230 +01 .7337 +01 .0110 +01
11; -1020 +00 ~.1021 +00 ~.1700 +05
1‘ .0200 ~01 .1007 .5277
1. .1000 ~01 .2730 ~01 .0001 ~01
1' .2370 ~01 3571 ~01 .0310 ~01
71, .2377 ~01 .3075 ~01 .0327 ~01
o .0070 + .1305 +00 .1003 +01
1: .0171 ~ .7113 ~02 .1007 ~01
11w ~.0o10 ~01 ~.1700 ~03 ~.s201 ~01
DI, ~.1m ~00 ~.1071 ~00 .1091 ~00
05 .2017 ~02 .1200 ~02 2011 ~02
- A" ~0000 +02 ~.7111 +02 ~9511-1 +02
71' ~.17011 ~01 ~.11010 — 00 ~.0110 ~02
114' .0100 .100 .1297 +00 .1950 +00
1, .1330 +07 .1210 +00 0020 +01
T I: 26“” K; ’0 I. a“
M .1000 +02 .2102 +02 .2237 .102
0 .9100 ~02 .1010 .1100 +01
11 .5110 +05 .3500 +03 .3222 +00
0 .0191 +01 .7073 +01 .0000 +01
11; ~2173 +05 ~.2301 .1011 ~2310 +00
r .3010 ~01 .1000 .3103
1. .2230 ~01 .3702 ~03 .7100 ~01
11' .1291 ~01 0100 --01 .0031 ~01
1, 3310 ~01 .5103 ~01 .0039 ~01
o .1101 +0.1 .1012 +01 .2300 +03
1: .0001 ~02 .0100 3-02 .1291 ~01
11“, ~.1002 ~01 —.2190 ~01 _.5137 ~03.
n", 2000 ~00 ~.2s29 ~00 ~2193 ~00
115 31100 ~02 .1301 ~02 .3170 ~02
1" ~.1250 +03 --.1523 +03 2001 +03
'1' ....1.1111. .- 01 ---31111 ~02 - 1105 ~02
1‘ .1330 .100 .1002 +110 211113 +00
1, .0170 .107 .3500 +00 .2790 +00

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r-2o11001<;0‘,—311

.2.“ +02
M2 +0|
.22!" +5
.6742 4-!"

— I79! “5
.Ilﬁﬂ +0| .
12:! ~02
.9“ —0| '
.9875 -0l

.2492 +03
JIM —0l

-—-.I3l6 ~02 .

.l952 —01
——.J9|~|. ~43

—-.16.19 +02 .

—.2098 ~0l

.2530 +0.
MIG +03

.23" +02
.69“ +0!
.2000 +G
.0025 +0]
-.2I9¢ +03

.7687

.l320 -02
.IJBI'
1363
31.55 +03
.l67l -—OI
--.IM —-02

—.2€23 —M

.2710 ~02
~2005 +03
~.1015 411

30011 4-“
3800 +00

 

[Continued on following page]

258

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5- (’0

[Continued]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

”a: 03.1'0‘5:

rnaoowKJU-ax

.1010 +02 .100: +472 .2100 +02
.0201 --02 .1010 —ol .000:
.1002 +00 0000 +00 .4101 +00
. .1110 +02 .0111 +0: .101: +0:
—.0:00 +00 -0040 +00 -—1:01 +00
.1104 —0: 0020 -0: .240:
.1010 01 .4410 —-00 0000 -01
.1020 ..o: 0424 -0: 1:20
.1001. 0: 0010.—0: .1120
.1102 -: 00 .1014 +01 .2100 +0.1
.0000 - 02 .1010 --01 .1001 —0:
. .0100 . 04 —.22:0 «01 -—0011 - 00
-0200 --00 .-5:20 «.00 —.4.101 -410
.2200 —02 .4400 . .02 ..410: —02
—.:::0 +01 -2104 .10.: —.:1000 +01
—.4000 —01 —.:12:14 —-01 —.:1:0 -—0:
.1010 +00 .2000 +00 .3000 +00
.1010 +00 1.1.10 +01 .1100 +00
1‘ .. 40000 K; 00 1. :19:
.1212 +02 .1400 +02 .1000 +02
.4100 ..02 .4100 .-o: .0000
.1011 +00 .1400 +00 .1000 +00
.1101 +02 .1004 +02 0001 +01
—.1142 +00 —'.0402 .1 00 _.0101 +00
2011 -o: .0051 ~01 .1140
.0145 -0: .2100 — 01 .0000 —01
.4102 --01 .1200 —01 .144:
.4100 .—0: .100: ...0: .1400
.1100 +01 .1002 +01 .2000 +00
.1000 —0: .1100 ~01 .1021 —01
—0001: - 04 -.1424 —0.1 —.0202 -00
—.0001 —00 -.400: —00 —.1001 —01
.1041 41:1 2000 —02 .1011 "02
—.1100 +00 —.2200 +01 --.0015 +00
--.0001 -02 --.4100 --0: —.0211 —o:
.2421 +00 .1040 +00 .0000 1-00
.1400.+00 .4100 +00

.2244 +02 .
.4110 +0: :
.112: +00 -
.0200 +01 ;

—.1000 +05
5362 '

.I492 —02
J?”
.9") “I

.3520 +03
.lM! —0l
—.lll6 —0‘.‘

~10" —M
5779 —U'I-
—.4656 +03

—.|5|6 —0l

16323 +00
.IIJO +05

.1000 +02
.2001 +0:
.1001 +00
.1400 +0:

—-.6l82 +05
3669

.IBOO —0!
.2436
.2485

.4339 +03
.2624 —0l
—.l240 —02 '

—,86l9 —U

.ll49 ——0l
—.l051 +04
—.8l“ -0l 1'

0000-006 '
.0030 +05

 

[Continued on following page]

259

FOR 0mm“. USE ONLY
0044 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continued]

~u-

 

 

 

um. 04
'W . | 4 | 4. | 000
r.-.-40m 4000:4010 T-WK
M .5002 +02 _ 0025 +02 .0529 +02
9 .4015 .4205 .4324 +04
44 .4904 +04 .3513 +04 20444 +04
0 .1922 +04 .4200 +04 3150104
0; —.2454 +04 —.4400 +04 —.4449 +04
r .3440 .4420 .9033
4| .4049 - 02 .4345 —02 .4100 -—02
0' .4344 ---02 2443 —02 22440 —02
A, .4420 —02 .2310 02 .2304 412
44 .4440 4 04 .4212 -4 02 .1500 +04
41 .2000 ~03 .1243 -03 .3050 —03
"00 -- 44042 .02 _-.4940 -02 -2451 40
D}; 4:400 .- 01 .1000 —01 .2134 --01
of, .2025 - 02 .0004 --02 .4402 —02
0., .4504 +04 .4044 .4-02 0440 +04
4' -..3045 .-02 —.1541 —02 —-.0142.—o2
44,: .4120 +04 .4910 +444 .4220 +04
)4, .4020 +00 3500 +03 .2100 +02
' Ila-4424.40. 01
mm |_ 4 I 40 400 I 000
“WWW——
M .4442 +02 . .5400 +02
4- - .0422 —04 .4041 +04 .4423 +02
4. .0320 +04 .4240 +04 3420 +04
4 .4109 +04 .4039 -4 04 3550 +04
4.; -0400 +04 4291-4-04 ——.4004 +04
1' .4424 .9033 .2201 +04
0 .4025 —-02 .4550 —02 .4004 —02
1' ' .3000 --02 .4024 —02 .3121 --02
l; .1435 -02 .4204 --02 .3020 -—02
a .2452- +02 .4042 +02 .4410 +02
0 .4341 —02 .4000 —02 .5204 —03
44..., -..4121 -442 —.2490 - 02 —.2420 —02
44f, 404.40 — 044 .0022 —01 .2040 -01
415' 0054 --02 .1490 —02 .5404 —02
4,, 444445 +02 .4540 +02 .4211 +02
1' «.0259 —02 —-.4433 —04 —.9223 —m
1‘ 444429 4 04 44000 +04 .1144 +04

.8240 +0.1 5270 +02 .31“ 4-”

 

[Continued on following page]

260

FOR OFFICIAL {SE ONLY
1-0. 7000 K; 0., a 4005
0020 402 .4402 .4 02 .0424 +02 .0179 +02

 

0477 --04 .7044 .9470 +04 .0400 +02
.9409 +04 .0242 404 .4004 +04 .4490 +04
6220 +04 .4045 +04 .0740 +04 .0409 +04
—J224 -4 00 —..0400 +04 —0040 +04 —5l.‘l3 +04
.0790 .9070 .2200 +04 .4727 +04
.7742 —04 .4040 —02 .4004_ —m .2042 —02
.4092 —02 .0247 -02 0704 -02 .0044 —02
.4047 -02 .0444 —02 .0002 --02 .0404 —02
.0404 .402 .0001 -4 02 .2092 +02 .4990 +02
.4074 -02 .4942 —02 .4407 —02 .7409 —00
—.4440 ---02 —.2000 —02 —.2542 —-02 -—.2040 .-02
.4027 —00 .9402 — 07 .4005 .- 07 .0470 —o7.
.0402 —02 .0420 --02 .4007 —04 .0000 --02
.2209 +02 .2000 +02 .2440 +02 .4947 +02
-- .0729 --02 —.4024 —-04 --.4447 ~04 —.4220 ~04

.l269 +06 .4030 +05 .Iﬁﬁ2 +05 .4407) +05-
.IW +04 .90l0 +02 .0l50 l-0I .8970

Tu W K; “U =- '0“
32") +02 .3897 +02 .4737 002 .6l09 +02'

.4920 —-0l .0I21 .7050 ID! .4179 +02
JIIIQ +45 .0328 +04 .6058 +04 .5239 +04
.55I5 «OOI .4022 '+0| .3926 +0| .3577 +0|
—.|427 0-” -4l093 +05 - .7840 +04 -—-.6758 +04
.119! .8537 .2M9 -I-0l .4I79 +0l
540‘ —0.1 .IISO —02 .l786 —02 .2000 —02
I40" --02 .8527 —02 .IMJ -—0l .l023 —0I
.5243 -- 02 .8754 —02 Jon —-0l .l035 -0l

.4l57 +02 .4829 +02 0&7 +02 .3ﬂ4 +02
.223 — 02 .2755 —-02 .2007 —02 .l374 ~02
—-M40$ —0.1 —.Il98 —02 —.2520 --02 —.2748 —02

4094 --00 .4004 —00 .0494 —07 .4004 —07
.4070 ..02 0000 —02 .4209 --04 .4279 —04
.4949 .4 02 .0045 +02 .0000 +02 .2925 +02
-- 0009 -02 —-.4250 —04 —.4790-—04 —.4020 —04

.lfﬂl 005 .2327 +06 .2540 +03 .2362 4 06
20l0 +03 JIM -l-0_2 .l770 4 0'
Table 3.6. [Continued]

 

 

M. II
' '0 I | 10 100 000
T— 10000 K; 0.,“ 109‘

14 .2990 +02 .3310 +02 .4005 +02 .4000 +02
9 .3010 —01 .0110 .0201 +01 .3130 +02
0 .1400 +00 .1192 +00 .0000 +04 .1310 +04
1 .5025 +01 5023 +01 .4233 +01 3004 +01
1.; --.1500 -1-00--.1411 +00 —.I100 +00 —.9021 +04
r .2003 .0200 .1004 +01 .3290 +00
4. .2141 - 0.1 .1101 ~01 .1009 —02 .2103 —02
11’ .1310 —02 .1204 --01 .1902 —01 .2121 —01
1, .1410 -. 02 .1300 - 01 .2002 -01 2141 --01
o .0232 -1 02 .1199 + 02 .7401 +02 .0219 +02
a 20.10 412.3902 02 .4301 - 02 .3205 —02
0m, ....1455 --o:1 1201 .02 - .2309 . 02 «.2045 —02
”I, .4010 - 01.1034 -- 00 .0011 -01 .3090 -01
1):; .2002 —02 3902 —-02 .1230 -- 01. .1000 --01
1,, 1.114 .101 29.10 +02 .4099 +02 0023 +02
1' _.2440 .- 02 -.-9202 02 —.2010 --01 .2201 —01
11‘ .2015 10.1 .3100 10'. .4022 +00 .4005 400
‘0 .3190 1.00 .1040 -104 .4000 102 .0300 + 01

n-12111011;11”..1ox

19.10404 .1010 40.1 .22” 102

M .2094 .102 3010 +02 .3004 +02 .4102 +02
11 .2911 .013190 .3912 +01 .2300 +02
0 .1010 +00 1409 +00 .1000 +00 .9390 +04
0 0001 +01 0214 +01 .4414 +01 3900 +01
41; —.1011 +00 —.1010 +00 —.1439 +00 —.I240 +00
r .1412 .1310 +01 2014 +01
0 .1111 . 03 .4120 0.1 .1300 ._02 .2002 --02
1' .9301 .02 .1013 —01 .2944 —01.3500--01
1, .9100 . 02.1091 -01 2911 ~01 .3002 -01
' a .0001 -1-02 .0034 '+02 .1090 +00 .9004 102
a .3121 -. 02 .4199 02 .0209 —-02 .0000 --02
000 — 1400 0.1 -1200— 00 — 2014 -—02 —- 2100 —02
pf, .1410 01.0302 —-01 .1300 -01 .4010 —01
11"" .4009 1 02 0940—01 .0121 --02 .1309 —01
1., . .0002 101.1040 +02 .0091 +02 .0000 +02
1’ .2010 — 02 0041 —02 —.1900 .-01 —-.21.11 -0l
1" .3400 1-00 .0230 100 .1401 .101 0022 +00

"0 1-150 + 416

 

[Continued on following page]

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5.6.

[Continued]

s

,ua-Q
0|

raga-E

 

[Continued on following

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

r-Isooox; 90-on

.2” +02
.2240 -‘0|
.204! +05
.634! 4-0!

—.|452 .105
.239: +05
9m - -o4

W00 - 04
.l2ﬁﬂ ---0!

.103! I 02
.4016' - 02
-- .9I26 - 04

- 4585 - 4B

.4804 --02
.-.ms +02
-4344!) - m

.5024 +06
.2850 +06

.2092 +02
.2315

"081 -I ﬂ
.6583 +0!

—.!51l +05
.3035

.2469 -- 03
.2l03 -- 0!
.2I9! --0!

.l020 +0.1
5106 - 02
~ 4015 - 03

4540 --01
1”!!! 02
—II)41 -|02
—.491.‘! --02

15“ +05
.2020 +05

.3203 +02
.2753 +04
“055 +05
.4150 +0!

—.!655 ‘I 05
.00!)

.MIO —03
.4204 -- 0|
.4235 --0I

.I490 +03
.8301 —02
-—.!.'!34 - 02

.0155 01

.4900 ~02
.I4l! +02

—.!854 --0l

.! !51 +00
.940 +03

15-20000 K: 001-! I0“

  
   
   
   
   
   

.2105 +02
.1660 --0l
.mzwn
.6594 +01

— .ms +05
.ﬂ'llﬂ -0I

.mo - 0.1
mm - ~0!
.2!!0 - -0!

.926! -4 02
.5424 - -02
—.!259 - -03!

- -..'!90l ‘ 00
.7605 —02
-309. 1.92
-—.8.‘IG! - In

.80!!! M

.020 no

    
   
  
 
 

page]

  
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
         
         

  

   
  
   
  
 

mo +02
.l104

mo +0!
"as": +15
.l144

.2560 ~03
.3260 --0l
.3252 —0l

.l21! 403
.1392 —02
-—.2460 - 03

mm: 40

me 42
-1102 +00
_.noos "tn
.I24I 00

.3820 +05

   

       

263

.219: +05.

   

 

 

.290! +02
4033 +0!
.2!” +06
.5!!! +0!

—.!100 +45
5501!

.0201 —03
.6910 —-0l
.0404 —0!

.lm +01!
“091 —0!
4002 --03
—.1604 —N
1500 —02
—.l465 +03
—8656 —02
.IQIB N

J!00 +04

 

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.3660 +02
.l64! +02
.!M +05
.4225 +0!

-—1‘034 '0'“
.4” +04

.I9!4 —02
.5093! —0!
$32 ~0!

A690 +00
”I2 .--02
—.2412 —02

.514! —01
.5050 --02
.00l8 +02

—JI90 -—0!

1318 +43
.!020 +03

.3!” +02
1033 +02
.IW +03
.4600 +0!

—.!103 +N
1!!” +0!

.Im 42
£090 —0!
.9119 —ol

.2410 +03
.I391 —0!
-.!1ll —02

.4W2 —-01

.2” --02
—.!260 +ﬂ
—-.20” -0!

.2842 4-“

.4220 +00
Table 5.6.

[Continued]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

3-":

was -:

1—25000 11; 00-1005

         
   
   
        
     
       
           
         
     
   
 
  

 

    

.2511 + 02 .2152 +02 2020 +02 .2025 +02
.1100 —01 .1025 .1402 +01 .1540 +01
.4111 +05 .2005 +05 2001 +05 .2414 +05
.1021 +01 .0141 +01 .5050 +01 .4000 +01

«.2410 + 05 -—2000 +05 —.2.100+05 —.2100 +05
.0050 —01 .1140 .0505 .1050
.1001 ...00 .0400 —01 .5051 —00 .1002 -112
.2882 - 0| AMI --Ol .00" —0l .l296 «N
.2011 .01 .4050 —01 .0025 - 01 .1200 00
.1001 .101 .1510 +00 2202 +01 .2000 +00
.5004 _02 0001 —02 .1000 -01 .1101 —01

".1405 .—01 —00111 —-00 -2105 —00 —.1410 -02

—.0014 ..-00 —.5204 —00 _5000 —00 .0050 —00
.0105 —02 .5504 —02 .1040 —-01 .1240 —01

-1110 +00 —.2200 +00 —.0100 +00 —.4001 +00

—.1210 —01 —.4100 —02 -- 4100 —02 -—.1040 —01
.1201 +00 .1045 +00 2004 +00 .0010 +00
.1500 +01 .1020 +00 .0410 +05 .1520 +00

r-00000 K: 00-1015
.2011 .102 .2405 +02 .2125 +02 2001 +02
.1000 ~02 .0050 —01 .1110 +01 5001 +01
.0100 +05 .5212 +115 .0511 +05 .0015 +05
11104 +01 .0050 +01 5552 +01 .5040 +01

—.5010 +00 —.0540 +05 1—3169 +05 42005 +05
.1225 -01 0001 —01. .2552 .5514
.1401 —00 0011 —00 0110 —-00 .1401 —02
.0101 —01 5151 —01 .1020 .1010
.0210 -01 5025 .—01 .1025 .1010
11002. 100 .1502 +00 .2504 +00 0101 +00
.1014 .-02 .1055 —01 .1400 .—01 .1050 —01

-1001 —01 —.0111 —00 —.1000 —00 —.1500 -02

—.1005 --01 —.1001 —01 _.0010 -00 —.1150 —00
0012 —02 0024 -02 .1400 —01 .1005 —01

._.1542 +00 —0120 +00 -5021 +00 —.1040 +00

--0011 —01 —.2050 -01 —.1150 —01 —.1540 —01
.1405 +05 .2420 +00 0100 +05 5202 +00
.1000 +00 0400 +00

   

.2310 +15 .0030 +0!

[Continued on following page]

264

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 5.6.

[continued]

noon.»

~r~u ,Q 3

>0»: -z

a
H

  

uga —,‘=-~I- 9%;

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hut-m at

7—400!) K; 'U- '0”

1023 ---02
J”? +00
.l070 +02

--.ll4.'| +M
.2!" -0l
.0106 - -M

.46“ — 0|
JCISI --0l

”22 «HI!
INI - 0|
- ‘ 77.03 - 04

-.l020 - (I‘

J?!" --02
- M45 +03
- -.75~37 ..(R
.23" +00

.lm +02
.50“! —0I

.Im +08
.orm +0l

— 9“" +5
.6010 — -0l

.2290 -- 03
.70” ,. 0|
.725” -- 0|

.I"? Mn
L162 ~0I
---.202|4 - 0.1 '

--.|07ﬂ ‘ 01
”I0 --02
—.3521 ~l-03
-4051 ~0l

3420 .5.“
.45” +01

       
   
       
     
         
     
     
        
    
   
 

  

 
   
 

  

r-sow x; New“

[Continued on following page]

.I3l2 +03
.3l20 0|
1293 ‘ 01
.10") +4"
—-.3l41 4M

       
      

265

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       

.2I20 +02
.06.”

.82“ +00
.m +0I

—.eoos +3
II?"

mu —m
.IZISI
1313

.21!” -l 0:!
.IMS —0l
- 4020 — 03

-—.2M| --07

1011 —0|
-—.lw1 +00

.51” +N
1340 +00

.2422 +02
.3791 +0I
5|“ +$

.69" +0!-
—.5l70 +45

.3044
.l778 —02
.2209
2203

.4009 +03
.2609 —0l
—.I100 —02

--.l92l -~01

.2492 -0|
—.IM9 +00

—.0012 —~0I

.0339 +M
.2200 +5

1-5000 K

.I220 +03
.2409 +0!
.lm +04
.199 +0l
—.$.164 +00
Table 5.6.

[Continued]

ﬁg; —,~i.4- 1-92

I!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
 

 

[Continued on following page]

 

but-2. u
I I. I“
Tum K; 00-50%
.9160 +02 .1116 +01 .1240 +03
.1592 .1926 +01 .2164 +02
.3691 +04 .2646 +04 .2131 +04
.2366 +01 .2015 +01 .1605 +01
—.1202 +06 —.6146 .104 —51101 +04
3431 6329 .1610 +01
.2239 —-02 .2966 —02 3394 —02
.3921 - 02 .5166 —02 6066 --02
.4364 02 .6141 ---02 .6216 .02
.3194 +02 3164 .102 .2400 +02
.1111 --02 .1660- 02 .9561 -03
«.2523 .- 02 —.4636 --02 --6120 —02
.1014 -00 6:162 ~00 .1156 -—01
.1146 -- 02 .1491 —01 .1116 -01
.1166 +02 .9662 +02 .6646 +02
—.1063 —01 —.1462 -01- —-.1600 -01
.1214 -1 06 .1663 +05 .1460 +05
.3960 +00 .2610 +02 .2110 +01
rewoo K: 00-60%

.6016 +02 .9920 +02 .1164 +03
.1231 .1633 +011 11604 +02
.4921 +04 3509 +04 .2091 +04
.2532 +01 .2150 +01 .1619 -101
—.1401 +05 —.1064 +05 —-1616 +06
.2035 .1651 .1606 .101
.1011 ~02 .2652 --02 .3621 ---02
6001 -01 6013 .-02 .9140 ----02
.5000 .02 6564 02 .1001 -101
.3916 -1 02 .4406 +02 3109 +02

‘ .2162 - 02 .2426 - 02 1110 —02
—.1395 --02 «.3111 --02 --5664 '02
.1602 --00 .1611 ---06 .9160 —01
.4409 —02 .1211 --01 .1960 ---01
.6269 +02 .1160 -1 03 .1343 +01
-—.1010 --01 -—.l659 —01 ---.2001 —-01
.1025 -1 05 .2241 + 05 2435 -1 05
.0010 .101 6620 + 02 .4150 +01

266

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.l239 +03
.9749 +02
2422 +01
.l140 +0!

—.0679 +5
.3352 +0I

.3768 —02
3940 —02
.9I35 —02

.2992 +02
.I0l5 —02
-.62M —02

.0275 —01

.l999 —0l
.l26l +03
—.l733 —-0I

BIS? +(5
.76I0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continued]

M“

m. 01
M I ll 0 "O “O
1-:0000 K; 00-000;
1: .1001 +02 0200 +02 .:000 +00 .::21 +00
9 0000 -0: .:020 +0: .:20: +02 .1240 +02
0 .0010 +04 .0000 +00 0000 +00 000: +04
0 .210: +0: .2001 +0: 20:1 +0: .:042 +0:
0; —.:002 +00 —.:+00 +00 —M40 +00 —0100 +04
r .2000 .00+0 .:000 +0: .2014 +0:
0 .000: —00 .2002 —02 00:0 —02 .4:00 —02
1' .1002 —02 .m: —0: .:000 —0: .:001 —0:
0,; .1001 +02 .:010 —0: .:000 —0: 2000 —0:
a .0010 +02 .0002 +02 .0012 +02 0000 +02
0: .2100 .. 02 0104 —02 0010 —02 2020 —02
mm - -0:00 —00 —2:u0 —02 —.410: —02 —.0:10 -02
11:, 4000 —01 .:200 —00 .:200 —00 .002: —01
:1: 24:0 —02 .4000 —02 .:0:0 —0: 2:4: —0t
' 0., .:010 +02 .000: +02 0000 +00 .2210 +00
0’ -— 00:: --02 —.0000 —0: —.2101. 1; -—.2000 —0t
0' .2400 +00 0000 +00 2410: +00 .4100 +00
‘0 .12:0+00 .2140 +00 .:010 +02 2000 + 00
1-:2000 K3 ’0‘“
M .0200 +02 .12:1 +02 0102 +02 .:0:0 +00
0 .010: —o: .1000 .0424 +0: 00:0 +02
0 .010: +00 .1204 +04 .0044 +04 .4001 +00
0 .0000 0: 0: .200: +0: 2:40 +0: 0000 +0:
b; --.0002 +00 —;:002 +00 -.:400 +00 —.:201 +00
r .:0:0 .401: .:200 +0: 20:1 +0:
:1 .:000 -00 .::0: —02 .0000 —02 .4201 —02
0' . .100: ---02 1:000 —0: .2000 —0: 0+1: —0:-
0: .1100 —02 .:040 —0: 0040 —0: 0040 —o:.
a 02:0 +02 0001 +02 .:001 +00 0400 +02
(0 020: —02 .400: —02 .0001 ~02 A142 --02
000 —.2100 -00 —.::12 —02 —0100 —02 —.0100 -02
of, 0400 —01 .000: —01 .:000 —00 .0110 —01
:13 .2000 —02 .0000 ---02 .::00 —0: .:000 —0:
0" .. 2010 +02 .0400 +02 .:000 +00 2012 +00
0' .-.1o10 —02 —-.:400 -—0: —.000: —0: —00:: —0:
0‘ 0:00 +00 .0001 +00 .101: +00 0:10 +00
1,. .0200 +00 .:220 +00 .0100 +02 .0000 +0:

 

[Continued on following page]

267

FOBOFFIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continued]

 

'M I ID I" 50.
1.40010 K; 40,-.0044

14 .0010 +02 .0003 +02 .1301 +02 .0024 +02
0 .4000 ~04 0030 .0200 +04 .3000 +02
0 .4314 +00 .4400 -4 00 0433 +04 .0240 +04
4 .3300 +00 .2040 +04 .2340 +04 .2010 +04
0; ~14400 +00 ~.4042 +00 —.4000 +00 —.4020 +00
r .4441 .3403 .0002 .4000 +04
4. .0440 ~04 .3034 -—03 .4000 ~02 .3022 ~02
14' .0323 ~02 .4105 ~-04 .3010 .04 .0000 ~00
0, .0400 — 02 .4000 ~04 .4000 ~04 .0404 ~04.
o .5103 +02 .0000 +02 .4434 +03 .4012 +03
6 .4004 ~02 .0021 --412 .0400 ~02 0024 «02
am, —.2301 - 03 .-.0044 ~03 ~2004 ~02 ~0022 ~02
05 --.4100 ~00 .0404 ~00 .0433 —01 0204 ~01
of, 3020 — 02 .2402 ~02 3040 ~02 .3440 ~02
00 ~0000 +02 ~.4000 +03 .3030 +04 .4004 +03
4.7 -3010 ~02 ~.4200 ~04 —.3000 ~04 ~.0044 ~04
0'5 .4202 +00 .0040 + 00 .0040 +00 .4442 +00
0, .0130 +00 .4040 +04 .2020 +04 3010 +02

. T=mm K‘ ’u-w”

0441 +02 .0021 +02 0034 +02 .0000 +02
‘4 3204 ~04 .3100 +04 2402 +02
0 .4041 +00 .4000 +00 4300 +00 .4430 +440
4 3400 +04 .3000 +04 .2004 +04 .2300 +04
0; ~.4030 +00 ~ .4000 +00 — 4.101 +00 —.4000 +00
r ° .0002 ~04 .0414. .4303 +04
4. .1000 ~04 .4004 ~00 .0043 ~00 .2040 ~02.
3' .4002 ~04 2.400 ~04 0000 ~04 .0421 ~04
3, .4004 ~04 .2414 ~04 .0404 ~04 .0104 ~04.
o .1340 +02 .4001 +03 - .4010 + 03 .2430 +03.
0. .0204 ~02 .1330 ~02 4440 ~04 .4004 ~04
om, ~3200 --04 ~.0034 ~03 ~ .4100 ~02 —.3000 ~02.-
44{, 3430 .00 ~.3034 .4014 ~00 .2240 -—01
03 .4410 --02 .4000 ~02 .1044 ~02 .2030 ~03
00 ~ 2400 +03 ~3230 + 03 — .4041 +00 ~0300 +03
0' ——.4000 ---02 ~ .4000 ~02 ~4040 ~04 —-.0940 ~04
35 .1000 +00 .4014 +00 .4100 +00 .2044 +00
044 .0140 +00 0020 +04 .1000 +01 .4200 +00

     

[Continued on following page]

ﬂour-I. 0'

 

268

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continua on following page)

 

M. n
'M 1 10 100 000
Tax” K; '0‘”

M .4054 +02 5100 +02 .5541 +02 5110 +02 -
p .2150 ~01 .2525 .2000 +01 .1523 +02
0 .2101 +05 .1011 + 05 111112 +05 .1555 +05
0 .1110 +01 322:1 +01 2020 +01 2550 +01
0; 0—.2520 +05 —.2.100 +05 —-2250 +05 —2150 +05
r .4500 —01 .1050 .4240 0410

q .0454 -0. .1020 --01 .4104 —0.1 11000 —02
1' .2040 _ 01 5120 - 01 .5440 —01 .1140

1, .2001 - 01 .1421 — 01 .5401 —01 .1150

41 .0112 +02 11210 +01 .1010 +01 .2152 +00
4: .0200 --02 0100 - 02 .1020 —01 .1001 —01
11W —.:m2 - 03 +0101 .01 —.1025 ——02 —.:1001 —02
11", —.4400 --00 --.5502 .1 00 —.0013 --00 —.1405 —00
115 .1000 "02 .5551 . 02 .1005 -01 .0012 —02
1., -4000 +01 .0020 +01 - -.9500 +01 -.1:150 +04
1' --0010 «02 -..5115 .- 02 -.5000 _02 —.2501 -01
11‘F 0150-105 .1549 +00 .2512 +00 .0514 +00
*1. .3000 +00 2510 -1 05 .2215 +04 .0000 +00

1*sz K; ’"=m

M 4152 +02 .4101 +02 5102 +02 5550 +02
9 .1004 —01 .1015 .2242 +01 .1100 +02
11 0024 +05 .2014 +05 .2051 +05 .1001 +05
0 .4110 +01 0511 +01 .2040 +01 .2000 +01
11; —5001 + 05 —2540 +05 —.3120 +05 —20:10 +05
r .0550 —01 ' .1015 .0002 .0502

1. 0000 -04 .2210 —03 .5250 —0:1 0110 -02
1' .2514 --01 .4004 ~01 .0000 «01 .1000

11, .2010 —01 .4001 -01 0110 —'~1 .1300

0 0105-102 .1200 +00 .2010 +00 2010 +00
4: .1142 .02 .0014 — 02 .1405 . 01 2001 —01
11,,” - .2041 . 01 ”.0005 —01 —..2105 —02 —.4250 -—02
11!, ...1.120 -- 00 ---0110 -100 --.0041 - 00 —0110 —-00
115 .2020 .02 .5011 . 02 .1100 +01 .1511 —01
11., -4101 +01 —.0001 +01 —.1s4o +04 -.2200 +04
1’ - .1251 - 01 «.4020 —01 -.1102 —-01 +1550 —01
1" .1251 +00 .2001 +00 .1040 +00 .4021 +00
1,, .2000 +01 .1100 +05 5020 +04 .1010 +04

 

 

[continued on following page]

269

MWLUSEWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.6. [Continued]

 

GO.
1 .. 10000 11; 0., - 001‘

11 .1101 +02 1019 +02 .1010 +02 .0010 +02
11 .9900 ~02 .1110 .1101 +01 .nw +01
1 0021 +00 .1991 +00 .1001 +00 - 2902 +00
1 0101 + 01 .1100 +01 .1101 +01 2900 +111
11; _.1110 1- 00 ~9011 +00 ~.0901 +00 _0120 +00
1' .2102 1-00 .0001 --01 .1900 .1001

1. .0929 ~01 .1010 ~01 0901 ~01 .1209 ~02
1' .1121 — 01 .0200 ~01 11:10 .1000

1, .1111 - 01 0.102 - 01 -.1110 .- .1000

a .1111 +119 .1190 101 .2201 101 1110 +00
a 1.1.01 02 .1211 -01 .1111 “-01 .2112 -01
”1111 ~.21109 09 --.0001 . 111 —..2199 -02 ~.1911 412
115 .— 11:10 — 00 —-0110 --00 —-.1011 ~01 _.1101 ~01
of, 111111 - 02 .1109 - 02 .1101 - 01 .2100 ~01
x“ _.6228 103 --.I|61 -| M —.28I.'1 +04 —.“l3 +01
1' _.9019 - 02 —.1001 -.01 ~-.111:1 - 01 ~.10.11 ~01
1.‘ .1001 +00 1021 +00 .1911 100 .1119 +00
1., .1210 -1 119 .9100 -100 .2910 + 00 .0200 +01

 

Table 5.7. monophyaical Properties of Potassium-Hydrogen Mixture

 

 

' ‘2! .W. 01

 

r- 1000 K; 0,. -,111

11.1910 101 .2021 +01 2900 +01 .1001 +01
p 011.1 ~02 .1112 ~01 11001 .1100 +01.
0 .1100 +00 ~0100 +00 _.1001 +00 —0021 +00
1 9001 +02 .1111 -102 _.0010 +02 0101-102
0; --01191 +01 _.9109 +00 -.1111 +00 - _.1110 +00
r .1111 .2119 .1092 7 .1021

1. 1.200 ~01 0910 ~01 000.1 ~01 .0091 ~00
11' 0102 ~02 0912 ~02 0002 ~02 .0112 ~02
1, .1101 .9011 - 01 .1121 -- 01 .2009 _-01
c 1919-1111 . .2111 +0! .1211 +01 .0110

a 10011 01 .1012 .01 .1010 ~01 .1012 -90
a“ .1010 011 . .1110 - 011 _.1909 ~01 _.0201 --01
p; .1002 ~01 .1901 ~01 .1010 ~00
of. .0011 - .1100 ~02 .1900 ~02 .1119 ~02
11 — .1120 ~11921 ~01 _.1110 ~01 —.1990 ---01
1.1000 101 .1190 +02 .0020 +02 .1001 +02
13 .1111 101.1210 +01 .0100 +02 -~0119 +01
1,, “2010 100_ 0110 101 .1900 +00 .1019 +02
M. n
I I. !00
r — 0000 x; a, - as
.1000 +0! 1039 +0! .24!!! +0!
3700 --02 .4339 —0! .0002
6250 +45 .20I0 +5 -.33!2 +05
.nogo +01! .9225 +02 .7029 +02
.3502 +6 .3404 +06 —.0047 +05
1200 .2”! .007!
.3505 - m .4000 —03 .7!!!) —03
.l020 - 0! .IM —0! .II33 —0!-
2042 -0! 9!!!) —0! .90I0 —0!
.702! -|-0!. .0000 +0! 307! +0!
1204 - -03 .2340 "03 1733 —03
-- 0255 - 01 -.4200 --0-‘! —.4907 —m
.6043- 07 .7004 —-07 U29 —07
1374 -0! J!” ~0! JM —02 ’
”.1005! —-0! -0I!0 —0! —.9494 -0!
~30!!! +02 -.3430 +0! .3702 +02
.3000 +04 .2736 +04 .!0!! +04
.3550 +1]! .430 +04 .Ifm +03
T .m K; .‘I- 3*
1672 +0! 1020 +0! 1033 +0!
.3095 —m .3!“ —0! .3”!
.0234 +05 .7234 +05 .2732 +00
.!!30 +03 .9979 +02 .0!” +02
.lﬂ! -{ 00 .l000 +M 370 +06
.0309 «on .20" .0305 _
£190! —0.1 .4474 —03 .0377 —03
1230 -- 0! .I270 --0! 13-19 -0!
.!414 --0! .3309 ...o| .9450 - -0!
1024 +02 100: +02 .7!!! +0!
044! - 0E! .00!3 -03 .2030 ~03
--.77.'l! —-03 -0&! -—03 —-.0049 —03
.0730 — 37 .5070 -07 .7702 -- 07
.IM 0-0! .!007 -—-0! 1433 —0!
—.2072 - 0': —.M5 - 0! — .0240 —-0!
—.5602 +02 —.3200 +02 .3320 +02
.0903 104 .63” +04 .3990 -| 04
.!!00 +07 9230 +04 .20“! +03

.2703 +0!
.3247 +0!
~50?!) +ﬁ
.0030 +02
—S!5 +ﬂ

.l025 +0!

.770! —-03
M01 -—0!
.025 —0!
.2277 +0!
.4049 ~04
—.5009 ~05!
.44” —07
.402! ~02

-.0770 —0|
0073 +02

.3560 +03
.!020 +02

.2349 +0!
we +0:
-100 +05
0199 +00
4:00 +05

.ll77 +0!
M50 ~03
1301 —-0I
M3 --0!

.4090 +0!
.!3|9 -oo
—.0049 --03

.01!!! —-07
.IM —0!

-—M! -0l
.3!“ +02

1962 +04
.1093 4-02
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5.7. (Continued)

1-1000105..-”

 

 

 

 

11 .1555 +01 .1552 101 .1105 +01 .2001 +01
9 .2519 —02 .2555 —01 .2511 .1551 +01
5 .9555 +05 .9551 +05 .1221 +05 .1211 +05
1 .1151 +01 .1011 +00 .5525 102 .1521 +02
11; .1215 1-05 .1255 105 .1029 +05 .1551 +05
1‘ .1151 -.01 .2115 .5519 .1051 +01
1. .1515 ~05 .1510 - 01 .5910 — 0.1 .1925 —01
5' .1152 . 01 .1505 -01 .1552 -01 .1015 - 01
11, . .1520 01 2051 .—01 .5151 -—01 .5150 -- 01
o .1115 102 .1219 +02 .1051 +02 .1590 +01
15 ' .5051 10-1 .5311 05 .1195 —01 2595 ---00
o“ .—.9.155 ~10 —.1921 —-00 —.5011 —90 —.5591 —00
D; .5121 -. 01 .5190 —01 5159 ~01 .1915 -01
0‘ .2012 —01 2125 —01 .2150 —-01 .1111 —01
1' .- 1111-01 —5555 ~02 —.3991 -01 —.19:15 -01
11“ _1111 102 ...5105 +02 -2991 +02 2125 +01
1" .5015 -101 .9155 +01 5220 +01 .5195 +01
11,, .1910 1011 .2510 +05 .5550 -1 05 .5150 +02
1 Bl m K". " - ”
111 .1551 101 .1511 +01 .1521 +01 .1192 -1 01
0 .2100 --02 .2111 --01 .2591 .1121 -1-01
1. .1105 100 .1090 +05 .9911 +05 .1221 +05
5 .1115 +01 .1051 +05 .9155 +02 5001 +02
11; .1159 +05 .1115 +0.: .1195 1 05 .1015 105
l' .5011 - 01 .1109 .1515 .9191
11 5255 .01 5151 — .01 .5105 --01 .1555 —-0:1
5' .1592 01 .1115 —-01. .1195 -—01 .1551 —011
A, .1125 01 .1951 -- 01 .5115 --01 .5911 —m
a .1215 102 .1125 102 .1559 +02 .1591 +52
15 5511 - 01 .1011 .01 .5155 ~05 .1051 —95
D“ ---.Io.1o - 02 V9515 —o;1 —.15;11 —0.1 —.5500 —0.1
01 5201 —-01 5125 —01 .5111 --01 5252 -01
D}; .2199 --01 .2121 —01 .2151 —01 - .2359 —01
11' .2911 -00 -—.1990 —02 —.1111 --01 —.5111 --0l
‘11 -—9:m 102 «1052 +02 -..1590 + 02 "-1947 +02
1‘ .9952 .101 .1210 +05 .1211 1-05 .9111 +01
__.\_,_ _ .1510 1100 .5110 +05 .1100 +01 9550 1-92
[Continued on following page]
212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nun-10.01

—-

: | :0 :00 000
1-:0000 x; “-390
.:000 +0: .:00: + 0: .:010 +0: .:030 +0:
.:001 ---02 .:002 - -0: .:000 .0000
.1022 +00 .:300 -:00 .::0:. +00 0230 00
.:22: +00 .:000 4 00 .0010 +02 .0030 +02
23:0 +00 .:00: + 00 .:011 + 00 .:100 +00
.0020 --0: .:2:0 .0000 1:03
.0010 —-00 0140 -.03 1:00 «00 0::2 —03
.2221 - 0: .2200 ...0: .2320 --0: 2101 —0:
.2000 .0: 2m --0: 21.10 —0: .0001 --0:
.200: +02 .:110 .:02 .:101 :02 .:000 +02
.:000 --02 00:0 - m 1003 —01 .0300 —00
—..0:02 -00 — .0010 - 01 -- .:031 —02 —00:9 —03
.:403 .. 00 0010 — 01 0:01 —01 .4001 —01
::0: ..0: .201: --0: .3400 0 0: .3000 --0:
.- 00:: ..02 —.3:0: .02 --.0000 -02 —.:032 —0:
—.0201 +02 --.0:13 -:02 -—.0000 +02 —.3000 +02
.:400 +00 .:102 +00 .2000 +00 .:01: 4.05

.8020 0-“ AM +00 .MN +00 .3530 +03
T- '2“ K: oK-3*

.::20 +0: I :02: 2 0: .:00: +0: .:000 +0:
.::00 -02 .:000 --0: 1535 .1026
.2588 +06 .:900 +15 .IGM +00 .I698 +06

.I3l1 203 .ll3l +03 .0090 +02 .8901 +02
.0030 +03 .2928 +00 .25“! +13 .2392 +45

.0100 ---0: .:202 .2019 558!
.100 "9" 9010 -411 .0606 —0:: moo—0::
.202: - .0: 2010 .. 0: .2011 —o: .201: —o:
0:00 -—0: .402: --0: .3380 -0: 3746 --0I
.0013 +02. 3.52 +02 .2023 +02 .2000 +02
.200: - m .:00: .02 .::0: '—02 0000 -03
--.:00: ~03 —0000 --03 —.:0:: --02 —.:000 -02
.1202 00 0200 --00 00:0 -- 01 .0040 —01
.3010 ---02 .::100 --0: 3:00 --o: .3120 —o:
—-.0000 —o: —.200: —0: .:000 —0: —.:000 —0:
- 3:20 +02 —.0000 +02 —.0:0: +02 —- 5:0: +02

.2686 1-05 .278! N .2923 +05 .2838 4-”
.l320 108 .47” +00 .::00 +15 .98l0 +03

—_____________,_.____..———————
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

.l5A3 -Hll
.009!

32:" 4“
.9136 +02
.3070 4-“
.6351

.II3S --02

.4449 —0I
MW —0I

.ﬂOI +02
.l9l3 —M
—.l0|1 —02

MN —01
.2802 -0|

—.5500 —0|
—.IJ79 +03

.6620 +6
11760 +0.

1:110 +01
.1010

.1190 +00
.1055 +00
.0513 +00

.6965

.l429 ~02
DWI —-0|
.l2l0
.l208 +03
.6l09 —02
—8I46 —03

.0970 —01
.ll32 —0|

—.l072
—.3579 +03

.IODI +00
.20“) +06

1911]
but... 01
I 1 10 | 100
7- “W K; ’x-J“
.1003 +01 .1151 +01 .1199 +01
.0519 - 03 .1010 01 .1100
.0521 405 9150-100 .2511 +00
.1019 +00 1200-101 .1052 +03
.1015 +111 .5123 -1 00 .9901 -105
.1200 - .01 .1512 .3101
0202 .00 01.10 01 .1159. 02
:1095 -- 01 .1190 .- 01 .1502 - 01
.1100 .0152 -01 .5209 — 01
.0010 +02 0190 .102 5111 -102
.9051 —02 .3153 -02 .2101 — 02
.1213 -.-01 . .2199 —03 .0920 .01
.5105 --01 .9210 — 01 .1000 - 00
.0010 —-00 .9055 —02 .1510 —01
4-90110 —01 .. .9191 —01 _.155.1 —01
—5101 1 02 — 0105 1-02 --.1303 «1 09 =
.1999 105 .5113 +05 2 .0005 +05 ;
.1210 .1011 3000 .100 .1110 +05
T - 20“” K; M - a“
11100 .9501 .1222 401
.1001 49 .5105 -02 .1955 _01.
.1210 +01 .9119 .100 51.111 -106
.1912 103 .1000 -100 .1232 +01
1995 -101 .1529 +01 .9051 +00
.5013 --01 .1159 .1501
.1992 --1n ' 5021mm .1100 -.02
.2020 .01 5010-01 .1000 —-01
.1159 .01 .1110 .1321
.1029 +00 .1202 10:1 .1550 +0.1
.5100 ~02 .0020 —'-02 .1209 --02
—.5122 ---01 —.1251 -—03 —.1000 —-00
5011 .00 .2151 —01 .5511 --01
—.11191 -01 9010 -—00 3511 —02
._.112:1 . 01 — 9100 --01 ---.1115
_.1109 .101 —.1101 +00 --.211:1 1-03
.0150 .105 .1205 +00 .1591 1 00
1110-1011 .1000 .101 2050 -1-05
_— — ________ —————-—————--
1109 page]
211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
11011 00010111. use 0111.11

(cont. luucdl

 

‘r-IDM K; .‘-3‘

 
    
   
  
 
 
    
    
    
  

M .1090 .1900 0120 0022
p .0110 -—00 .0110 --02 0109 - 01 .1901
1. .1021 +01 .1502 +01 .1110 +01 .1110 +01
2 .2119 +00 .1005 +00 11500 +00 .1010 +00
11; .2120 +01 .2120 +01 2222 +01 .1029 101
r .2200 --01 .1210 --01 .2222 .1001
1. .1209 ---01 .1551 -- 01 .5215 —m .1111 —02
2' .5529 --01 .1900 .01 .1210 .1011
11z .5501 -. 111 .0100 —01 .1115 .2211
11 .1500 +00 .2010 1..“ .2120 100 0119 +00
11. 3523 .02 _um .- 0| .l«9 —0l .IGGG —0|
0101 -.1010 .-01 «1215 -01 -—0001 —-00 —.0100 —00
D§ mo: ---09 -4000 —09 .0015 -00 .1109 —01
l): ..._|2|4 ..02 —.9092 —0-1 -.22I4 ~03 .I0l5 --02
1’ —.1001 0-02 --.1000 —01 -—.0000 "01 —.1011
11K “.0011 .102 --.2191 +00 —.0591 1 01 —.1010 +01
11" .2055 .100 .2009 +00 .1001 +00 .5011 +00
1R . . 3910 +13 .2610 +06 N10 +0!
1 - 10000 11; ”11 - 091
M .1050 .1000 .1902 .0291
p .2019 -1 .00 .2011 --02 .2102 —01 .1210
11 . .1929 101 .1001 +01 .1002 +01 .1105 +01
0 .2200 -100 11951 +00 .1100 +00 .1500 +01
1.; .2105 +01 .2101 +01 2101-101 .2020 +01
r .1000 -01 .1005 —01 .1292 .2050
1. .1000 —01 .1051 —00 .0210 «00 .0000 —00
11' .9010 - 01 .1012 .1901 .2100
1, 0015 --101 .1011 .1911 0010
11 .2119 +03 2121 +00 .0025 +00 .1510 +00
1:. .1111 -—01 ' .1110 —01 .1910 —01 .2120 —01
"101 .-.1110 -01 -9110 — 01 —.2010 —00 —5100 —00
I1; .1202 ----00 .1120 -00 .2112 -00 .0110 —09
vi. -2110 .02 4510 - 02 —-.2051 -02 —.2100 —02
11' --.1191 ---02 —5022 —02 ~ .2501 --01 -—.0111 ~01
11K 0100 102 --5050 +02 --.1020 +00 —-.1200 +01
1'5 .0510 1 00 11112 100 0022-100 .0002 +00
2,, - . .1000 -1 011 .0010 1-01 0190 +00

 

m following page!

275

1'0! omcm. use 0111.11
-—‘—l-I_-_l—- I. I0. __-——T

r-4ooox;0.(-:0::

00:0 +0: .4000 +04 .5045 -: 0: .5500 +0:
1005 --0: .:07: .4570 +0: 0247 +0:
.2400 +04 —.200: +05 —.1050 +05 —.4:02 +05
.5107 +02 .4000 +02 03:3 +02 .2000 +02
—00:: +04 —.0300 +05 —:300 +00 —.:405 +00
.:05: .0340 .070: .::70 +0:
.0115 -0.1 .7220 —00 .0000 -01 .0005 —00
.700: —-02 .7035 --02 .7205 . 02 .0000 —02
.0050 .o: 0:40 —-0: .004: --0: .2000 —o:
.4005 -: 0: 2005 + 0: .:.102 +0: 70:3
.2405 . 01 1025 - 0.1 25.25 . 04 00:2 —05
. .0510 .- 01 .. 000:: .00 --..02:5 .- 01 --.9505 —01
302:: - 00 .:072 -00 .2204 07 —-.:002 _07
.4401 02 .202: — 02 .:477 - 02 .000: —00
.-.000.: -0: +7051 0: -—::0:0 -0: —.:04.1 —0:
.:.110 +02 0445 +02 .:205 +00 .:303 +00
:50: + 04 7200.4 0.1 .207: -: 01 .:2:5 +00
0000 +05 .:500 +04 5010 +02 .5240 +0:
7-5000 K; 0‘0.on
.2004 +0: .0430 -: 0: .4450 +0: .5002 +0:
.7070 —02 0:00 -—o: .:052 +0: 00:2 +0:

36" +05 .IGJG +15 -.MZ$5 +05 —.2676 +05
.5055 102 .4954 +02 3849 -I-02 .332l +02

.0004 :05 .3744 +05 —.50.17 +05 --9014 +05
.I072 .4074 0725 .I533 +0:
4:01 - 01 50:5- 0:: 01.14 --01 .9207 —03
.0074 02 .9052 —02 .0004 - 02 .9000 —02
23:2 -0: 70:0 -—0: 0:2: --0: .5053 -o:
:420 +02 .0200 + o: .4500 +0: 2014 +0:
0023 0.1 .4002 .01 1050 ---00 0009 04
0007 00 —.7707- .0: -—.0274 - 00 -.:04: —02
.0057 07 :05: -- 00 300:: -05 .5050 --07
0000 . 02 707.1 ---02 5:400 -02 .0004 --02
. .0200 . 0: "-0700 —o: --0240 -: 0: - -.5:0: --0l
5777 :02 - 9004 +0: .7122 +02 .::.10 +00
.4442 :04 .1005 +04 4052 I04 .955: +03

.66") 10!: .:440 10‘ 5370 +02 .2800 +0I
Table 5.7. [Continued]

0 m."
:0 I :00 000
1.- 0000 K; 0,K - :09:

i

 

 

0: .2090 +0: .3030 +0: .3090 +0: . .4309 +0:
0 010:: —02 .091: --0: .1000 - .4290 +0:
0 .:011 +00 .:::0 +00 1143 +00 —.:0:1 +00
.0 0:01 +02 .001 +02 .«20 +02 0120 +02
0‘ .::20 +00 .:002 +00 .3001 +00 —.300: +00
1' .1040 .4092 02:: . .1000 +0:
0 «m --03 0:12 —m 1:02 —00 0:32 --00
10 .:2:2 - 0: .:230 --o: 4201 -—0: .:230 —0:
1, .m2 -- 0: .290: +0: .1020 —0: .1002 —0:
o «.30 -: 02 4000 +02 1000 +02 .1:03 +0:
:3 0010 — 03 0000 «03 .::10 —00 2::0 —03
"x“ —.I37‘ “02 «.9933 ~03 .292“ —03 I —.'M‘ T”
n; 1000 —-00 01:1 —_01 .:o:9 —00 ' .::01 —00
n: .:213 --0: 0300 —0: 0000 no: .0009 --02
0' —0::1 —03 ---.:101 -0: -000: — 0: ; —.1:03 .—0:
0‘ . —.::::9 -: 0:: —00:0 +02 —.2000 +0: . 00:: +02
0‘ .120: +0: 01.1: +0: 0900 +0: ' 001040:
0,, .::00 +00 2:00 +0: 0:00 +02 .:200 +02

1' a 1000 K; 0“ — :090
,4 .2012 +0: .2920 +0: «"30 WI .3123 +0:
9 .:0:1 --02 .:9:0 —0: .5319 0:00 '+0:
I. .67“ +05 .609 +05 Al“ +05 .2006 +05
, .0322 4 02 00:0 +02 , .4000 +0? - .:::0 +02
.; .:290 -: 06 .0320 +00 3011 +08 0001 +00
r .:200 00:0 .011: .:000 +0:
‘ .4507 - In .5l69 -- M 690‘ -—03 guy _03
p 1:5: - 0: :52: - 0: .:0:1 --0: 4031 -0:
A; 1502 .0: 4000 --o: .0300 —0: .110: —0:
a :040 +02 2:0: +02 .:130 +02 .1020 +02
0. 0000 --02 .::02 --02 .0200 --00 .4000 -01
":0: - -|8l6- 0'2 . .uoo -02 — .I066 «02 ..._:oa§ -02
I»; :002 — 00 9:91 —01 .1109 —01 .:000 -05
pf; :01: --0: 0:00 - 0: 01.33 -0: .1401 -0:
1’ 110: ---0: --0:93 --02 —.:::00 -0: -5530 —o:
A, —. :100 1 03 _..::00 +0: —.0::3 +02 .1112 +0:
:5 .9900 +0: .1200 +00 ::00 +00 5312 +94
_ 5L___5£:L96 6m +0: m +21 mo +02
[Continued on following page]
211
[Continued]
ﬂap-626p '

M .2666 +04
14 .6646 +06
6 .6424 +02
6; .4462 +06
4‘ .4004

14' .4694 .444
A: .4143 -- 04
o .2462 +02
04 4414 .-02
41," .6002 .—01 :
Df‘ .4144 —04
2' .2246 --0:4
4‘ - 22:46 +03
1.‘ .4101 +06
M .2644 404
p .1454 02
14 .44404 ~I05
s .6632 -4 02
1.; 2430 -4 06
4' .6000 --04
4. 0444!) ~03
4' .2242 --04
14,: 2406 .04
o .2146 +02
4.4 I468 ~02
I!“ 49:43 -- 442
I): .4629 - 4444
I): .4645 --04
4' —_74|63 02
0‘ - - 2265 I03
4“ 444444 -| 06
ﬂu 40440 408

on following page]

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

- Anna-6. 66

1-6000406“..on

 

.2660 +04 .3041 +04
.4216 ——04 .4410
.6241 +06 .6644 +06
61:46 +02 .5002 +02
.4640 +06 .4464 +06
.2666 .1666
.6624 —04 .6666 —00
.4604 —04 .4660 —04
466:4 —-04 .:4414 --04
.2664 -4 02 .2461 +02
.4011 -02 .4203 —02

—.4626 --02 —.4.426 —02
6:494 —01 .1264 —01
22:44 —04 2:446 --04

_ 4646 —02 —-.4122 —04

_.4666 +03 —.1690 +02
.4664 +06 .4664 +06
.4160 -4 06 :4000 -4 0:4

r .. 40000; 6,... 4044
2661 +04 .2644 +04
mo - 04 .4466
.1016 406 .1644 +06
.6620 402 .6226 +02
.4641 .4044 .4001 +06
2024 6064
614:. 04 .1036 43
2.466 - 04 .2514 —04
24:44 04 24465 --04
3433 402 0413.402
. 4616 ---02 .4161 —02

-- 2-406‘--02 --.469:4 —02
.4014 - 06 62:42 -—01
.2066 ---04 33“! —04

— 6606 --04 — 6026 —02
2.144 404 —- 4416 +03
264:4 -4 06 .4460 + 06
.4460 406 41.40 +04

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.3330 +04
.2414 +04
' .4410 +06
.4364 +02
.4002 +06

M12 +0!

[IN «03
.I052 —0I
.5894 --0|
1904 +02
.17"! --03
—.Il92 —02

.0263 —-01
.2036 —0l

—.4305 —0I
—-.4003 +02

1482 +%
.3200 +02

:4034 +04
44802 -4 0|
.6961 +05
'.4109 -4 02
.4649 4-06
.4462 +04
'905-1 «03
2694 -444
092:4 —04
.3406 +02
.4444 —02
—.4049 0- 02

.6880 —01
.3|69 --0l

—-.I%‘2 --0|
—-6705 -| 0'!

.30“ 105
.II420 103
Jontinuedl

POI! OFFICIAL WE ONLY

 

Man-0. 01

7- 120m ‘3 "- '0“

2940 +01
.1400 +0:
0021 +00
. .4000 +00
.2300 +00
0021

.IOIS —02
0300 ~—0l
.3972 -0I
AMI +02
.1020 —02
—.2|33 ~02

.1110 —01

.4003 —01
—1303 —01
—-0000 +02

.47“ +6
3430 +03

.2059 +0|
.IIM +0I
.1201 +00
.5I20 +02

.3347 4-“
.6883
.1222 -02

.452 —0|
0302 -0I

.5859 +02
2032 -02
_.,24w -M

1'63 —N
4.87 —0I

—.3‘95 —-0l
_m2 4 02

.1902 +05
.IM +06

 

:11 .2001 -:-0: 2:419 +01 2010 +0:
0 2010 —-02 2110 —0: 2042
:1 .1304 +00 .1030 +00 .9400 +00
2 .1102 +02 10130 +02 0300 +02
1.; .3001 +00 .2109 +00 240: +00
1‘ .0011: ~0: .1010 .4430
1| .130: -00 0003 —01 .0000 —03
1: .2141 -01 .2990 —o: .3201 —0:
11, .4540 --0: .3410 ~01 3483 -—0:
a 4001 01-02 .3001 +02 .4200 +02
_ a 22:0 - 02 .2134 —-02 .2150 —02
:1“ -—0440 00 -.1031 -.-02 -.-2449 —02
0.2 .2240 --01: .4005 —00 .1043 —00
:1: 0-101 . 02 .2109 -—01 3131 —0:
1’ -11041 0: --3101 —01 —.0024 -02
AK .0450 102 - .1021 +00 --.1413 +03
1." .21102 1:10 3504 +00 .400: +00
LR .1310 :00 .0100 :00 .5090 .104
1 =10.000 K; 0‘ - 1:144
M .2014 +01 202: 4-01 .211: +01
.5 .1011 412 .1901 . -01 .2190
1: 3401 1:10 .1925 400 .1300 +00
5 .0010 102 .0104 +02 .6000 +02
0, .1034 101 5001 +00 .1000 +00
1‘ 1.14: --01 .1041 3013
1. 01:13 —0-1 .9202 —03 .1102 —02
11' .1000 .. 01 .410: . 01 .4001 --01
1:, .0011 -.::: .1404 —o: 01:10 —01
o 0010 .102 .1000 +02 .041: 402
a :1012 .. :12 .3100 1-02 .3342 --02
I)“ 11.04 :13 . .0100 ..03 --.1010 0-02
"1: 11:01.1 . 01 .1001 —00 .1040 —00
In: 1120 02 .0029. 02 .2500 —01
1' .5150 01 . -.0402 - o1 4:101 _01
‘1: 0011 1:12 -.1404 .401 “10:14 100
A” 04111 15 .0102 05 .1321 00
1,, .1200 4-011 .3100 .400 .1200 405
following page)
219
Table 5.7. [Continued]

 

r—aoooo Ink-IO“

M .I552 4 on
p .922! —00
0 .0099 4-00
0 .l050 +00
0; .1990 1-01
r .5001 --0I
u. .0500 —00
1' .2191 4:
A, .0102 no:
a .0029 4 00
a .0000 -02
0“ —um —03
D; .9121 —00
o: .2000 —00
1' —.l04l4 —on
*x —.2000 +03
0' .9312 +05
1,, .0030 +09
1‘ —_
M .1015 +0:
‘0 .5020 --00
0 0000 +00
0 .0102 +00
0; .2020 1-01
r .2300 -on
0‘ 3.0.12 . .00
1' .0107 --0|
0: .5200 ~ on
o 4529 -i 03
a .8400 --02
D“ -- 00:0 ---04
of. ms -00
0f. -- I00: - 02
1' "-000: -02
AK — 0m 4 02
1‘ .nm 4 00
1‘

1792 +0l .2280 +0!
.l010 —0l .1000
.0000 +00 M“ +N
.0505 +02 .0026 +02
.I520 +01 .9046 -l N
1406 .350!
.6030 "03 .I229 --02
Am - 0| JNI —0I
0000 ' .I251
1200 -I 03 .0300 +03
.6049 "M .73“. —02
—1582 - 03 —3662 —03
—.«II —-07 -.|0II —M
154% —03 .0503 -02
—0351 -—0l —.I320
-.3|l9 +00 —-.4555 +03
.l274 +00 .l640 +06
10:” +07 .2070 +05
W K; " 3"“
.ISIM +0! JEN ~l-0l
5M3 --02 .650 —0l
0000 +00 .1029 +00
9900 +02 .0142 +02
.2420 4 07 .2222 +07
.1292 —0l .225!)
1939 - 0.1 .6174 -03
.17l6 - 0| .I264
Jill — 0| .l460
20" +03 .21I0 +03
1009 -0I .l460 -0I
—.Zl10 v0.1 --.6901 --00
«no ---09 am: — 01
-- I494 --02 -.|490 —03
— 2286 - 0| —6946 --0l
-- 40l9 1-01 —.l201 +0!
2&5 100 .4026 +45
.4070 -| 00 .2510 1-45

257: +01
.7100

2200 +00
0000 +02
.0009 -| 00
.0200

.I674 —m

.9037 —0l
.ll74

.l279 +03
.0501 -02
—.l108 --02

.I2l8 --00

1917 --0l
—.l504
—.4!.I30 403

1833 100
.l070 -I04

.IOIJ -l 0|
.3736
.0005 +00
.7207 102
.l820 -|-01
.4034

.l347 —02
.1000
.ml
3:09 +0.1

1000 --0l
—.ll9l —02

..'|2l0 ---07
.2"? -- 02

‘— l009
—.l066 40.

MN +06
0050 +00

 

[Continued on following page]
r—.—-

.1111-101
.1211 03 '
.1092 -I-01
.1200 103
21.19 +01
.1351. 01
.1011 -- 03
115112 —01
11519 --01
.1919 -1 03
.1150 01

.. 911111 «01

2320 --00
- .124! —02

-1-.|092 - 0|
.3003 +03

.3320 -I 00

1405 4'02
.4305 0|
.1678 104
1333 4-02

.54!‘ 'I II- .

2616

3985 — 03
.39" - 02
.3470 0|
4/20 -| 0|
2.125 - 0.1
1 2070 102

.42I2 - 01
JBIG -1 0.1

— 3405 - 0|
.4400 -| 02

"ill {04
9l1l0 104

 

149! +0l
.23”
.9l0l 4-“
M04 +02
.2623 +01
.2007
.853? —M
.21l0
.2904

.4400 +03
.2424 —0I
—.I0l0 --02

34" ~01
—.3556 —02

; —.9121 —01

—-.2M +04

”I! +N
1300 +05

.2ll0 -4 02
.3l37 -4 02
—4403 +04
.0470 -I-0l'

: —.|425 +l3

but... 01
I. IO.
1- 10000 11; 911'- 1011 '
.1111 +01 .1191 +01
.1351 -—02 .1191 —01
.1012 +01 .9911 +01
.1051 +03 9112 +00
.2115 +01 .2153 +01
.1209 - 01 .1319
.1105 -01 .3110 —03
.1212 .1111
.1219 — 01 .1111 .
.2591 +01 1511 +0.1
.1112 -01 .1913 —01
4816 —¢1 --.1115 --03
.2150 "-01 .1111 -01
.-.3901 —02 —.1121 —02 .
-—11111 —01 —.3511.—01
.1221 +03 -5111 +03
.1535 +01 .5121 +01
.1310 +09 .3190 +01
1 — 1000 x; 1“ -= 1011
.1110 +02 .1919 + 02
.5221 5115 +01
--.12.1.1 +01 -— 3191 +01
.4003 102 .9290 -|0l
—-1901 +12 - 1311 -1 13
.5325 .1200 1 01
.1091 .02 .1111 .02 -
.3155 --02 .1011 02
.1110 .. 01 1151 .- 01
.2293 +01 .1051 +01
.1101 —01 .2211 - 01
—3131 -02 —.3110 —02
.3019 —01 .1101 —01
.1911 —01 .2115 —03
—..1120--—01 .—.1521 —01
.3211 +01 .1019 +03
.1053 +01 .1915 <1 01
22110 +03 1150 +01

.2” +0!

.Il1l --02
1968 -—02
.0440 —02
M38
11004 -04
—.3478 —02

.7420 —01
.2692 "03

-.7701 —02
.5060 +03

.3093 +01
.0530 +M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

table 5. 7 . [Cant inuod]

__ _________________________
ﬂan-110. u
n 1P l 10 I” so.

r—000011;0‘..00g

111 .1200 +02 .1100 +02 .1101 +02 .1000 +02
9 .0010 —01 .0001 .1100 +01 2001 +02
11 .1000 -1 00 .0120 +01 .1100 +01 —.0100 +00
1 .1120 -102 .1211 +02 .1010 +02 .2201 +01
11; _ .1010 +00 .1010 + 00 —0211 +00 —.0009 +00
1‘ 0102 .0001 . .1010 +01 0105 + 01
1. 000's 1 0:1 .0029 -- 00 1-100 02 .1201 —02
1: .0111 -02 .0010 - 02 . 11211-02 .1210 --02
11: .0020 .02 .2002 -. 01 2010 - 01 .1010 - 01
o .1011 +02 .0001 +01 .1020 +01 .0100 -1 01
a .1!" --0~‘| .032 —03 1629 «03 .8222 --0l
1)“ .—.0200 --02 —0115 --02 —0011 +02 —.0000 —02
v; .1100 —01 0002 ---01 .0200 -01 .1100 —01
D: .1020 -02 .1100 —02 .1011 ~02 0021 —00
11" «.1112 —02 —.2511 —01 --.0100 -01 —2010 —01.
’21 -—.22111 +00 --.0201 +02 2100 +00 .1201 + 00
1.‘ .1021 +01 .1110 +01 2001 +01 .1011 +01
11,, .0000 +01 .2000 +00 .1020 +02 .1010 +01

. r - 0000 K; 11‘ - 0011
111 .1110 +02 .1210 +02 .1110 +02 .1122 +02
[1 .2200 .4“ .2011 .2010 101 .1121 +112
0 .1001 +00 .1200 -1 00 .1100 .101 .0001 -101
2 .1000 +02 .1011 +02 .1100 .102 .1011 +02
1.; .1002 -1 00 .1200 +00 .0221 +00 -- 2002 + 00
r 0201 .1011 .1020 .101 .0210 -1 01
1. .1000 .-00 .1020 — 00 .1102 .02 .1200 —02
11' .1000 — 02 .0110 —02 .1120 .. 02 .0000 —02
11; .0101 —-02 .1210 —01 .2102 -01 .2000 —01
o .2202 102 .1010 +02 .1210 +02 0000 +01
1: 111201 - 02 0000 —00 .1000 —00 .1000 —00
"1111 «.1500 .112 —0110 —02 -.0101 —02 —.1105 —02
v: .1011— 01 .0101 —01 .0000 —01 1010 -—01
n: 2101 --02 .2120 —02 2229 —02 .2110 -112
11' .1010 -102 —.1105 —01 -—.2101 —01 --.2002 --01
’21 - .0010 +110 -...2001 -1 00 --.2100 +02 .2021 -1 00
A" ml 1-01 0100-101 .1001 +01 0100-101
’21 .0200 .1-01 .0000 .100 2020 +02 .2000 +01

 

._———.. - . _._— —.—__———- _—__ -—

 

[contmued on following page]

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tabla 5.7. [Continued]

_ —_ m. 00 — *_§
' I” I“

r..1011011;0‘-0011--

 

 

M .1011 +02 .1101 +02 .1311 +02 .1019 +02
9 .1010 —01 .0013 2200 +01 .1311 +02
1. .2111, +00 .1130 +00 .1302 +00 .9000 +01
0 .1000 +02 .1101 +02 .1210 +02 .1090 +02
11; .1410 +00 .1000 +00 .1210 +00 .0102 +00
r .2119 .0009 .1001 +01 11012 +01
1. .1011 --o:1 .0410 1—01 .9901 —01 .1101 —02
1' .1009 --01 .1110 1- 01 .1101 ~01 .0000 —02
0‘ .1003 --01 .1212 —01 .1941 -‘ .01 .2030 -01
o :1015 +02 .3101 +02 .2210 +02 .1051 +02
1: 1020 02 .1001 .-02 .1010 ~02 .0102 —00
11,m - 0201 02 . .1001 .02 --.1222- 02 -—.1300 --02
n; 9211 .01 .0142 . 01 11010 1—01 .1100 —01
I): .3151 02 .1010 —02 .0150 --02 .1041 —02
0’ .3115 - «1 0200 -02 --.1950 —01 -.2111 --01
A“ 1 0050 .101 -- 3100 +01 --.2100 +00 —.1000 +02
1" .1103 .100 1001 +00 .1031 +00 .1231 +02
1,, 2100 -1 00 .1100 +03 .0010 +02 .1000 +01
1 - 00011 K; 0“ - 0011

01 .1010 102 .1120 +02 .1200 +02 .1300 +02
01 1510 -.01 .1100 .1090 +01 .1000 +0.
0 .2001 1-00 .2109 +00 .1111 +00 .1010 +00
0 .1125 +02 .1000 +02 .1200 +02 .1103 +02
0; .1512 +00 .1111 +00 .1001 +00 .1205 +00
1' .2201 .0100 .1191 +01 .2191 +01
11 .0905 43 0000 —00 .9112 40 .1110 —02
11' 1200 - 01 .1120 -—01 .1019 --01 MI? —-0|
0, .1211 - 01 .1410 — 01 .1013 —01 2‘81 --0|
0 .3000 100 .1201 +02 .3021 +02 .2900 +03
a 1005 - 02 2203 ~02 .1110 —02 .9120 "00
D“ - 1001 02 -—.02110 - 02 ”-0000 —-02 -—-4I|06 —03
n: .1040 - 00 .0001 —01 .3103 --01 .2969 ~07
0: 3001 - 02 .1012 --02 .0300 —02 .0101 —02
1' —.0110 —0- 1 --0001 --02 —.1011 --01 ~.2303 —01
l“ —0102 -1 03 —..0103 +00 —.2192 +00 —.-1:101 +00
0‘ .1040 .101. .2200 + 00 .2102 +00 2110 +00
,, 0050 -1 00 .1100 + 01 .0000 +02 0420- 101

 

.. .0".
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ICOntmuedl
“%
A0000... 01
ll ' I l0 "0 “I
T- '0” K; ’K I- m .
M .1032 +02 .1001 +02 .1101 +02 .1241 +02
11 .1230 —01 .1204 .1410 -1 01 .1094 +01
11 .3000 +00 .2001 +05 .2404 +05 .2011 +00
0 .1100 +02 .1500 +02 .1312 +02 .1232 +02
0; .1042 +00 .2010 +00 .2142 +00 .2032 +00
r .1443 .4301 .1100 +01 2212 +01
11 .4104 -03 0041 --111 .0433 --03 .1122- 02
0' .1111 --01 .2020 .-01 .2431 -- 01 3401 —02
0, 112:1 --01 .2044 --01 .2514 --o: .2000 —01
0 "0| I02 5102 102 3|“ -| 0'1 530? 102
a .2301 - 412 3124 --02 3119 —02 .2221 —02
D“ 1012 - 01 -0221 --02 -.1200 —02 —.0230 —02
D: .1213 - 00 .0001 - 01 0000 -- 01 .3105 ~01
Dﬁ . _ 40011 412 .0024 '02 .0200 —02 .0350 -.02
1' 4325 00 _.2313 —03 --.1310 --01 2110 -01
"11 ---.1243 +04 —.0212 +03 -2123 +03 —.1900 +02
11' 2.120 +00 3411 +00 .4035 +06 .4560 +00
‘0 .9010 +00 .1100 +00 .2040 +03 .2590 +02
. 1' = 12000 11-. 911 - 0091

M | 1000 +02 .1000 +02 10911 +02 .1114 +02
9 ._ “00 —-0| 1002 J!” +o| .6066 +0I
'1 +00 .3342 +06 .2000 +00 .2004 +05
1 .1045 +02 1020 +02 .1425 +02 .1204 +02
0, 3100 +00 .2400 +00 .2020 403 .2000 -1 00
r 1004 .3101 .0101 .1010 +01
11 .5503 —01 .0100 - 03 0022 —03 .1140 —-02
1.’ .2142 -1-01 .2022 .--01 .3300 -—01 .1150 —01
11, .2332 - 01 2000 -- 01 .3401 --01 3090 —M
o .5211 -1 02 .0020 +02 0324 +02 .1194 +02
0 .2020 - -02 .3130 02 .4400 -.02 3012 --02
o“ .0402 02 -.1140 --01 —.1005 --01 —.0141 —02
05 .1000 .00 .1121 -00 .0000 .501 .4100 —01
vi .4411 - 02 .1010 --02 .1004 - -01 .1101-01
11" . 5001 . 02 --.0004 -01 —.1010 —01 —2101 —01
1.“ --..1200 +04 —.1012 +04 —11000 + 03 2055 +03-
1' .1201 +00 .4133 +00 .0101 +05 .1400 +00

1,; .3400 +07 I‘ .GJIO +05 .9020 10.1 .6700 +02

. following page]

 

284

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

r—101111011;0.(=0001

M .0015 +01 .0000 +01 .1010 +02 1106 +02
0 .0101 --02 .1001 —01 0013 .1010 +01
11 .1200 +00 .1112 +00 .1000 +00 .0110 +00
1 .2100 +02 .1120 +02 .1100 +02 .1011 +02
1, .1000 +01 .1010 +00 .0101 +00 021:1 +00
1‘ .1010 —01 .2111 .0120 .1000 +01
1. .1030 «01 .1020 ---01 .0000 --m .1210 —02
1' 21.10 -111 .1010 .01 .1100 —01 0100 —01
1, 1201 - 01 .1101 -01 .1001 -01 .0001 —01
11 11111 1| 02 .0110 1-02 .1005 +03 .1113 +03
10 .1020 --02 .1002 -_02 0111 —-02 .0010 —02
11“ . 21:10 - 02 —-.0021 - 02 .— 1210 .01 -—.1101 —01
11: .1110 -- 00 .1012 00 .1001 0 110 .0101 — 01
115 1.101 02 0002 ---02 .1200 ...01 .1010 —01
11’ — 0110 - 01 .0201 —02 ---.110.1 .—01 -2J11 —01
1‘ — 1000 +00 «.1002 +01 -. .1010 +00 .1210 +01
11‘ .0200 1-00 .1101 +00 . .1011 +00 .1201 +00
1. .1110 +00 .1200 -' '10 | .1110 +01 .2000 +03
.J

1-2001011;0‘-§o_9_q

11 .0001 +01 1100 +01 .0000 +01 .1010 +02
9 .1100 —02 .1012 --01 0011 .1111: +01
1. .1202 +00 .1000 +00 .0101 +00 .0011 +00
. 21.111 +02 .2002 +02 .1001 +02 .1110 +02
1.; .1008 +01 .1511 -1 01 00.11 +00 .0022 +00
r .0010 —01 .1011 .1102 .0110

., .1011 —00 .0010 ~00 .1112 - 02 .1001 -02
11' .2000 —01 1101 — 01 .1220 —-01 0101 --01
1‘ .1010 -01 .1120 - 01 .0201 - 01 .1001

., .1010 +03 .1110 +110 .1000 +01 ' .1110 +01
a .0111 . 02 .1010 ~02 .0113 —02 .0100 —-02
11“ .4000 "-01 .._.1001 .412 ...1121 _.02 -—.1201 —01
n; JIM --07 .0110 —01 .1001 —00 .1011 -00
0‘; 806° 4‘ .1012 —02 .0011 702 .1001 —01
1' —-;1050 -02 —.2010 —01 -0100 -—01 —.0110 —01
xx -0210 +00 - .1000 +01 —.-200 +00 2101 +01 '
11‘ 0:100 +00 .1201 +00 .1011 +00 2210 +00
1, .1220 +00 .1000 +01 .2000 +05 .1110 +01

 

1101111 9 page]

285
NI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

 

 

antinuedl
_._.._ ___- - _ .1. .-.....:_ __-._. .. ..
I ' ' I 1 | 10 400 I 500
_ r .. 30000 11; $11 - 0005
M .5013 +01 .0401 +01 .1100 +01 .1045 +01
9 .2010 —02 .2500 —01 .2002 .1025 -1 01
0 .2402 +00 .1054 +00 .1550 +00 .1209 +00
0 .2014 +02 2410 +02 .2010 +172 .1142 +02
11; .2430 +01 .2431 +01 .2220 +01 .1015 +01
r .2505 —01 .1010 —01 .2200 .4030
q .1215 -04 .2101 -- 03 .0530 -00 .1012 — 02
1' .1102 —01 .5431 - .01 .1101 .1100
1, .1920 --01 .0001 ---01 .1340 1051
41 .1200 +00 .1020 .101 .2001 +03 .1140 +03
1: 0110 --02 .1000 --01 .1455 --01 .1013 --01
11“ ‘ .--.4204 .03 -- 1025 .0 02 --.20.10 -02 —.0140 —02
n: .1000- 00 .0104 - 00 .1500 . .01 .1101 --01
”x .-.1200 —02 -—..1310 - 02 --- 0042 -04 .2505 —02
1" .4005 .01 —..mo —01 —5130 —01 —.1005
’11 — .1023 +04 —-.1243 +00 —0.4214 +04 --5111 +04
1" .1014 +05 .2510 +05 3002 +00 5112 +00
1,, —— .5100 +00 .3130 +00 .9030 +04
T r! ”a” K; “K - w“
M .5451 +01 .5019 +01 .5150 +01 .5050 +01
0 .1015 —02 .1134 —01 .1050 .1021 -1 01
11 3004 +00 .2095 +00 .2500 +00 .2101 +05
0 .3212 +02 .2120 +02 .2300 +02 .2002 +02
11: .0101 +01 .2004 -1 01 .2151 +01 .2525 +01
1 .1001- —-01 .4011 - 01 .1405 .3130
1. 0010 --04 .1344 .01 .4200 -00 .1201 .-02
1' .5402 . -01 .0501 -- 01 .1440 .2354
1,: .5501 .-01 .0125 --01 .1514 .2550
0 .1440 -1 01 2015 +00, .3011 +05 .4110 +00
1: .1040 . 01 .1400 .01 .1021 .01 2451 ---01
11,.K .4101 --01 - .0140 00 - 2104 —-02 --.4150 - 02
12:; .1220 --00 .2000 —00 4400 00 .9250 ---00
I): - 0.1004 --02 -—.2010 —02 «.3490 -—02 -..1003 —02
1" 2504 . 01 .2501 . 01 5114 .- 01 ---.1200
‘11 .1112 -1 01 .4500 +04 .3013 +04 —2021 +04
1” 2001 -1 05 .1012 -1 00 5014 +00 .0312 +00
1,, _ .0040 4 00 .4040 +01 .1010 +00
200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Notations in Bibliography

M «Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics
ZhPH'l'P «Journal of Applied Mechanics and angineering Physics
Zhgg «Journal of Applied Spectroscopy

ZhPXh «Journal of Physical Chemistry

2m? «Journal of Engineering Physics

DAN SSSR «Reports of the USSR Acadeny of Sciences

M «'memOphysics of High Temperatures

UFN «Advance: of the Physical Sciences

1111‘ «Theoretical and Mathematical Physics

Trudy MAI «Proceedings of the Moscow Aviation Institute

Trudy PIAN «Proceedings of the Physics Institute, USSR Acaduy of Sciences

Preprint 1PM «Preprint of Institute of Applied mthsnatice

WTI ‘ «Khar'kov Physicotechnical Institute

HZhG ‘ «Mechanics of Pluids and Gases

JQSR'r «Journal of Quanta Spectroscopy and Radiative Transfer
Phys. Rev. «The Physical mien

Rev. Mod. Phys. «Reviews of Modern Physics

287

F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bibliography to Preface ..- .7 -1

1. Second Symosiul on Uranium Plasmas, Research and Applications. Atlanta.
Georgia, 1971.

2. "Dinamika i upravleniye atomym raketnum dvigatslsn" [Dynamics and Control of
a Nuclear Rocket Engine], edited by B. N. Petrov, Moscow, Atmizdat. 1972.

3. IYOVIOV. V. H” ZZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SBRIYA ENERGETIKA I TRANSPORI', No 6, 1977.

4. TM? Rh. G. and P. K. Shwenk, WYA TEKHNIKA I KOSHORRVTIKA, Vol 16,
No . 1978.

Bibliography to Chapter 1
1. Iyevlev, V. H. IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. SBRIYA ENERGETIKA I TRANSPORT, No 6, 1977.

2. Heeling, W” PHYSICA, Vol 43, 1969.

3. Shpil'rayn, B. 2.. K. A. Yakimavich et a1, “Peplofizicheskiye svoystva
shchelochnykh netallov" [Thermophysical Properties of Alkali mtals], Moscow,

Izdatel' stvo standartov, 1970.

4. Smnov, A. H. and E. E. Shpil'rayn. ”Equation of state of A awmically Ref
acting Gas,” in "Uravneniya eostoyaniya gasov i zhidkostsy" [Equations of
State of Gases and Fluids], Hoscov, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1975.

S. Gurvich, 1.. v., G. A. Ithachkuruzov et a1, 'Ternodinamicheskiye svoystva in-
dividual'nykh veshchestv" [Thermodynamic Properties of Individual Substances],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo AN SSSR, 1962.

6. Gryaznov, v. K. and I. L. Iosilevskiy, in “‘replofizicheskiys svoystva nia-
kotelperaturnoy plasmy" [ﬁherlnophysical Properties of Im-Telperature Plasma] ,
edited by v. M. lyevlev, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1976.

7. Portov, V. Ye.. B. N. Lomakin and Yu. G. Kraanikov, M, Vol 9, No S, 1971.

8. Landau. L. D. and Ye. M. Lifshite, ”Statisticheskaya mekhanika" [Statistical
Mechanics], ﬂoscow, lzdatel'stvo Nauka, 1964.

9. Norman, 6. B. and A. N. Stamstin, M. Vol 8, No 2, 1970.
10. “Ocherki po khimii i fizike nizkotenperaturnoy plazuy" [Essays on the Chen-

istry and Physics of Iow-Tenperature Plasma] , edited by L. s. Polak, Moscow,
lzdatel'stvo Nauka, 1971.

288

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kudrin. I... P., "Statisticheskaya fizika plazw" [Statistical Physics of a
Plasnal, Moscow, Atonizdat, 1974.

Yakubov, I. T., in "Idlimiya 1 flzika planar" [The Chenistry and Physics of
Plasmas], No 1, Moscow, Atomlzdat, 1974.

Alekseyev, V. A. and A. A. Vedenov, (JPN, Vol 102, 1970.

Khranak, A. 1'. and I. '1‘. Yakubov, mm, Vol 59, No 1, 1970.

Likal'ter, A. A., Inc. cit... Vol 56, No 1, 1969.

Yakubov, I. T., "Some Problems of the 111qu of a low-Touperature Plasma,”
Dissertation for Doctor of Physicomatheutical Sciences, Izdatol'stvo I'VT

AN SSSR: 1972.

Dillon, J. 6., P. A. Nelson and B. s. Swanson, JOURNAL OF CHRIICAL PHYSICS,
Vol 44, No 11, 1966.

Portov, V. Ye., A. N. Drenin and A. A. Iaont'yev, 'rv'r, Vol 13, No S, 1975.

Korahunov, Yu. 5., A. P. Senchenkov et a1, Doc. c1t., Vol 6 No 6, 1970;
Vol 13, No 3, 1975.

'l‘relin, Yu. 5., V. V. ‘neryayev and L. R. Fokln, Doc. c1t.-, Vol 12, No 5, 1974:
Volyak, 1.. D. and A. K. Omelebayev, noc. it., Vol 14, No 4, 1976; Gur'yanova,
L. P., Trudy MAI, No 420, 1977.

Hirschfelder, J., c. Curtis and R. Beard, "Molekulyarnaya teoriya qaaov 1
zhlcncostey" [Molecular Theory of Gases and Fluids], translated from English,
Moscow, Izd-vo lnostrannoy llteratury, Moscow, 1961.

Trelbus, 14., 'Tenuostatika i termdinanlka" [Themstatlcs and Thermodynamics],
translated from English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Energiya, 197G.

Homunq, K., JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, Vol 46, No 6, 1975.

Young, D. and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev., Vol A3, No 1, 1971.

Pattoret, A. et a1, TRANSACTIONS OF PARADAY SOCIETY, Vol 65, No 553, 1969:
Ackerlnan, R. J. and E. G. Rauh, JOURRAL OF PHYSICAL CHBIIS‘I'RY, Vol 73, No 4,
1969.

Vedenov, \. A. and A. I. Larkln, ZhB'l'P, Vol 36, No 4, 1959.

Latkin, A. 1.. 10C. Cite! v01 38' NO 6' 196°.

Trubinkov, B. A. and V. F. Yelesln, Doc. cit, Vol 47, No 4, 1964.

Krasnikov, Yu. 6., Loc. c1t., Vol 53, No 6, 1967.

289

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30.
31.

32.

33'

34.

35.

37.

38.

39.

‘0’

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dewitt, ii. 2., JGJRNAI. OP MMTICAL PHYSICS, Vol 7, No 4, 1966.
Kopyshev, V. P., am, Vol 55, No 4, 1968.

Ebeling, H., ANNALBN PHYSIK, Vol 10, 19671 Bbeling, W. and R. Saending,
mum PHYSIK, V01 28, No 4, 1973.

starostin, A. 31., ”Some Problems of the Theory of an Imperfect Plan‘s," Dis-
sertation for Candidate of Physioouthenatical Sciences, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo
Hoskovskoqo Gosuderstvennoqo Universiteta, 1970.

Vorob'yev, V. s. and A. 1.. mm, THE, Vol 8, No 1, 1971.

Krasnikov, Yu. 6., mm, Vol 73, No 2, 1977.

Krasnikov, Yu. G. and V. I. xucherenko, M, Vol 16, No 1, 1978.

Abrikosov, A. 3., A. P. Gor'kov and I. Ye. Dzyaloshinskiy, 'Metody kvantovoy
teorii polya v statistichesluoy fizike" [Methods of man Field 1110017 in
statistical Physics], Moscow, Pirnatgiz, 1962.

March, N., w. Young and s. Supantchar, “Problem mogikh tel v kvantovoy
nekhannike' [Problans of Many Bodies in Quantum Hedzenics], translated fron
angliah, lbsoow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1969.

Isihara, 3., statisticheskaya fizika" [Statistical Physics], translated from
English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1974.

Pradkin, Ye. 5., in 'Kvantovaya teoriya polya i gidrodinanika" [Quantum Field
Theory and Hydrodynamics], Trudy HAN, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo um, 1965.

Mitchell, D. J. and B. W. Ninhan, Phys. luv” Vol 174, No l, 1968: Cohen, 8.
and ‘1‘. Murphy, PHYSICS 01“ mms, Vol 12, No 7, 1969: del Rio, I". and H. De-
witt, PHYSICS OP FLUIDS, Vol 12, No 4, 1969.

'I‘yablikov, S. V. and V. V. mimchev, DAN 8858, Vol 114, No 6, 1957.

Brush, 5. G., H. L. Sahlin and B. Teller, JOURNAL 01’ CHHHCAL PHYSICS, Vol 45,
NO 6, 1966; Hansen, J. P., Phys. luv” V01 A8, NO 6, 1973.

vorontsov-Vel'yaninov, P. N. and v. P. Chasovskikh, M, Vol 13, No 6, 1975,
chasovakikh, V. P., 'lnvestigating Equilibrium Properties, the structure and
Phase Transitions in an Ion System," Dissertation for Candidate of Physico-

mathematical Sciences, Leningrad, uningradskiy Gosudarstvenniy Universitet,
1974.

Rasaia, J. C., D. N. Card and J. P. Valleau, JWRNAL 0? CWICAL PHYSICS,
Vol 56, No 1, 1972.

Hill, 1'., "Statisticheskaya Iekhanika" [Statistical Mechanics], translated
from English, Moscow, Izd-vo inoetrannoy literatury, 1960.

290

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
47.

48.

49.

SO.

51.

52.

S3.

54.

SS.

56.

57.

58.

S9.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thelmer, O. and R. Kepple, Phys. Rev., Vol 165, No 1, 1968: Phya. Rem, Vol
1, N0 3, 1970; Wright, '1'. and o. Thelmer, PHYSICS orrwms, Vol 13, No 4,
1970.

Zalener, V. V., G. 3. Norman and V. '1'. Pilinov, M, V01 10, N0 6, 1972.
Hernia, k., JGJRNAL OF PHYSICAL SOCIETY OF JAPAN, Vol 26 (mpplanent), 1969.
Okubo, s. and Islhara, A., PHYSICA, 'lol 57, 1972.

Stillinger, F. and R. Watt, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 49, No 5, 1968.

Gryaznov, V. K. and I. L. Iosilevskly, CHISLBNNYYE WY mm SPIDSI'MY
SRBDY, Vol 4, No S, 1973.

Gillan, H. J., JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL CHD‘IIS‘I‘RY, V01 7, 1974.

Springer, J., H. Pokrant and P. Stevens, JOURNAL 0P CHWCM. PHYSICS, Vol 58,
No 11, 1973.

ﬂirt, C. H., PHYSICS 0P FLUIDS, V01 10, No 3, 1967.

Bogolyubov, N. N., ”Problemy dinamlcheekoy teorll v atatisticheekoy ﬂuke"
[Probleas of Dynamic meory in Statistical Physics], Moscow, Gostekhizdat,
1946: Fisher, 1. 2., "Statlsticheskaya teorlya zhidkootay" [Statistical Theory
of Fluids], Moscow, Pimtgiz, 1961.

Carley, 0., Phys, Rev., Vol 131, No 4, 1963.

Zanalln, V. M., P. 8. Norman and V. s. Plllnov, "Hetod Monte-Kano v statis-
tlcheekoy termdinamike" [The Monte-Carlo Method in statistical memodynan-
lcsl, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1977.

Glauberlan, A. Ye. and I. R. Yukhnovskly, 211”, Vol 22, No 5, 1952.
Vorontaov-Vel'yamlnov, P. N. and V. K. shlff, 'rv'r, Vol 15, N0 6, 1977.
Pasaiah, J. C. and H. Prioduan, JOURNAL OF CHBﬂan PHYSICS, Vol 48, No 6,
1968: Ibld., V01 50, No 9, 1969: Carley, 0., Ibld., V01 46, 1967; Martynov,
G. A. and A. a. Shuddt, M, V01 17, N0 2, 1979.

Rogers, P. and H. Dewitt, Phys. Ram, Vol A8, N0 2, 1973.

Dewitt, H. and 5‘. Rogers, PHYS. EARTH, PLANET. Immoas, Vol 6, 1972.

Rowllnson, J., in "Pizlka prostykh zhidkoatey" {Physics of Simple Fluids],
Vol 1, translated from English, Moscow, Izdatal'ctvo Mir, 1971.

Carley, D. and F. Lado, Phys. Rev., Vol 137, No l, 1965: 'rsykalo, A. A. and
v. I. Selevanyuk, WT, Vol 9, No 5, 1971.

291

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
66.

67.

68.

69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

15C

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.
Bl.
82.
83.

84.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Moore, 5., Atomic Energy Levels, N. V., 1950.

99311119, V., PHYSICA, V01 38, 1968.

Zslensr, B. V., c. E. Norman and V. S. Pilinov, M, V01 13, No 4, 1975;
No S

nailing, H., PHYSICA, V01 73, 1974.

Vorob'yov, V. s. and A. L. mankin, M, V01 14, No 1, 1976.

Abe, R., PROGR. Timon. PHYS., V01 22, 1959; Huron, 2., JOURNAL OF CBEHCAL
PHYSICS, Vol 28, No 4, 1958; Fried-an, a. I... Ionic Solution Theory, New York,
1962.

min, B. N. and V. Ye. Portov, zhm, V01 62, No 1, 1972.

Bushman, A. V., B. N. makin, V. A. Sachanov, V. Ye. Portov at al, 1.0a. cit.,
Vol 69, No 5, 1975.

Iosilevskiy, I. L, M, V01 18, N0 3, 1979; Gryaznov, V. R., V. N. Zubarsv,
H. V. Zhernoklstov, I. L. Iosi1svskiy and V. '10. For-tow, 211m, V01 79, N0 6,
1980.

DsGroot, S. and C. Sold”, PHYSICA, Vol 12, 1946) Harris, G. H., am C!
CﬂﬂlICAL PHYSICS, Vol 31, No 5, 1959; Phys. luv” Vol 119, 1960.

Grabosks, H., D. ﬂax-wood and 2. Rogers, Phys. New, V01 186, No 1, 1969.

'nolnachsv, v. V., "Howdy kvantovoy tsorii nagnstizna' [Methods of the Quantum
Theory of Magnetism], Moscow, Pimtgiz, 1965.

Koval'skaya, G. A. and V. G. Sevast'yanonko, in "Svoystva nizkotnporaturnoy
plazny i netody yoye diagnostiki" [The Properties of a Low-Teaporature Plasma
and Methods of Diagnosing It], edited by H. P. Zhukov, Novosibirsk. Izdat01'-
stvo Nauka, 1977.
Kazanskiy, K. A. and V. M. Novikov, M, V01 14, No 3, 1976; Gurvich, L. V.,
V. s. Yungmn et a1 "Thermodynamic Properties of a 0-? System," Proprint
IVT AN SSSR, No 1-0018, Voscow, 1977.
Jackson, J. and L. Klein, Phys. Rev” Vol 177, 1969.
Vorob'ysv, V. S. and A. L. Khonkin, 'rv'r, V01 15, N0 1, 1977.
Inglis, D. R. and E. Teller, ASTROPHYSICAL 30m, Vol 90, 1939.
Fermi, 3., NUOVO CIMBN'PO, Vol 11, 1934.
Sawkinas, A. Yu. and A. z. Chizhyunas, LITERATURNYY FIZICHESKIY SBORNIK,
V01 14, 1974.

292

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101 .

102.

FOR omcm. USE ONLY

Gryaznov, V. x., A. M. Ivanova et al, Fourth All-Union Conference on the
Physics of a low-Tauperatum Plasma, Annotations of Reports, Kiev, 1975.

llattree, D., "Raechety atomykh struktuz" [Calculations of Atomic structures],
translated from English, Izd-vo inoetrannoy literaturi, Moscow, 1960.

Landau, L. D. and Ye. M. Lifehits, 'Kvantovaya mkhanika" [Quantum Mechanics],
Moscow, Fizmatgiz, 1963.

Alder, 8. J. and 'i‘. 3. Wainwright, JGJRNAL OP CMICAL PHYSICS, V01 33, Mo 5,
1960.

Glembotskiy, I. I. and 1. Yu. Petkyavichyus, LITERATURMYY PIZICHBSKIY
SBOIWIK, V01 8, 1973.

Wigner, 2., Phys. Rev” V01 46, 1934; TRANSACTIONS OF PARADAY SOCIETY, V01 34,
1938.

mrzhnits, D. A., Yu. Ye. Bound): and G. V. Shpafakovekaya, USN, Vol 117,
NO 1, 1975e

better, R., Phys. Pew, Vol 99, 1955.

Kalitkin, N. N. and L. V. Kuz'nina, 'Kvantovo-statisticheskoye uravnsniye
sostoyaniya i udarnyye adiabaty“ [me Quanta-statistical Equation of state
and Adiabatic Shock Cums]. Proprint IPM AN SSSR, No 14, Moscow, 1976.
Kirzhnits, D. A., zhm, Vol 32, No l, 1957; Doc. cit., Vol 35, Mo 6, 1958.

Kirzhnits, D. A. and G. V. shpatkovskaya, Ioc cit., Vol 62, No 6, 1972,
Inc. cit, Vol 66, No 5, 1975.

Gomkhov, L. N., Yu. s. Rhodeyev and A. M. Yenel'yanov, M, Vol 12, No 6,
1974.

Foster, P., R. neckenby and B. Robbins, JGJRMAL OF PHYSICS, Vol V 2, 1969.

Yemkhin, N. V., 3. M. Kovalev and P. P. mux, Proceedings of 12th Inter-
national Conference on Phenomena of Ionized Gases, Eindhoven, 1975.

Gryaznov, V. K. and G. A. Gutsev, 'l'V'l‘, Vol 18, No 4, 1979.

Gurvich, L. V. et a1, "mtg“. razryva khinicheskikh svyazey. Potentsialy n
ionizatsii i srodstvo k elektronu" [Breakdown Energies of Chemical Bonds.
Ionization Potentials and Electron Affinity], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mauka,
1974.

Gerzberg, 6., Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, New York, 1955.

Yemel'yanov, A. M., Yu. S. Khodeyev and L. N. Gomkhov, 'I'V'i‘, Vol 8, No 2,
1970.

293

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
103.

104 .

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.
110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Temdinmicheskiye Eunktsii individus1'nykh veshchestv" [memdynsmic
Puncticns of Individual Substances], edited by V. P. Glushko, V01 4, Moscow,
IZd-VO AN SSSR. 1980.

strove, W. 5., cm. PHYS. 1m“ V01 7, NO 3, 1970.

Gurvich, L. V. and V. s. Ungmn, Thermodynamics (Proceedings of s Symposiun,
Vienna, 1965), Vol 2, 1m.

Perks. A., B. Lsine et al, "Optical Constants of Uranium Plum," NASA,
Cit-72348, (“-8244, 1968.

Steinhsus, D. 03., L. deziemki et el, "Current status of Analysis of the
Optical Spectra of Uranium,” Report 11-4501, 1971.

Blaiso, J. and L. J. dezienski, JOURNAL OF THE OPTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA,
Vol 66, No 7, 1976.

Gorbacheva, G. P., M. A. Yel'ysshevich et s1, 'rv'r, V01 13, No 1, 1975.
Gryaznov, V. K., I. L. Iosilevskiy and V. Ye. Fortov, zhm. No 3, 1973.
Uienbeck, J. and J. Ford, "iektssi po statisticheskoy ukhmike" [lectures
on statistical Mechanics], translated from English, Moscow, Indetel'stvo
Mir, 1965.

Sternheinsr, R. 11., Phys. Rev., V01 183, p112, 1969.

Kiriliin, V. 3., V. V. Sychev and A. Ye. Sheyndlin, ”Tekhnichesksys tem-
dinsmiks" [Engineering memdynsnics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Energiys, 1974.

Patch, R. w., "Ihemdynmic Properties and Rocket Performances of Hydrogen,”
NASA, SP-3069, 1971.

Alemov, V. Ye. et .11, "Termdinsmidzeskiye i teplofizicheskiye swystvs
produktov sqorsniye" [Thermodynamic and hemphysicsl Properties of Combus-
tion Products), V01 9, Moscow, VINI‘rI, 1978.

Grekov, L. 1., Yu. V. noskvin et s1, “Osmvnyye svoystva nekotorykh gezov
pri vysokikh tempersturekh" [Main Properties of Some Gases at High Tempere-
turesl. Moscow, Izdstel'stvo Msshinostzoyeniye, 1964.

"pravochnik po teplofizicheskim woystvm quov i zhidkostey" [Inference
Manual on Themphysicsl Properties of Gases and Fluids]. edited by N. B.
Vatgsftik. Moscow, Izdstel'stvo Nsuks, 1972.

Kalitkin, N. N., L. V. Kuz'mins and V. S. Rogov, "Tables of memdynenic
Functions and Transport Coefficients of A Plasma," Pmprint 1PM AN SSSR,

1972.

Kovslev, B. 11., P. P. Kulik and Ye. K. Rozenov, KhVB, V01 10, No 1, 1976;
Manuscript No 1919 deposited at VINI‘I‘I, 1975.

294

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
120.

121.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vetchinin, S. P. and Yu. K. Xurilenkov, TV'I‘. V01 13, No 4, 1975.

Mr. Go and W. “1:81, ANNALS“ PHYSIK, V01 17. NO 2-3. 1956

Bibliography to Chapter 2

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6O

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Iyevlev, V. Mn IMSTIYA AN SSSR. SERIYA mm I TRANSPORI'. No 6.
1977.

Iyevlev, V. 14.. ”Turbulentnoye dvizheniye vysokotemeraturnykh sploshnykh
ered" [Turbulent mtion of High-Temperature Continuous Media], Hosea.
lzdatel'stvo Hanks. 1975.

Pavlov, G. A. and 3. Yo. Son, pm, No 6, 1975.
Kucherenko, V. 1.. G. A. Pavlov and E. Ye. Son, M, Vol 14, No 5, 1976.

Butler, J. N. and R. S. Brocaw, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 26, NO 6.
1957.

Iakubov, I. T” BBITRAGUNG PLASMAPHYSIK, Vol 17, No 2, 1977.

Renkert, H” F. ﬁensel and 3. U. Prank, BER. BUNSBI, 635m PHYS.
CHEL. V01 75. No 6, 1971.

Barolskiy, s. 6., N. V. Yernokhin et a1, ICP'rG-xn. Vol 1, Bindhoven, 197$.

Bol'tzaan, I... “Inktsii po teorii gasov" [Lectures in the Theory of Gases],
translated from German, Moscow. Irdatel'stvo inostrannoy literatury, 1960.

Chapman, 5. and T. Cowling. 'Hateuaticheskaya teoriya neodnorodnykh gaxov"
[Mathematical Theory of Inhomogeneous Gases], translated tron English,
Moscow, lad-v0 inostrannayliteraturi. 1960

rerziger, H. and J. Copper. "Hatssaticheskaya teoriya protsessov perenosa v
gazakh" [Mathematical Theory of Transfer Processes in Gases], translated
from malish, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1976.

Bogolyubov, N. N. "Problem! dinuicheskoy teorii v statisticheshoy fizike"
[Problem of Dynamic Theory in Statistical Physics], Moscow, Gostekhizdat,
1946.

minontovich, Yu. I... "xinetieheskaya teoriya neideal'oogo gaze 1 Michel'-
noy plenty" [Kinetic Theory of Imperfect Gas and of Iaperfect Plasma] .
Moscow, Irdatel'stvo Nauka, 1975.

Liboff, R., "Vvedeniye v teoriyn kineticheskikh uravneniy‘ [Introduction to

Theory of Kinetic Equations! , translated from English. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo
Mir. 1974.

295

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.

F0! OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Halvasu, K. , "Stat ist whaskaya makhanika zaryazchelmykh chastits" [statistical
Mechanics of charged Particles], translated 15m English, Moscow, Isdatcl'stvo
Mix, 1974.

"Kinatichaskiye protscssy v guakh i plums" [Kinetic Processes in Gases and
Plasma], edited by H. Hochstia, Ho-cov, Atcnizdat, 1972.

Ulcnbcck, J. and .1. Ford, 'Lsktsii po statistichsskoy askhaniks' [Lscturss in

Statistical Hschanics], translated from mglish, Moscow, Izdatcl'stvo Mir,
1965.

Cohen, 3. G. D., ”The Kinetic meaty o! Dans. Gases,” Amsterdam, North-
Holland, 1962.

Kawasaki, K. and I. Oppsnhain, Phys. Rem, Vol A139, No 5, 1965.

Hubbard, J., pkoc. ROY. 5°C., Vol A261, No 3, 1961.

Alyanovskiy, v. H., th‘rF, Vol 60, No 5, 1971.

Gould, H. A. and H. a. Do Hitt, Phys. Ram, Vol 155, Ho 1, 1967.

Kadantasv, B. 3., Zia-71?, Vol 33, Ho 1, 1957.

Ka'damv, L. and H. Bain, "Haravnmsnaya statistichcsxaya Mkhanika" [Non-
equilibriun Statistical Mechanics], translated from mlish, macaw,
Izdatel'stvo Mix, 1964.

Kihara, T. and 0. Anna, J. PHYS. soc. JAIL, Vol 18, No 6, 1963.

Anna, 0., ANNALS“, PHYSIK, Vol 57, No 3, 1970.

Itikawa, Y., J. PHYS. SCXI. JAE, Vol 18, No 10, 1963.

Liboff, R. I.., PHYSICS 05' FLUIDS, V01 2, NO 1, 1959.

Yoruakov, v. v. and N. N. ltalitkin, in “mislcnnyyc utody v ukhaniks
sploshnykh axed" [chrical Methods in the Mechanics of Solid Nadia], Novo-
sibirsk, Ird-vo N60, 1978.

Bram, E. PHYS. FLUIDS. Vol 10. No S, 1967.

Hahn, IL, E. A. Mason and P. J. Smith, PHYSICS O!" FLUIDS, V01 14, No 2,1971.
Lamps, M., Phys. Rev” Vol 174, No 1, 1968.

Williams, R. H. and H. 8. Do Witt, PHYSICS 01’ FLUIDS, V01 12, No 12, 1969.

Kivalson, u. c. and o. P. Du Bois, PHYSICS 0P FLUIDS. V01 7. No 7, 1964.

296

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.
SO.
51.
52.

S3.

54.
55.

56.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Spitzer, L. and R. Basra, Phys. Rem, Vol 89, No S, 1953.

Hirschfelder, H. , C. Curtis and R. Beard, "Molekulyarnaya teoriya gazov i
zhidkostoy" [Molecular Theory of Gases and Fluids], Translated from uglish,
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1961.

Bernstein, I. 8., PHYSICS OF FLUIDS, Vol 12, Mo 1, 1969.

Pavlov, G. A. and E. Ye. Son, 'rv'r, Vol 9, No 5, 1971.

Ebnchik, In, K. S. Yun and E. A. Mason, J. cam. PHYS., V01 39, No 3, 1963.
Pbx, R. 1... PHYSICS OF FLUIDS, V01 13, No 8, 1970.

Gerasimv, G. Ya., IZVESTIYA AN SSSR, SERIYA HEW!“ ZRIDKDSTI I GAZA, 1974.

Kubo, R., in "Ternodinamika neobratimykh protsessov," [The Thermodynamics of.
Irreversible Processes] , Moscow, Izdatel'stvo inostrannoy literature, 1962.

Zubarev, D. N., “Meravnovesnaya statisticheskaya termedinanika" [Nonequilib-
rium statistical Thermodynamics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1971.

Kadanoff, L. P. and P. S. Martin, mum PHYSIK, V01 24, Mo 2, 1963.

Pines, R. and P. Nosior, "‘moriya kvantovykh zhidkostoy" [Theory of Quantum
Fluids], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1967.

Martin, P. C., Phys. Rev” Vol 161, No l, 1967.

Mcnsnnan, J. A., in "Advances in clumical Physics,“ edited by 1. Prigogin,
New York Pergamn Press, 1963.

Landau, L. D. and Ye. M. Lifshits, "Kvantovaya mkhanika" [Quantum Mechanics],
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo fiz.-mat. lit., 1963.

Megan, J. R., PHYSICA, Vol 35, No 1, 1967.
Kurzhnits, D. A., UPM. Vol 119, No 2, 1976.
Lagar'kov, A. N. and A. K. Sarychev, M, Vol 15, No 3, 1977.
Valuyev, A. A. and G. E. Norman, 10c. cit.

Hansen, J. P., I. R. McDonald and B. L. Pollok, Phys. Rev., Vol All, No 6,
1975.

vieillenfosse, P. and J. P. Hansen, Phys. Rem, Vol A 11, No 6, 1975.
Martin, P. c. and s. Yip, Phys. Rev., Vol 170, No 1, 1968.

Porter, 0., P. c. Martin and S. Yip, Phys. by” Vol 170, No 1, 1968.

297

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
57.

58.

S9.

61.
62.

63.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

700

71.

72.
73.
74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Paul', V. I. and G. M. 211331113029, mm, V01 41, NO 3, 1961.

son, 5. Y0., 1n TEDDY m1, Part 1, Dolgopmdnyy, 12d. mak- filo-toxin).
instituta, 1971.

Yakubov, I. '1‘., 2118'”, V01 57, No 6, 1969.

Neal, 7., PHYSICS 01’ FLUIDS, V01 13, No 2, 1970.

Sachemv, V. 6., B. Ye. Son and 0. Yo. ShchOkotov, M, V01 15, No 2, 1977.
Ivanov, Yu. V., V. B. Hint-0v 0t :1, zhm, V01 71, 80 1, 1976.

Dikhter, I. Ya. and V. A. Zaygamlk, DAN sssn, V0.1. 227, N0 2, 1976.
Bhaskar, N. 0., PHYS. REV. LET?” V01 38, No 1, 1977.

Pavlov, G. A. and V. I. Kuchoranko, M, V01 15, No 2, 1977.

Halter, H. R. 3., JOURNAL OF PHYSICS, V01 86, N0 6, 1973

Podlubnyy, 1.. 1., M, V01 13, no 5, 1975.

surnov, B. H., "Atomyye stolkmveniya 1 almontamyyo protsuay v plan-0'
{22:11.0 Collisions and alas-enemy Process“ 1» a Manual, Moacow, Atonizdat,

Hayov, s. A., 2111?, V01 40, N0 3, 1970.

Babikov, V. V., "Motod fazovykh funktaiy" [Hothod of Phase muons], noncow,
Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1966.

Mitchner, M. and C. Kruger, ”Chastichnoionizovannyye gazy' [Partially Ionized
Gases], translated from English, macaw, Izdatol'stvo Hit, 1976.

21m, J. 14., PHIL. MAG., V01 6, no 6, 1961.
Bomb'ycv, V. S. and A. L. momma, nzrn mm, V01 3, No 4, 1977.
ngatter, '1‘. P., Phys. Rem, V01 A5, N0 10, 1972.

51:01, A. S., Shklovskiy, B. I. and A. 1.. 21m, PIS'HA V MP, V01 17, N0 4,
1973.

Kaklyugin, A. s. and G. E. Nomn, 'rv'r, Vol 11, N0 2, 1973.

Klkoln, I. K. and A. P. Sanchenkov, FIZIKR WW I METALIDVEDBNIYB, Vol 24,
No 4, 1967.

Cohen, H. N. and J. Jortner, Phys. Ram, V01 A10, no 5, 1974.

298

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

97.

98.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hansel, P. and P. U. Prank. REV. HOD. PHYS., Vol 40, No 3, 1968.
Alekseyev, V. A. and A. A. Vedenov, PIS'MA V mm, Vol 16, No 2, 1972.
Alekseyev, V. A., M, Vol 8, No 3, 1970.

Alekseyev, V. A., A. A. Andreyev and V. Ya. Prokhorenko, um, Vol 106, No 2,
1972.

Alekseyev, V. A. and A. A. Vedenov, PIS'MA V th, Vol 12, No 7, 1970.
Gitterlnan, M. and V. Steinberg, PHYS. REV. 1.211., Vol 35, No 11, 1975.
Imrapak, A. 6., M, Vol 12, No 6, 1975.

Vetchinin, s. P., A. G. Kbrapak and I. T. Yakubov, Doc. cit... Vol 10, No 5,
1972.

nurapak, A. G. and 1. 1‘. Yakubov, Doc. cit., Vol 9, No 7, 1971.
De Groot, C. and P. Hazur, "Neravnovesnaya termdinaniko" [Nonequilibriul

Thermodynamics], translated from mglish, Abscow, Izd-vo inostrannoy liter-
atura, 1974.

Landau, L. D. and Ye. M. Lifshits, "stetisticneskaya fizika" [Statistical
Physics], Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Neuka, 1964.

Kucherenko, V. I. and G. A. Pavlov, thHl‘P, No 5, 1978.

Yeletskly, A. V., L. A. Palkina and 8. M. Smirnov, 'Yevleniya peremsa v
slaMionizovannoy plazas" [Transfer Phenomena in weakly Ionized Plasma) ,
Moscow, Atonizdat, 1975.

Nikitin, Ye. Ye. and B. H. animov, UFN, Vol 124, 1978.

Lick, M., J. Hilbert and B. W. muons, “Transport Properties of ﬁelimn Pm
200 K to 50,000 K,“ Cambridge, Perganon Press, 1965.

Kieffer, L. 3., "Atomic Date on Electron Collision with Atoms and Molecules,"
Boulder, Colorado, Perganon Press, 1973.

Burke, P. G. and J. P. 8. Mitchell, JOURNAL OF PHYSICS, Vol 36, No 6, 1973.
Kudrin, 1.. P. and A. A. Dozorov, AMAYA ENERGIYA, Vol 27, No l, 1969.
"Spravochnik po teplorizicheskin svoystvan gazov i rhidkostey" [Reference
Manual on memophysical Properties of Gases and Fluids], edited by N. B.
Vargaftik, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1972.

Radtsig, A. A., in "mimiya plazny" [The dienistry of Plasmas], no 2, Moscow,
Atonizdat, 1975.

299

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
99.

100.

101.

102.

10 3.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kalitkin, N. 11., L. v. Kuz'nina and V. s. Mov, 'Tablitsy termdinani-
cheskikh funktsiy 1 transportnykh koefﬂtsientov plazuy" [Tables of Them-
dynamic Emotions and Transport Coefficients of Plasma], Moscow, IPM AN
555?, 1972.

Grekov, 1.. 1., Yu. V. Houkvin, V. S. Ronnychav and O. N. Pavorakiy, 'Oano
awe svoystva nckotorykh qazov pri waokikh tomratuxakh' [Main Proportion
of Some Gnu: at High Temperatures]. Moscow, Izdatel'otvo mhinoatroyaniyo.
1964.

Mason, 8. 8., ﬂ. O'Hara and P. J. Smith, JOURNAL OP PHYSICS, Vol 85, 1b 1,
1972.

Smith, L‘. J. and R. J. Hum, JOURNAL OF CHMICAL PHYSICS, V01 41, N0 9, 1964.

Sanuylov, Ye. v. and N. N. Taitalaurt, M, V01 2, No 2, 1964; Inc. ck...
V01 7, No 1, 1969.

Sokolova, I. A., ZhPH'rE‘, no 5, 1971.

malik, In, PHYSICS OP FLUIDS, V01 11 NO 2' 1958, Ibidu V01 2' N0 3' 19590
Belov, v. A. and N. I. Kluchnikov, M, V01 3, No 3, 1965.

moms, v. 8. and Yu. N. Belyayev, DAN 5581!, Vol 173, No 12, 1967.

Sanuylov, Ye. v. and N. v. Voskrasenakaya, 1n "Iaalodovaniya w fizichaakoy
gazodinamikc" [Investigations on Physical Gas Dyna-1:3], macaw, Izdatal‘atvo
Nauka, 1966.

Bender, C. F. and B. R. Davidson, JOURNAL OF cmcu. PHYSICS, V01 49, 1b 11,
1968.

Chang, c. x. and R. 3. Walker, Phys. Rev” Vol 178, No 1, 1969.

Erhard, H. R. and R. K. 8. 301131119, JOURNAL OF CHDIICAL PHYSICS, V01 49, N0
12, 1968.

Gentry, W. B. and H. B. Harlan, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, V01 49, No 5, 19
1968.

Good, R. G. and C. J. Hope, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, V01 53, N0 2, 1970.

Helbing, R. K. B. and E. H. Mthe, JGJRNRL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, V01 48, N0 9,
1968.

Krupenic, P. H., 3. Mason and T. '1'. Vandcralice, JOUML OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS,
Vol 39' lb 6' 1963.

Hum, R. J., a. A. Mason and r. J. Smith, doom or cmucn. PHYSICS, V01 41,
No 9, 1964: pmsrcs or rwms. Vol 8, No 6, 1965.

Abrachamson, A. A., Phys. Ram, Vol 178, No 1, 1969.

DOVOto, R. 5., PHYSICS OF FLUIDS, V01 9, N0 6, 1966.
300

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
119.

120.

121.
122.

123.

124 .

125.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prank-Kanenetskiy, D. A., "Diffuziya i teploperedacha v khilichsskoy kinet-
ike" [Diffusion and Heat Transfer in (musical Kinetics], Moscow, Izdate1'-
stvo Nauka, 1967.

Gens, A. V. and G. A. Tiukiy, IZVBSTIYA AN 5581!. 53m mm 2510'
KDS‘l‘I I M, NO 6, 1972.

Holland, 2. J., Phys. Rev., Vol 57, No 1.
Scneidernann, s. 3., NASA CR, No 213, 1965.

Tirskiy, G. A” DOKLIDI AN SSSR, V01 155, No 6,- 1964: PRIKL. HAT. I m:-
IQ, No 1, 1969.

Titskiy. G. A” O'ICHET "11" W, No 1016, 1969.

Suslov, o. N., G. A. rirskiy and V. v. Shohennikov, zhm'rr. No l, 1971.

Bibliography to chapter 3

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

9.

10.

11.

Krascella, N. In, "Tables of the Caposition, Opacity and Thermodynamic
Properties of Hydrogen at High taperature, NASA. SP-3OOS, 1963.

Patch, R. It, "Absorption Coefficients and Opacities for manger: Plasma at
High Pressure,“ NASA, m—X—l902, 1969.

Soloukhin. R. I., Yu. A. Yakobi and A. v. min, "Opticheskiye Unraltteris-
tiki vodorodnoy plazmy" [wticsl characteristics of a Hydrogen Plasma],
Novosibirsk, Izdatel'stvo Nauke, 1973.

Main, R. P., “Opacity of silicon-Rydrogen Mixtures," NASA, (ZR-72749, 1970.

Krascena, N. L., "meoretical Investigation of the absorptive Properties
of stall Particles and Heavy-Atom Gases," NASA, CR—72749. 1970.

Kuznetsova, N. I. and G. B. Lappo, M, Vol 17, No 1, 1979.

Grekov, L. 1., Yu. V. Hoskvin, v. s. Ronsnychev and O. N. Favorskiy, "Osnov-
nyye svoystva nekotorykh gazov pri vysokikh teeperaturakh" [Main Properties
of Some Gases at High Temperatures], Noscow, Izdate1'stvo Mashinostroyeniye,
1964.

Parks, 0. 2., 6. Lane, J. C. steward and s. Peyton, “Optical Constants of
Uranium Plasuu," NASA, KR-72348, 0-8244, 1968.

Kuznetsova, N. I. and G. a. Lappo, M, Vol 17, No 3, 1979.
nobkin, s. 3., G. B. Lappo and E. Ye. Son, M, Vol 17, No 6‘, 1979.

Prank-Kanenetskiy, D. A., "Fizieheskiye protsessy vnutri zvezd" [Physical
Processes Inside stars], Moscow, Pizaatgiz, 1959.

301

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

12. Becattey, 0., 'Radiatsionnyye proteessy v plazne" [Radiation Processes in a
Plasma], Translated from English. Moscow, Izdatal'atvo Mir, 1959.

13. Smarteld, A., "Stroyeniya atone i molekuly' [The Structure of the Atom and
Molecule], Vol 1 and 2, Moscow, Goetekhizdat, 1956.

14. Gilliam, S. and P. H. Brown, ASTROPBYSICS am, V01 104, No 3, 1946
15. Bibeman, L. H. and G. 8. Norman, 0?", V01 91, No 2, 1967.

16. SCIIOIVIIIO, W. 8., ASTROPHYSICS mm, V01 39, No 2, 1964.

17. John, ’1‘. L. and A. R. “1111:“, 301mm. 0? PHYSICS, V01 35, N0 9, 1972.

18. sobel'nan, I. 1., 'Vvedeniye v taoriyu atouxykh spektrov" [Introduction to
the Theory of Atomic Spectra], Moscow, Fizmatgiz, 1963.

19. 11191138, D. R. and E. Teller, ASTROPHYSICS JCXJRNAL, V01 90, N0 3, 1939.

20. Pritzker, A., K. Dreaeeler and w. Haelg, JQSR'r, Vol 15, No 12, 1975.

21. Mussel, K. H. and R. F. O'Oonnel, PHYS. 1.211., Vol 513, N0 2, 1975.

22. Bethe, H. and a. Solpiter, 'Kvantovaya nekhanika atonov e odnim i dvunya
elektronami' [Quantum Mechanics of Atoms with One and M Electrons] , trans-
lated from English, macaw, Pia-atgiz, 1960.

23. Burgoss, A. and H. J. seaton, RSV. non. PHYS., V01 30, NO 5, 1958.

24. Moore, c., 'Atounic Energy Levels," Vol 1, New York, Perqanon Press, 1949.

25. Hudson, R. D. and V. 2. Carter, J. OPT. 506., Vol 57, No 5, 1967.

26. Hudson, R. D., J. CHM. PHYS., V01 43, No 6, 1965.

27. Pano, D. and J. Cooper, "Spektral'nyye raepredeleniya sil oetaillyatorov v
atomakh" [Spectral Distribution of Oscillator Forces in Atom], translated
from English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Nauka, 1972.

28. Dietnar, B. and H. Pothe, JQSRT, V01 9, No 1, 1969.

29. mkvin, Yu. V., OPTIKA I SPBRTRDSmPIYA, V01 15, N0 6, 1963.

30. Steihaue, D. IL, L. .1. human and R. D. Coven, Report Doe-Alamo Sc. Lab.,
LIL-4501, 1971.

31. Bazaar, S. and J. My, INTERNATIONAL JWRNAI. OF MASS SPMMMETRY AND ION
PHYSICS, Vol 21, NO 1, 1976.

32. Chupka, W. A. and J. Borkowits, JOURNAL OF CHMICAI. PHYSICS, V01 48, NO 11:
1968.

302

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JJ.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.
40.
41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

50.

51.

FOR OFFICIAL USE .:.Y

Chandrasekhar, 8., ASTROPHYSICS JOURNAL, Vol 102, No 2, 1945.

Brenscom, I... in "Atomnyye i molekulyarnyye protsessy" [Atonic and Holecular
Processes], edited by D. Beitz, translated from English, Moscow, Izdatcl'stvo
Mir, 1964.

Iyevlev, V. 11., IZVBSTXYA AN SSSR. SERIYA ENERGBTIKA I TRANSPORl‘, No 6, 1977.
Corliss, C. and w. Boseman, "wroyatnoati perekhodov i sily ostsillyatorov 70
clemntov" (me Transition Probabilities and Oscillator Forces of 70 Elements),
translated from English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo Mir, 1968.

Purser, A. A. and V. S. Vlasov, 1mm, Vol 10, No 2, 1936.

Grim, H., "Spaktroskopiya plazmy' [the Spectroscopy of a Plasma], translated
from English, Moscow, Atomizdat, 1969.

Wiese, w. I... M. H. Smith and B. H. Hi1es. HSRDS, NBS-22, 1969.
Barager, M., Phys. Rev., Vol 111, No 2, 1958.
Kalb, A. C. and H. R. Griem, Phys. Rev., Vol 111, No 2, 1958.

Sobel'man, I. 1., "Vvedeniye v taoriyt atomykh spektrov‘.‘ [Introduction to
Theory of Atomic Spectra], Moscow, Izdatcl'stvo Nauka, 1977.

Pennar, S. s., 'Kolichestvennaya uolekulyarnaya spektroskopiya i irluchatel“
naya sposobnost' gazov" [Quantitative Molecular Spectroscopy and the miuive
Capability of Gases] , translated from English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo inostran—
noy literature, 1963.

Rosan, B. , "Spectroscopic Data Relative to Diatomic Molecules, New York-
Iondon, Pergamon Press, 1970.

Gurvich, 1.. v., G. A. Khachkuxuzov, v. A. Hadvadav et a1, "Winamicheskiye
svoystva individual'nykh veshchestv" [memdynanic Properties of Individual
Substances], Vol 1, edited by V. P. Glushko, Moscow, Izdatel’stvo AN SSSR,
1962.

Khachkuruzov, G. A., OPTIKA I SPBK‘I‘ROSKOPIYA, Vol 21, No 1, 1966.

Hartree, 0., "Raschet atomykh struktur" [Calculation of Atomic Structures],
translated from English, Moscow, Izdatel'stvo inostrannoy literatura, 1960.

Spinglcr, R. J., JQSRT, Vol 9, No 8, 1969.
Shin, H. JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 20, NO l, 1952.
Allison, A. C. and A. A. Dalgarno, JQSRT, Vol 9, No 12, 1969.

Holniewitz, L. JOUIWAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 51, No 11, 1969.

303

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
52.
S3.
54.
55.
S6.
57.
58.
59.

60.

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

7o.

71.

72.

73.

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Karo, A. M. and A. R. Olson, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 32, No 3, 1960.
Soshnikov, V. N., UPN, V01 24, N0 1, 1961.

Davies, D. , TRANSACTIONS OF PARADAY SOCIETY, Vol 54, No 7, 1958.

Velasoo, R., CANADIAN swarm. OF PHYSICS, V01 35, No 10, 1957.

Jazmin, w. and R. Nickolls, PROC. ROY. 8°C., V01 84, No 2, 1964.

Jane, '1‘. and w. Norris, meAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 32, No 3, 1960.
Crawford, H. and R. MacDonald, CANADIAN JGIRNAI. OF PHYSICS, V01 36, 1958.
welsh, H. In, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, V01 19, No 2, 1951.

Crawtord' "up H. “18h. J. P. C. mmld and Jo mks, "lyi- mvo' V01 90,
No 2, 1950.

Van Kranendonk, J., Byron and R. Bird, PHYSICA, V01 17, No 11, 1951.

Van mundonk, J., PHYSICA, V01 23, No 11, 1957.

Hargonaw, H. and H. Lewis, REVIEW 01’ moms PHYSICS, V01 31, N0 3, 1959.
Vujnovic, V., .168“, V01 10, No 7, 1970.

Hour, 8. and H. Barongor, Phys. Rev” V01 118, No 3, 1960.

Koval'skagu, G. A. and v. G. Semt'yanenko, in “Svoystva nizkocemperatumy
plazny 1 metody me diagnostiki" [Properties of a m-I‘aperaturo Plans and
Methods of Diagnosing It], Novosibirsk, Izdatol'atvo mm, 1977.

Rapper, C. 1'” Phys. Rev. , V01 149, No 1, 1966: Vol 165, 1968: V01 169,
1969.

Gurovich, V. 'rs., L. K. Heronkova. and V. S. Bngel'sht, DAN SSSR, V01 221,
No 2, 1975.

Kobzov, G. A., Yu. K. Kurilenkov and G. 8. Norman, M, V01 15, N0 1, 1977.

Stamstin, A. N., Dissertation for candidate of mynicmtlmtical Sciences,
NIIYaP em. 1971.

Alekseyev, A. N. and M. A. mitskiy, in 'Prineneniyo meadov kvantovoy
toorii poly: k zadacham mogikh tel” [Application of Nothods of Qantun Pield
Theory to Many-Body Problm], Moscow, Atomimt, 1963.

Roldugin, V. I. and I. '1'. Yakubov, 'rV'r, V01 15, N0 2, 1975.

Nozsnyai, 8. P., JGSR‘r, Vo1 13, No 10, 1973.

304

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
74.

7s.

76.

77.

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

Rozsnyai, a. P., Phys. Rem, V01 A3, N0 6, 1972.

within, N. N. and L. V. m'nine, "Tables of Thermodynamic Functions," Pre-

print I911 AN sssn, Moscow, 1976.

zink, I. w., Phys. Rev” Vol 176, No 2, 1968.

Pryeznov, V. K., A. V. Ivanove and V. Ye. Fortov, zhm, Vol 76, No 2, 1979.

Bibliography to chapter 4

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

9.

10.

11.

12.

1'3 .

14.

15.

Kndrin, L. P., "Statisticheskaye fizike plezny" [stetisticel Physics of a
Plane], Boom, Atomizdat, 1974.

"Ocherki fiziki i khimii nizkotempereturnoy plezuy" [Essays on the Physics
and Chenistry of a Iow-Tmpereture Plesm], Moscow, Izdetel'stvo Neuke, 1971.

Asinovskiy, E. I. and V. A. zeygernik, TV'I‘, V01 12, N0 6, 1974.

Biberman, L. M. and G. E. Norman, UFN, V01 91, No 1, 1967.

Norman, G. E. and A. N. Sterostin, TVT, Vol 8, No 2, 1970.

Iomakin, B. N., V. Ye. Portov and O. Ye. shchekotov, m, Vol 8, No l, 1970.
Portov, V. Ye., Yu. Ivenov et el, DAN SSSR, Vol 221, No 7, 1975.

Portov, V. Ye., A. A. Leont'yev et al, in "replofizicheskiye evoyotve nix-
kotenpereturnoy plezmy" [Thermophysical Properties of Iow-mereture Plasma],
Moscow, Izdetel'stvo Neuke, 1975.

Knopfeld, 8., 'Fizike vysokikh plotnostey energii" [The Physics of High
Energy Densities], edited by P. Kerldirol, translated fron English, Moscow,
Izdetel'stvo Mir, 1974.

Ross, R. G. and D. A. Greenwood, PROG. HATER. SCI., V01 14, No 1, 1971.

Alekseyev, V. A., A. A. Andreyev and V. Ye. Prokhorenko, UFN, Vol 106, No 2,
1972.

armhin, N. V. et el, Proceedings of the 12th International conference
Phen. Ion. Gases, Eindhoven, 1975.

Yernokhin, N. V., 8. M. Kovelev et el, M, V01 9, No 4, 1971.

Dillon, J. A. G., 8. A. Nelson and B. S. Swanson, JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS,
Vol 44, N0 11, 1966.

Grosse, A. V. J., INORGANIC NUCLEAR MISTRY, Vol 25, NO 2, 1963: JW 01’
PHYSICAL CHﬂlIS‘I‘R‘I, V01 66, No 1, 1962.

305

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.
17.

18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

35.
36.
37.

38.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

totem, V. ‘10., A. A. Ioont'yev and A. N. 0min, M, V01 13, No 5, 1975.
Alekseyev, V. A. and A. A. Vedenov, 01’", Vol 102, N0 4, 1970.

Kikoin, I. K. and A. P. Senchenkov, PIZIRA mm I MAWDBNIYB, V01 24,
No 5, 1967.

Alekseyev, V. A., M, V01 6, 80 5, 1968.

Khupek, A. G. and I. 'r. Yekubov, mm. V01 59, No 5, 1970.
Hansel, Ex, PHYS. 1.3712, V01 A31, N0 1, 1970.

Landau, L. D. and Va. 3. Zel'dovich, m. V01 14, No 1, 1944.
Rakhimv, A. '1'. and P. R. Ulinich, ZhEﬂ', V01 57, No 4, 1969.

Yakubov. I. '1'., th, V01 58, No 6, 1970.

Pinkelnburg, V. and H. Meeker, ”Elektrichesklye dugi 1 cemicheskeye plum“
[Electric Area and a Thermal Plasma], translated tron Ger-an, Izdatel'stvo
inostrannoy literatury, 1961.

Votlutskiy, V. N., A. ‘1'. 0nufr1yev and V. G. Sevest'yenenko, Pm, No 4, 1965.

sevast'yanenko, V. 6., Author's Abstract of Candidate Dissertation for Candi-
date of Physiconathmtical Sc1ences, Novosibirsk, m, 1966.

nyazev, Yu. R., 1'0. 5. Borovik et al, mm, V01 37, No 3, 1967.
Batenin, V. H. and I. V. mnayev, 'rV'r, V01 9, No 9, 1971.

Goldbech, C., et :1, JQSR'I‘, V01 12, N0 7. 1972: Compt. rend" Set. 8., V01.
272, No 3, 1971.

Pokin, V. IL, IZVES‘I‘IYA SO AN SSSR, SERIYA mu. BUR, V01 1, N0 3, 1971.
Poltzik, 8., W188. VBROFP. SIMS-K0132” V01 19, No 1, 1970.
Shimmvich, V. D. and L. V. Kiselevskiy, znps, V01 5, No 1, 1960.

Aleksandzov, V. A., v. D. Gurevich and I. V. Podnoshenskiy, ths, V01 1, N0 3,
1961.

muons, H. 9)., PHYSICS 0F FLUIDS. Vol 10, N0 6, 1962.
Asimvskiy, E. I. and V. A. hygarnik, M, V01 8, No 4, 1970.
minute. .7. and A. Kansans, AJAAJ, V01 5, No 7, 1967.

Asimvskiy, E. 1., Vs. P. va and I. H. Yertsev, 'rv'r, V01 16, N0 1, 1978.

306

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
39.

40e

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.
47.

48.

‘9.

SO.

51.

S2.

53.

54.

55.

56.

S7.

58.

59.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Peters, T., 2. PHYS” Vol 135, No 4, 1953.
Blenbau, N., "The High Pressure mercury Vapor Discharge,” Amsterdam, 1951.

"Diagnostike plemy" [Plasma Diagnosis], edited by R. Hudstoun and 5. Ward,
translated from English, macaw, Izdntel'stvo Mix, 1967.

Zel'dovich, Ye. B. and Yu. P. Bayzer, "Pizlke Manykh voln 1 vysokoteupere-
turnykh gldrodlnemlcheskikh ynvlenly' [Physics of Shock Nave: and High-Tn-
penture Hydrodynamic Phenomena], Moscow, ndatel'etvo make, 1966.

Kramer, s. 8., mm, Vol 94, No 4, 1968.

Win, 8. N. and v. Ye. Portov, WT, Vol 9, No 6, 1971.

SechenOV, V. A. and 0e Ye. mhekotov, m. 611’", v01 10, N0 5' 1972’ vol 12,
lb 4, 1974.

M11110, R. V. and V. P. Kantsodal, 10c. cit., V01 13, No 1, 1975.

Inyev, I. F. and L. P. Kudrin, Inc. ck", Vol 6, No S, 1968.

Gol'danskiy, V. 1., UN, Vol 100, No 4, 1970.

Kullk, P. P., Ye. K. Rosamv and V. A. Rylbyy, m, V01 15, No 2, 1977.
Al'tshuler, L. V., UPN, Vol 85, No 2, 1965.

Ivmv, V. V. and A. G. lbzanov, Ahﬂ‘, Vol 43, No 2, 1973.

Bakeyev, A. A., R. Ye. oninskiy and I. P. Shirkov, WT, Vol 7, No 6, 1969.
Bakeyev, A. A. and R. Ye. Rovinskiy, Doc. c1t., Vol 8, No 6, 1970.
Concbarenko, G. M. and I. N. Amanenko, Zhﬂ‘, Vol 40, No 12, 1970.
Bukovlch, S. M. and M. M. I‘opovlch, TV'I‘, Vol 10, No 2, 1972.

Genet, J. P., H. M. Popovlc et: a1, ‘mird International conference on Gas
Discharges, London, 1974.

Ogurtsova, N. N., I. V. Podmoshenskiy and V. H. shenina, 2111?, Vol 45, No 11,
1975.

Ogurtsova, N. N., I. V. Podnoshenskly and P. N. mgovtsev, M, Vol 9, No 3,
1971.

Nesterov, Ye. V., "Teplofizichesklye svoyatva nizkotmpetaturmy plenty"
[Thermophyeical Properties of low-Temperature Plasma], macaw, Izdetel'stvo
Neuka, 1976.

307

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
60.

61.

62.

63.

65.

66.

67.
68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.
75.
76.

77.

78.
79.
80.

81.

FOR OFFICIAL "SI". ONLY

Petmnko, V. 1., R. V. men at. .1, 2111?, V01 39, N0 10, 1969.

Bozovik, Yo. S., V. 1. Patronko at 81, 1.00. c1t.,

Borovik, Yo. 5., V. P. mesml 0t 31, Doc. c1t., V01 37, No 4, 1967.

mm, R. V, V. P. Kahuna-1 at 01, Proprint m1, 72-38, Kharkov, 1972.
Mild-um, S. 6., I. X. Konkashbayov and B. s. atria, M, V01 5, N0 3, 1967.

Andrew, S. I. and T. V. Gavrilova, 100. ch", V01 12, No 6, 1974; V01 13,
N0 1, 1975.

Androyov, S. I. and V. Ye. Gavrilov, OPTIn I SPEICI'ROSKOPIYA, V01 26, N0 4,
1969; V01 38, N0 3, 1975, zrm’, V01 40, no 6, 1970, ms, V01 13, N0 5, 1970,
M, V01 8, No 6, 1970.

Wheeler, C. 3., APPLIED PHYSICS, V01 42, No 2, 1971.

Kiparenko, G. P., Trudy MAI, No 27, Moscow, 1974.

Shimkov, H. F. and V. G. Hunvenko, Pmcudlngo of mth All-Onion Confor-
once on Physics of lav-Toupcuture Plasma, Kiev, 1975.

Wave, N. 11., I. V. Podnoshmkiy and V. L. sum, PIS'M V ”1‘17, NO 1,
1975.

Yomkhin, N. V., B. M. Kovalov at £1, M, V01 15, No 4, 1977.
Barol'skiy, S. G., N. V. Yoxnokhin et a1, zhm, V01 62, N0 1, 1972.

51110:, V. K., Ye. V. Krivitskiy and V. P. Litvinenho, zhﬁ', V01 44, No 11,
1974.

Okun', I. 2., 10¢. c1t., V01 41, N0 2, 1971.
Martin, E. A. JGJRNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, V01 31, N0 1, 1960.
Robinson, J. H., JGJRNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, V01 38, N0 1, 1967.

Kalitkin, M. N., L. V. Kuz'mina and I. I. Shoripdzhnnov, Reprint 19“, No 43,
Moscow, 1976.

labodcv, S. V., m, V01 6, No 1, 1968.
Cozuirliyan, A., HIGH WPBRATURE-BIGH PRESSURE, V01 2, No 3, 1970.
Martynyuk, M. H. at :1, Zhﬂ', V01 42, No 1, 1972, 2111101, V01 49, N0 2, 1975.

”Vzryvayushchiyeoya provolochki” [Exploding Him) , «had by 1'. Bennett,
translated from English, Moscow, Izdotol'otvo wotranwy litontury, 1963.

308

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
82.

83.
84.

as.

86.
87.
88.
89.

90.

91.

92.
93.
94.

95.
96.
97.

98.

99.

100.

101 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Glszunov, B. P., V. P. Kennedal and R. V. Hitin, in "l‘oplofizicheskiye svoy-
stve nizkotemperstumoy plea-y” [‘memophysicel Properties of low-Moretuxe
Plssna], Moscow, Izdetol'stvo Neuke, 1976.

Dikhtor, I. Ye. and V. A. Zeygarnik, DAN SSSR, Vol 227, N0 4, 1976.

Dikhter, I. Ye. and V. A. uygernik, M, Vol 15, No 3, 1977.

Shana, J. H. et el, Proceedings of 7th Symposium on 'mernophysicel Proper-
ties, N.B.S., 1977: Reprint (Elm-78782, 1977.

shener, J. H. at e1, PHYS. REV. MRS, V01 33, No l, 1974.

Norman, 6. E. 211917, V01 60, No a, 1971.

Jskuvov, J. ‘1‘., BBITR. PLASHAPHYS., V01 17, No 4, 1977.

Kunevin, A. 'r., A. V. Kizillin and Yu. S. Korshunov, M, V0110, No 6, 1974.

Brevyy, B. 6., S. P. Vetchinin, A. V. Kirillin and A. '1'. Knnevin, loo. cit.,
V01 15, No 1, 1977.

lmskin, B. N. and V. Ye. Portov, zhm, V01 63, No l, 1972.

Landau, L. D. and Ye. M. Lifshits, "Mekhenike sploshnykh sred" [Tho Mechanics
of Continuous Media], Moscow, GI’I'l‘L, 1954.

Ionskin, B. N. and V. B. Portov, "Recent Developments in Shock 'rube Research,"
edited by D. Borshsder end w. Griffith, Stanford, 1973.

Bospslov, V. Ye., V. K. Gryunov, A. N. Drenin end V. Ye. Portov, 2361?,
Vol 69, N0 6, 1975.

Portov, V. ‘10., s. I. Husyenkov 0t e1, TV'I', V01 12, No 5, 1974.

Portov, V. Ye., A. A. leont'yev et al, zhm, Vol 71, No l, 1976.
Zhernoklotov, H. V., v. K. Gryaznov et el, 211m, V01 75, No 1, 1978.
Portov, V. Ye. and A. N. Drain, PIS'MA V zhm, Vol 20, No 1, 1974: in
collection ”Goreniye i vzryv" [Combusion and Explosionlmasoow, Izdetel'stvo
Neuke, 1976.

Glushek, B. l.., H. V. Zhemoklotov and V. N. Zuberev, Proceedings of First
All-Union Symposium on Pulse Pressures, Moscow, 1974.

Bushman, A. V., B. N. maskin at al, znm, V01 69, No 5, 1975.

Bushman, A. V., B. N. Win at e1, Report mice of Fourth All-Union om-
:erence on Physics of low-Wants Plum, Vol 1, Kiev, 1975.

309

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
102.
103.
104.

105 .

106.

107 .

108.

109 .

110.
111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.
117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

123.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Portov, V. Ye. and Yu. G. Krasnikov, Zhi'l‘P, V01 59, No S, 1970.
Sechenov, V. A., 8. Yo. Son and 0. Yo. shchckotov, M, V01 15, No 2, 1977.
Pavlov, G. A. and V. I. Kuchonnko, M, V01 15, No 2, 1977.

Ivanov, Yu. V., V. B. Mintsev ct a1, PIS'MA V zh'rr, V01 2, No 1, 1976: 2113-1",
Vol 71, no 6, 1976.

Toikulin, M. A. and Y0. G. Popov, ”Izluchatel'nyye svoyotva Marilyn: voln v
gazekh" [The waive Properties of shock Waves in Gases], Moscow, natal“-
stvo Nauka, 1977.

Wigner, 8., TRANSACTIONS 0? PARADAY SOCIETY, V01 34, N0 4, 1938.

Isenov, z. A. and G. A. Nomn, 211m, Vol 62, N0 6, 1972.

Cook, N. A. at 11, JOURNAL OF APPLIE PHYSICS, V01 30, M. 12, 1959; JCAIRNAL
OF APPLIED PHYSICS, V01 29, No 11, 1958: PROC. ROY. 8°C., V01 A259, No 1299,
1961.

Boxer, G. and N. "012131, ANNALEN PHYSIK, V01 17, No 1, 1956.

Packet, 6. and H. Weizel, ZBIMG NA‘I‘URPORSCHUNGEN, V01 12., N0 5, 1957.
Knmetsov, N. M., 'Temdinamicheskiyo funkton 1 udarnyyo adiabaty vozdukha"
[Thexnodynamic Functions and Adiabatic Shock Curves of Air], Moscow, nutcr-
stvo Hashimstroyeniye, 1965.

Davts, H. C. and A. K. Campbell, JOURNAL OF APPLIED PHYSICS, V01 31, NO 7,
1960.

Ruaakov, H. M. of: at, M, V01 13, No 1, 1975) V01 15, N0 3, 1977.

Ogurtsova, N. N., I. V. Pomoahonskiy and V. L. Smirnov, M, V01 15, No 3,
1977.

Fortov, V. Ye., M, V01 10, No 1, 1972.
Mont'yev, A. A. and V. Ye. Fortov, Pm, V01 3, No 1, 1974.

Bushman, A. v., V. Ye. Portov and I. I. Sharipdzhanov, M, V01 15, No 5,
1977.

Skldmore, c. and E. Morris, Proceedings of Symosiun on Thermodynamics of
Nuclear Material, Vlonna, May 1962.

Beaumont, P. and L. Leyqonie, Proceedings of 5th Synponiu- on Detonation,
Posadena, 1971.

Al'tshulor, L. V. of. a1, 2W, V01 80, No 1, 1980.

Homo, K. and K. W. “1.01101, JWRNAI. OF amen. PHYSICS, V01 57, No 6, 1972.

Jackson, J. and L. Klein, Phys. Rom, Vol 177, No 2, 1969.

00A
124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

16.

FOR 0Fl-1('IAL USE ONLY

Vedenov, A. A. and A. I. thkin, m, Vol 36, No 4, 1959.

Gryaznov, V. 1., A. N. Ivanova and V. E. Portov, 13th International confer-
ence on thomena in Ion Gases, Berlin, 1977.

Khomkln, A. L., M, Vol 12, No 5, 1974.

Valuyev, A. A. and G. E. Noman, Doc. clt., V01 15, No 4, 1977.
Vorob'yev, v. s. and A. L. Khomkln, Inc. c1t., V01 14, No l, 1976.

Ivanov, Yu. v., V. K. Gryaznov et a1, Inc. clt., V01 14, No 3, 1976.
Isakov, I. M. and B. N. Win, Inc. c1t., Vol 17, No 2, 1979.

Ivanov, A. A. and V. Ye. Chertoprud, Doc. cit., Vol 16, No 4, 1978.
Iyevluv, V. M., IZVBSTIYA AN SSSR. SBRIYA TBPIDBNERGBTIKA, NO 6, 1977.
Batenin, V. M. and P. V. Minayev, I.Q.S.R.'l‘., Vol 17, No 1, 1977.

Kobzev, G. A., G. A. Kurllenkov and G. 8. Norman, M, Vol 15, No l, 1977.
Kurilenkov, Yu. K. and P. V. Hinayev, znm, V01 74, No 2, 1978.

Bospalov, V. Ye. and V. Ye. Pbrtov, PIS'HA V zh'I'P, V01 4, N0 8, 1978.
Volkov, V. N., S. K. TITAROV and B. K. Thachenko, 'rv'r, Vol 15, No 2, 1977.
Carverale, E. H. et a1, JCORNAI. OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS, Vol 46, N0 8, 1967.
Yos, J. H., AVCO/RAD, Technical Report RAD-TR-65-7, 1965.

Knopp, C. F. and A. B. Campbell, PHYSICS 01’ FLUIDS, V01 9, N0 4, 1966.
Mottshmann, J., 2. PHYS., Vol 191, No l, 1966.

Spitzer, I... “Plzika polnost'yu ionizovannoy plum" [Physics of a Completely
Ionized Plasma], translated from English, Moscow, Izdatel'atvo Hit, 1965.

Could, H. A. and H. E. Dewitt, Phys. Rev” Vol 155, No 1, 1967.
thara, '1‘. and 0. Aono, J. PHYS. SOC. JAPAN, V01 18, N0 6, 1963.
Conwell, E. H. and V. F. Weiskopf, Phys. Rev., Vol 77, 1950.

Alipov, S. v. and B. K. ’l‘kachenko, 'rv'r, Vol 13, No l, 1975.
- END -

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat, 1980

6521

C90: RI!I/|,'021/c

331
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY