FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10165
4 December 1981

Translation

IN THE FOCUS OF TIME

83!

Abikoam Samuylovich Istlgin

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. .Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUilE THAT DISSEHIHATION

OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10165

4 December 1981

IN THE FOCUS 0F TIHE

Leningrad‘v FOCUSE VRBMBNI in Russian 1976 (signed to press 7 Dec 76)

pp 1-210

[Book ”In the Focus of Time' by Abikoam Samuylovich Istigin,
Izdatel'stvo Lenizdat, 2,500 copies, 210 pages]

Contents

Annotation.................................................................

What is Ilﬂl)?..............................................................

My First Interview, with Digressions.......................................

A Tour Through the Engineering Building....................................
The birth of unique telescopes.......................................
Interview in the SKB of nicroscopy...................................
On the trail of the M910 tubYooooeeeeeeoeaeeoeeo-ooooaa-o-oooooooooo
The great grandsons of Potokor.......................................
Those who saddled the rainbow........................................

The Firm Conducts Research.................................................

Pomenko. 'who can do everything' ....................................
"an and miracle gratings-see.so.oeeeeeaeeeeaeeeeesecoeaoeeeeeeooeeoee

workim Guards...-00.00.000.000...00.0.00...OIC.0.COIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00......
Ivanov's personal latter

To be first...o............oo.o....no....o........oo.......-.........

Towards Maximum Precision............................................
Family treasures.....................................................
The generous life of Valentin Petukmoeeeeeeevteoceetoss-eeeeeeoeevo
Optics is their family matter........................................
Kostygov Universities......................................................
The Diploma of the Shop Chief..............................................
nor: (gcientific Organization of Lubes? at the rim

Focal Point of Communist Education.........................................

Young Communists...........................................................

15
17
22
23
25
27

32
32
41

d8
52

56
61

67
73
84
95
100
122

127
POR 0??!an USE ONLY

n.8mk Which “as a Thousaw Authotﬂ..u....o......uo..o......oo...........

mm During the 10th Five-Year Plan........................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WA‘I'ION

The world's largest and most improved optical telescope that per-
nits Soviet scientists to look into the far stellar worlds of the
universe became operational on the eve o: the 25th CPSU Congress
in Stavropol'skiy Kray, not far from Stanitsa Zelenchuk. This
unusual astrophysical complex was developed with the assistance of

the collective of the Leningrad Optical-Mechanical Association
ineni V. I. unin.

Telescopes are only one of the types of products produced by 1.0m.
Optical equipment with the mark of this association is widely
known in our country and abroad.

The book of leningrad journalist A. s. Istigin "In the Pocus of
Tine' is devoted to the collective of Leningrad optical special-
ists--its workers and torenen, scientists and designers, organizers
and production managers.

The new labor advance of the collective of Leningrad optical spe-
cialists to inplenent the historical decisions of the 25th CPS!)
Congress and to fulfill the tasks of the 10th Five-Year Plan--a
five-year plan of efficiency and quality-«heed of schedule is
shown in the book, consisting of docment excerpts written clearly
and convincingly.

The book is intended for the mass reader.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WHAT IS LOHO?
toningrad v FOCUSE VREMENI in Russian 1976 (signed to press 7 Dec 76) pp 1-210

[Book "In the Focus of Time". by Abikoam Samuylovich lstigin, Izdatel'stvo Lenizdat.
2,500 copies, 210 pages]

[Text] During the days when this book was being prepared for press, far from Len-
ingrad in Stavropol'skiy Kray. there occurred an event which was judged to become

an extraordinary benchmark in the knowledge of the universe. On a mountain over»
grown with trees, 2,000 or more meters above sea level, not far tron Stanitsa
.Zelenchukskaya, a gigantic thousand-ton dome seemingly light-transparent and weight-
less from atar. flashed with silver. This was the tower of the world's largest and
most modern optical telescope ETA. People aimed its "eye” at one of the stars

which no other telescope was capable of looking at.

here at the astrophysical observatory scientists have already been able to obtain
the first pictures of stars 10 million times weaker than those that the human eye

is capable of seeing. Moreover, this new telescope permitted people, due to its
special optical devices, to look at stars right side up rather than upside down.
The light collected in the abyss of the universe by the bowl of the main six-meter
mirror, is directed toward the observer and a distant mysterious star floating in
the cosmic ocean suddenly becomes quite close.

In February 1976, on the eve of the 25th CPSU Congress, the ETA telescope was
turned over for operation atter intensive and caretul testing. Soviet science was
armed with an unusual astrophysical complex that carries an information flow about
the universe .

Pour 1etters--LDHo--are clearly visible on the telescope-~the result of the enor-
mous labor of scientists, designers and toremen. These letters are the Leningrad
optical-Mechanical Association imeni V. l. lenin.

It was here that the ETA was developed.

The joyful news arrived at Lone. General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee
Comrade Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev heartily congratulated all the workers of the firm
with their important labor achievement.

FOR OFINC1AI.USE‘DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Scientists. designers, engineers, technicians and workers, collectives and organ-
izations that participated in development and putting into operation the world's
largest astronomical telescope:

Dear Comrades!

I heartily congratulate you with your remarkable labor success-~with putting the
world's largest optical telescope into operation with main mirror six meters in
diameter at the Astrophysical Observatory, USSR Academy of Sciences.

Development of the unique telescope is an important advance of Soviet science and
technology. Soviet scientists have now gained the opportunity of developing their
scientific search even more widely and of penetrating more deeply into the secrets
of the universe and of making a new contribution to the human storehouse of
knowledge.

Putting the largest astrophysical complex into operation is the result of the joint
creative activity of many scientists and design collectives, industrial enterprises
and organizational and political work of party, trade-union and Kcmsomol organiza-
tions. This is a good example of successful implementation of the plans of the
communist party and the Soviet government for development of science and new con-
vincing proof of the scientific and technical progress of our motherland, the crea-
tive enthusiasm of the Soviet people and the labor successes that greet the 25th
CPSU Congress.

I wish you dear comrades new achievements in the glory of our great socialist
motherland.‘

Several days passed and the joyful excitement still persisted with regard to such a
high evaluation of the labor of the creators of the unusual telescope, as it was
newly discussed from the tribunal of the 25th CPSU Congress. In his concluding
speech at the Congress, Leonid Il‘ich Brezhnev proudly enumerated the high points
of the victory of Soviet science, technology and industry, also named the ETA tele-
scope with the mark LOMO.

LOMO is one of the production associations created in 1962 in the city on the Neva
River at the initiative of the Leningrad Oblast and municipal committees of the
CPSU that laid the basis for concentration and specialization of Leningrad industry.

Tens of Leningrad companies have been organized since then, without even talking
about the hundreds of associations that have arisen throughout the country. Their
successful work again and again confirms the correctness and fruitfulness of the
course taken by the party to create production and industrial associations.

This idea was also emphasized at the 25th Party Congress in the official report of
General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee Comrade Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev:
“ﬂow when extensive experience has been accumulated and when the directions in
which we must move forward have been better denoted, we can and should accelerate
readjustment of the economic mechanism."

'Brezhnev, L. I., "Otchet Tsentral'nogo Komiteta KPSS i ocherednyye zadachi partii
v oblasti vnutrenney i vneshney politiki" [Official Report of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee and Routine Tasks of the Party in the Field of Internal and Foreign Policy].
Moscow, Politizdat, 1976, 70 pages.

 

2
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The word "who" can now be read on themands and thousands of different optical

devices and apparatus that meet modern requirements of the scientific and technical
revolution.

The mark 'mno' is on the fluorescent biological microscope that makes it possible
to look at the finest details of a living cell, to discover its secret and thus to

supplement the arsenal of scientists with a new weapon in the struggle for human
health.

The mark "LONG“ is on the first Soviet telephoto lenses for color television equip-
ment, on movie cameras and movie projectors and on black-white and color cameras.

The mark ”mm" is on modern studio and portable tape recorders and a nuniaer of
devices for the most rapid spectral analyses of mtals, alloys and oils.

The mark “mm" is on miracle machines capable of renewing into new form old, but

valuable movie films on which it would seem time has left an irreversible impres-
sion: warped film and scratches.

It was these machines made at the company that helped to restore to life the leg-
endary film ”The Battleship 'Potemkin',‘ which is now again making victorious voy-
ages on the screens of many of the world's countries. Timeless movie documents
that recorded the exploits of heroes of five-year plans and World War II, have
been regenerated for future generations.

The mark "mm" is on miniature devices which weigh grams and which can be placed
in a matchbox and on those which weigh many hundreds of tons.

The company now produces more than 600 names of the most complex devices. It has
approximately 20,000 customers. mm has participated with unfailing success in
many international exhibitions and fairs. who now delivers products to more than
100 countries of the world.

The most prominent scientists from the most diverse institutes--the State Optical
Institute, the Botanical Institute, the Scientific Research Institute of Polymer-
ization Plastics, the Physicotechnical Institute , the Main Astronomical Observatory
and many others--cooperate closely with the firm.

There is nothing remarkable in this. The products of who themselves are designed
to advance science and technology in the most diverse fields. And it is now not
simply a production association. The firm has become a unique school of experi-
ence in modern organization of socialist production and management and a laboratory
of scientific and technical progress in an entire sector of industry. Leno, having
joined thousands of communists, is a school of universal and mass education of
leading, widely educated and ideologically hardened workers. The Leningrad Opti-
cal-Mechanical Association was awarded the rank of collective of commist labor

in 1971, the first in Leningrad. It bears three Orders of Lenin on its banner.

At the end of December 1971 the Leningrad Optical-mchanical Association was vis-
ited by General Secretary of the CPS!) Central Oomittee L. I. Brezhnev. Leonid
ll'ich becane acquainted with the experience of organization of labor and

3
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production management. He viewed the products which the association produces. He
talked with workers and engineers. He was interested in how the complex plans for
economic and social development are being fulfilled here and how the everday and
living conditions of the workers and specialists are and what their wages are and
what is being done to develop new recreation areas and sanitoriua-resort treatment
of the firm's workers.

In thinking about this book. the author did not pose the task of relating the firm‘s
history. He was interested primarily in how it is today. The affairs of a multi-
thousand collective, its concerns. dreams and ideas, the good changes in the fate
of the firm's workers during the 10th rive-Year Plan and the conditions under which
they live and work now.

This book is the result of direct impressions from “travelling“ through the firm
and from meetings with its peoplenfron rank and file workers. engineers. research-

ers and designers up to the managers of the association. The impressions, reports
and interviews made up the contents of this book.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FIRST INTERVIEW, WIT“ DIGRESSIOBB

One can see buildings on different streets of Vyborg that are crowned with the
same luminous emblem: a spire with a small ship on the point and letters near its
base. If one looks a little more closely, one can easily note that the spire with
the small ship on the point is nothing more than the letter I. and together with
the letters below you can easily recognize the familiar word "who.“

Regardless of what the enterprises that becane part of the firm were called before,
they all bear the name of the association itself. Unlike other associations, there
is no main enterprise here. The Leningrad Optical-Mechanical Association is a
unified and inseparable economic organism. It short, it is a company!

My first. interview is with the general director of 1.0m, hero of Socialist Labor
Mikhail Panfilovich Panfilov. To meet him. I head for old Claugunnaya Ulitsa where
my eye is immediately caught by a remarkably light and airy building similar to a
gigantic bird that has spread its flexible white wings for vigorous flight.

All the management services of the firm, including the office of the general direc-
tor, are located here.

The director is sparing in his words. his time is calculated in minutes and not
only is he an important economic manager. "any of his responsibilities are along
social and party lines, not even mentioning the fact that Mikhail Panfilovich is a
deputy to the USSR Supreme Soviet and was elected a delegate to the 23rd and 25th
Party Congresses. He has been awarded the state prize for participation in devel-
opment of the first Soviet firms.

Preparing for the first interview, I wanted to find out a little more about the
man who has been constantly on the captain's bridge of LONG for almost 25 years.
Mikhayl Panfilovich himself does not like to talk about himself. But if one can
express it so, the main years of his life have passed here at this enterprise and
they have an excellent knowledge of his biography here.

And the biography is a simple one: in the 1930s he was a lathe operator at a Bal-
tic plant. At the same time he was a student at the workers' high school. He was
later a technician-machine tool builder. But he was soon attracted by a sector
only beginning to make its first serious steps. Optical

And Panfilov crossed the threshold of com-«he State Optical-Mechanical Plant.
Binoculars, movie cameras and eyeglasses were made at this enterprise after the

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Great October Socialist Revolution. They took up making cameras. People of the
older generation remember them--black cones of accordians with the inscription
”Potokor.”

During the years of the First Five-Year Plan the enthusiasts of GOMZ overtook the
renown German company Zeis only in their most daring dreams. It would still be a
long time until this happened in practice. They did not have enough specialists.
The Zeis Company demanded gold for the most inconsequential consultations. The
GOMz workers then decided to organize manufacture of the products independently.

At the same time, at the end of the 1930s, M. P. Panfilov also came to GOMB. He
worked in the department of the chief technician. At the same time he studied at
the Leningrad Institute of Precision Mechanics and Optics. The young technician
participated in development of new optical devices created by prominent scientists:
s. I. Vavilov, V. P. Linnik. I. v. Grebenshchikov and M. N. Xachalov. COME had
already organized manufacture not only of still cameras, but of portable film pro-
jectors and soon began to develop telescopes.

The young engineer was full of daring plans and thoughts.

When Panfilov was designated the chief technician of GONE, the plant was working

in an enemy-besieged city. he was soon elected secretary of the party committee.
The enterprise collective had to resolve a difficult problemo-production of weapons
for the front had to be organized quickly in the destroyed workshops, on the re-
mains of equipment, without experienced specialists who had been evacuated to the
rear. And they did organize it!

But in the 1944 war year, a group of COM! engineers, including Mikhail Panfilovich,
unexpectedly presented to the Main Board of Weights and Measures an unusual model
of a clearly peacetime product--optical calipers that permit one to make measure-
ments with precision up to a tenth of a micron.

Soon Panfilov, a man of solid and decisive character who lived through all the
grief, joy and tests of the war years together with the plant collective, became
the chief engineer and then the director of the enterprise.

Director's experience made it possible for him to gain a wider View of many prob-
lems of organization of labor and production management. He carefully studied
problems of economics and began to think about a number of phenomena which it had
been a custom at that time to regard as ”natural" phenomena. th, let us say, does
some washer or bolt made at one plant cost a kopeck and that made at another cost
10 or 20 times as much? why must the same articles be made at different plants?
Why are they satisfied with long obsolescent equipment at many enterprises in the
age of automation and electronics? Why is everything “our own" at plants of the
same type producing products of the same type: our own design office, our own
casting, stamping, repair and tool shops?

Lots of money was wasted because of the fact that each manager wanted to have "his
own garden,” be it small or be it poor. But still it was his.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And one got the idea how many people, devices and equiptnent could be freed up if
enterprises of the same type were combined and were specialized and if production
was placed on a wide base and the freed resources were used to iuprove the effi-
ciency and profitability of production.

Thus the idea gradually ripened of creating a production association, for example,
optical-mechanical firms in which enterprises of the same type would be combined.

of course, the idea of creating production associations at that time, the very be-
ginning of the 1960s, excited many managers, scientists and party workers. It was
born in time by the need to solve those problems for which the framework of previ-
ous methods of organization and management of production became even more closely

related. This was especially true at those large industrial centers such as
leningrad.

And of course, this problem whose time had come was discussed thoroughly and re-
peatedly in the uningrad party obkom. The party obkom carried out important work,
attempting primarily to convince managers of the need to restructure production
management according to the modern level and to prove the prospects which would be
opened up for production associations.

0n the instructions of the CPSU obkom, Panfilov prepared a report to assemble the
most active members of the Leningrad party organization.

he sat for long hours behind his desk on which lay the plans, layouts and economic
analyses. These were convincing. thoroughly thought-out substantiations and argu-
ments in favor of creating associations which should become the most important di-
rection for development, concentration and specialization of production.

Panfilov's report at the meeting of the most active members was heard with inter-
est and aroused many conversations and debates. But the most important thing: the
ideas and specific proposals on organization of firms was warmly approved.

It was decided as a result. at the suggestion of the Leningrad obkom of the CPSU
and economic bodies, to create nine sector production associations. This was in
October 1962. They contained 43 industrial enterprises and u scientific research-
planning-design and production organizations. The main criterion for association
of enterprises was the homogeneity of the product produced and the technological
identity of production.

There were already approximately loo production and scientific-production associa-
tions in Leningrad by the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan. But who was one
of the first. And Mikhail Panfilovich Panfilov headed it.

And now, after this necessary digressiOn, let us return to his office. It is late
in the day. It is unusually quiet after the working day. Unwillingly recalling
those distant "first steps” of the firm, Mikhail Psnfilovich says:

"This was a very difficult time and very complex in all respects. Restructuring

was begun in all aspects. The restructuring was both organizational and psycholog-
ical. where was it simplest, let us say, to break down old walls and to build in

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OITICIAL USE ONLY

their place new ones and where was it best to break obsolete habits, traditions and
concepts and to change the views of Ian toward his position and role under new
conditions.“

'91th didn't encounter at the beginning of the trip, not even mentioning the dif-
ficulties which arose in solving fundamental problems related to the birth of the
firm: changing the management structure, reconstruction which would premit rapid
specialization of shops and sections, complex mechanization and automation of pro-

auction processes, introduction of progressive forms of organization of labor and
much more.”

“Inevitably ‘oonflict situatione‘ arose here and there--after all we were dealing
primarily with people and their characters and attitudes had to be dealt with."

"Many questions had to be resolved urgently. They had to be solved together with
the party organization that combined many hundreds of communists."

”The party organizations helped to work out a management structure which would per-
mit the most efficient use of the creative capabilities of each worker, having
clearly defined his position under the new production conditions. The party com-
mittee thoughtfully assisted the management of the firm in selection and placing of
personnel in all the decisive sections. An entire army of agitators and propagan-
dists explained the prospects and advantages of association in the shops, sections
and in all subdivisions. They did everything so that people would rapidly feel them-
selves members of one large family-othe name of which was LONG."

"And of course, matters were not limited only to 'discussions about the future.’

The party cosmittee and trade-union organization helped to solve the most essential
problems related to significant improvement of living conditions from the first
days of creation of the firm. For example. a cafeteria with large dining hall was
constructed on the territory of the former Kinap organization. A branch of a poly-
clinic and a library were opened and a comfortable mvie hall was equipped.“

"All this was very important. And people became convinced-~the firm had no 'suck-
ers' and what an individual plant was incapable of, the association was quite capa-
ble of ."

"roving forward, it should be said that the first steps in this direction were the
beginning of an extremely important campaign prompted by the party organization of
the firm, which largely determined the future of the firm: develop complex plans
for socioeconomic develOpment for each five-year plan, compiled with the participa-
tion of thousands of association workers. These plans encompassed all aspects of
the firm's activity, including economic, engineering, technology, improvement of
production and management, personnel training and improvement of working conditions,
everyday life, recreation and wages.‘

"The firm's cost-accounting funds formed with regard to conversion to the new sys-
tem of planning and economic stimulation of production. became the firm base of
this planning. We are still talking about plans for the social development of
LOMO. The main topic of our conversation is new methods of production efficiency
and quality and everything to which special significance was given at the 25th

Party Congress. And much of the firm's experience is especially instructive today."

8
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Efficiency," Panfilov formulates his idea. "is the ratio of a useful result to
the expenditures for achieving it if one talks in general terms. Efficiency is
always concrete. We reconstructed production mich made it possible not only to
improve working conditions to the maxim but to introduce specialization on wide
scales. The result is that two rubles of additional output of commercial products
are achieved for each ruble of capital investments.“

"Yes.production efficiency became the firm's slogan from the very beginning of its

creation. And then its most important source became specialization and
concentration. "

"This was not as simple to accomplish. Mcialists carefully worked out nmnerous
versions of the future plan of specialization and cooperation. Detailed calcula-
tions and analyses of each version were made. Only those which firmly supported
the economic effect and increased product quality and production volunes were
adopted. One link pulled another behind. Specialization made it possible to con-
centrate manufacture of homogeneous parts, assemblies and articles in the shops
and to concentrate homogeneous or similar production processes."

”Here are the materials of different reports. Figures, figures. What do they say?
Imagine an enormous. multicomplex plant, from month to month. from year to year, an
increasing voluse of output which becomes ever more complex on which ever higher
requirements are placed. And you will learn that an enterprise. coping successful-
ly with all these problems. reduces by one third the nomenclature of scare materials
consumed. It requires one-half or less fewer tools and accessories. This saved it
rour million rubles during one year alone."

"how did everything begin? From the rear."

"mery army commander knows that the beginning of victory is to support the relia-
bility of the rear forces.”

"We began with this prerequisite at mm. The rear forces were the auxiliary ser-
vices. The repair and machine shops were the first to be reorganized. They exist
at every plant. It seemed that you couldn't get along without them. And now they
have disappeared. But a single large major metal cutting equipment repair shop
was created. Specialization was introduced in the sections. And again the suffo-
cating figures: old. uncoordinated shops could repair 250-270 machine tools during
a year. But a single new shop could repair 450 machine tools! It could be even
greater but there is as yet no need for it."

"Imagine: one repair service alone after reorganization freed 1,500 square meters
of production area and hundreds of machine tools. It was possible to use immedie
ately with the highest output 100 qualified workers and approximately 20 engineers.

”And one more detail: the concentration of equipment of the same type and intro-
duction of mass production technology reduced the total cost of repair by more
than one third. Three tool shops were made into one. But whereas 'a little bit
of everything' was done in each one previously, each one has its own, strictly
defined profile: one produces only dies, the other produces molds and press molds
exclusively and the third produces measuring cutting tools.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Large shops appeared on the freed areas. For example a tool and die or an automa-

ton or let us say a plastics shop. They were all supplied to the maximum with mod-
ern equipment.

"And as many optical shops remained as there were before. But these are quite dif-

ferent shops with new planning and new, modern equipment and the main thing, with
their own specialization.

"The galvanic coating shop was renovated. The workers said that they previously
had to unload the alkali baths by hand. The workers show me with satisfaction how
seven automatic lines with program control now operate here that have replaced

people in dangerous operations. One person controls all the galvanic processes
from a special console.

”It is curious to look at the work logs of many LOMO workers who control complex

machinery. For many the word operator, engineer and adjuster has been placed after
the words multiskilled worker, rigger, loader or farmer.”

”The higher the degree of mechanization and automation, the fewer the needs for
people engaged in heavy physical labor. Approximately 2,000 workers in the asso-
ciation have been released from heavy labor. They have been trained at the train-
ing kombinat and have attained new specialities which the firm now needs.

"The first decade of operation of none convincingly demonstrated the correctness
of the main direction toward which the Leningrad obkom of the CPSU oriented the
firm: concentration, specialization and complex mechanization. however, this is
insufficient for production efficiency. A principally new system of centralized
management is required .

"Former plants were converted anew into territorial plants headed by a chief in-
volved in current operational management. But soon, as specialization was develop-
M,mwuumnmw«nmnnunleuimmuﬁshmwaMcmuustm
more complicated. A natural need developed in the new restructuring of management,
but not by the principle of territorial disposition but by production “occupations":

optical, sound engineering equipment, optoelectronic devices, optical preparation
and tool.

“The plant chiefs are involved only in operational supervision of individual groups
of shops similar in profile by means of dispatcher equipment.

"The general director manages the association. Functional directors and assistants
to the general director carry out management work. The following duties are dis-
tributed among them: director for production and economics, technical director,
director for construction and reconstruction and so on.

The main accounts department and the department of technical control and the depart-
ment of scientific organization of production, labor and management are directly
subordinate to the general director. .In cooperation with scientific research in-
stitutes and higher educational institutions, this department works out scientifi-
cally based forms of organizing production and management and is involved in me-
thodical problems of production planning and accounting.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A council of directors, which eerises activity mder the supervision of the gene
eral director, has also been created in the association. It includes the functional
directors, managers of leading departments and representatives of party and trade-

union organizations. The council discusses problems of production and technical
activity.

The principles of unanimity with broad participation of the oomunity and thus com-
bined in discussion of fundamental problems of the economic life of the association
and production management. Colleageel discussion of the most inportant problems
makes it possible to work out solutions with regard to collective experience.

This structure helped to overcome parallellism and duplication in work, to elimin-
ate approximately 30 departments of form plant achinistrations and to free a sig-
nificant nunber of highly qualified workers. Part of them was transferred directly
to production and part was transferred to new departments, without which develop-
ment of future problems of LOMO and problems of scientific organization of produc-
tion, labor and management is now impossible.

Thus, without increasing the total number of personnel, a department of specializa-
tion and reconstruction, a department of automation and mechanization, a computer
center, a department of scientific organization of production, labor and management
and a departmnt for planning technical preparation of production were created. A
special, permanently acting department where architects, planners and artists work,
was organized. Psychologists, physiologists and medical workers were recruited to
improve production. Everything was done to create the nest favorable working con-
ditions for people in the shops, laboratories and departments.

The style of efficiency penetrates all spheres of production life. Only strict
and substantiated calculation is taken into account.

And although the firm has grown rich rapidly and has gained control of millions,
accounting is still done in rubles and kopecks. ‘rrue, once the financial bodies
almst accuse the general director of being wasteful.

And here I should 8981!! We a deviation. Here is a brief episode related to me in
the central design office.

Once the firm turned over several expensive camera to the photoamateur section of
the Palace of Culture. And then began: from what, why and from whom did this
generosity come? This was no one's personal property.

But there was a calculation here and a long-range aim. The fact is that that at
one time one of the new cameras, regardless of how the designers worked on it, did
not find the expected demand among buyers. for some reason they didn't like it and
for some reason it didn't suit them, despite a nunber of advantages over previous
models. The firm experienced specific losses.

It was then decided to turn over several cameras to experienced amateurs. To turn
them over, but only with the condition that they send in their comments: what

didn't they like in these cameras and how should they be improved? after all,
even the most talented designer cannot always foresee and take into account

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

everything that an amateur photographer would like and what he notices when work-
ing with the camera every day under the most different conditions.

The hopes were justified. The amateur photographers sent detailed letters to the
firm. They contained many sensible remarks and valuable suggestions and advice.
Results were felt very rapidly. The designers and technicians studied and learned
from the remarks and suggestions of the amateur photographers. And quite recently
the unprofitable camera gained popularity and brought small profits to the firm.
They taught and learned to manage skills at all levels. They learned to economize
both great and small. Take, for example, redesign. Everyone understands that you
can't get along without considerable capital investments when shops must be rear-
ranged. equipment must be rearranged or changed and new continuous-flow conveyor
lines must be developed.

But expenditures differ. of course. it was simplest to turn the order to contrac-
tors: But they demanded too much money. And also they did not promise to do it
rapidly.

They decided it was expensive and disadvantageous. They had to get along through
their own efforts.

Yes, this cost collosal efforts and stress to the entire collective. Moreover,
they were able to carry out an unprecedented reconstruction. And current work was
not stopped in a single shop or in a single section. Production output continued
at the former rate, strictly according to plan.

This was not easy. The party. trade-union and Komsomol organizations managed to
mobilize people and to explain to them the importance and urgency of the problem
and the significance of reconstruction for the fate of the entire collective of
the firm. All work on reconstruction proceeded strictly according to schedule.
when necessary, construction workers willingly assisted production workers. Much
was done on days of mass subbotniks.

The firm was transformed and became a modern enterprise meeting all requirements
of technical progress as a result of reconstruction. Automatics, mechanization
and introduction of advance technology opened new horizons for an increase of pro-
duction efficiency. It was made even more profitable.

Profits increased continuously due to the rapid growth of labor productivity and
the quality of articles, the demand for which increased every day. The LOMO mark
became ever more popular both in the Soviet Union and abroad.

Creation of a central design office where first-class specialists were assembled
primarily assisted in this. They had at their disposal an experimental and produc-
tion base equipped with the latest technology and their own experimental shop in
the engineering building. Each designer began to be responsible for development
of a device, beginning from the idea and draft to serial production.

More and more optical devices were produced at the worldwide engineering level.
More and more foreign countries expressed the intention of purchasing LDMO
products.

12

FOR OFFICIAI.USE4)NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Once, during the first years when the firm was established, D. Rockefeller came to
none while a guest in our country.

Panfilov was showing the famed multimillionaire around the enterprise. They were
walking along the carefully washed asphalt of the plant yard, buried in flowers and
greenery, beside well-dressed glass and concrete buildings. They looked into the
shops where machine tools, automatic and conveyor lines and electronic devices were
reflected in the polished floors exactly as in a mirror. People were working
quietly, without concentration, without the least fuss.

Panfilov proudly noted that the firm made an impression on the guest. When they
returned to Mikhayl Panfilovhch's office, Rockefeller said:

"Mr. Panvilov, I am prepared to invest money in such a business. I can offer
credit.“

"You are very kind,” answered Panfilov. And with a smile he asked: "And under
what conditions?"

"As is customary in the United States: 8-10 percent of annual profits. Inciden-
tally, we could concede somewhat to your firm."

And he heard this answer:

“Thank you. But the state takes only 3 percent from us. So that you understand
yourself."

"What then,” said the multimillionaire, “I was happy to make the acquaintance of a
business person. Think it over. About the profits.“ ’

When I reminded him of this, Panfilov laughed.

”Yes, profit is an important indicator under our conditions,“ says H. P. Panfilov.
"These are new millions from our own fund for technical re-equipping of production.
Moreover, this is also a realistic base for us so as to force out universally and
finally laborious manual operations. The profits were spent on apartments for
workers, on preservation of health and on services for the firm's euployees. And
all this is an inportant weapon against such a scourge as personnel turnover."

The problem of turnover here at m long ceased to be an acute problem. It is
remarkable what a normal life, good working conditions and excellent prospects for
creative growth of all workers and especially for advancement of youth will

accomplish.

It is no accident that almost all engineering and technical personnel in the asso-
ciation were quite recently machine tool operators, installers, grinders and metal
workers.

Who better than they can know the specifics of production? Therefore, the general

director together with the party con'mittee advances to management positions pri-
mari 1y those within the firm, that is those who have grow: up at who and who know

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fine points of their duties, who are concerned about the firm and who use their
experience and theoretical knowledge skillfully. The possibility of conducting
such a personnel policy specifically determines the long term aspects of socio-
economic planning. hundreds of workers attain secondary engineering and higher
education, besides general education, without leaving the pay of the firm.

A valuable beginning, universally supported by the party and trade-union organiza-
tions of low-brigades that service a single piece of equipment but on different
shifts are paid at the same rate-was widely developed during the Ninth Pive-Year
plan. These brigades turn over machine tools “on the run" to each other without
readjustment. And the result is 30 minutes saved by each worker during a single

shift alone. And there is collective responsibility for the quality of each
article.

The nature and content of the labor of workers outside the brigades were also
changed.

Joining occupations were developed both main and auxiliary workers. For example,
the functions of lubricators and saddle makers were turned over to equipment repair

and servicing metal workers and many loaders mastered the occupation of electrirr
arc welder.

”When you write about the internal affairs of the firm." noted Panfilov, "do not
embellish anything. We still have many difficulties and many unresolved problems.
For example, take equipment. There is still not enough new equipment for all en-
terprises. Here is just one example. A small plant that manufactures dividing
heads was attached to us. We converted this plant to a shop but equipped it with
new unit machine tools and organized a production line. And the shop imediately
began to produce 2.5 times more products than when it was a plant. How many people
were released! Generally, in one way or another, our firm, like others, lives and
operates and increases capacity. There can now be no doubt of any kind: a produc-
tion association completely justifies itself and the future of our entire industry
is in such firms. Their development is in the interests of the state.’I '

One cannot enumerate nor retail all the terms which ensured the success of the
firm during the Ninth Five-Year Plan and the confident entry into the 10th Five-
Year Plan in a single interview, even the most extensive interview.

But as a popular saying goes, "It is better to see once then to hear it a hundred
times."

So let us complete our “journey" through mm. Let us visit together in the shops,
laboratories and design offices, everywhere where a continuous, constant struggle

is underway to solve the main task of the 10th Five-Year Planna five-year plan of
high labor efficiency and a five-year plan of quality.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A TOUR T880068 TR: ENGINEERING BUILDING

when the construction materials almost a kilometer long appeared on Chugunnaya
Ulitsa and when the tower cranes appeared above them, many thought and guessed:
what will be built here? New shops? This is something unfamiliar.

Moreover. an enormous, long building four stories high with reflecting windows from
floor to ceiling soon began to sparkle with the whiteness of wells and became filled
with sunlight, while fluorescent lamps could be seen inside at dusk. with an even,
soft bluish glow. New residents--scientists. engineers. designers and researchers
from the different plants that had become part of the firm joined together for the
first time joined together under a single roof~~appearsd in it. They looked with
amazement-at the enormous light rooms where everything was ready for them: from
well-appointed furniture to portable computers, special transparent grids for drew-
ing printed-circuit cards and hundreds of other necessary accessories which will be
required in calculations, research and design.

If a large meeting must be held, a complex design must be discussed or opinions must
be exchanged, there is a vast conference hall.

The new engineering building contains modern apparatus and the latest equipment:
domestic, imported and “our own" made at the firm itself. And alongside is a spe-
cial experimental shop. Here they can embody in metal any idea of a designer. They
can make an existing mockup of any assembly or of an entire device and can check the
value of an idea or the accuracy of calculation in practice rather than
theoretically.

All the design services of formerly separately existing enterprises were included
in the TsKB [Central design office]. But the work is now arranged by a new princi-
ple--ciear specialization. Specialization in each direction of instrument building.
Specialization in general engineering problems. Maximum elimination of any inter.
mediate links in management.

A vertical structure has been developed here. It appears thusly: engineer-re-
searcher--designer--chief of specialized design office-chief of central design
office. And immediately thelnmmer of managers in this subdivision was :sduced by
almost one half! And one can say that operativenees in solution of many problems
was doubled.

15

FORlOFFﬂ]A1.USEINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to and for a high technical level of a future device. whether it is the design
office of astronomical instruments or spectral devices, movie equipment or measur-
ing equipment, video recording and so On, it contains not only design groups but
specialized laboratories required for complex engineering solutions.

Incidentally, the number of design groups contained in special design offices is in
no way constant. It may also vary if the nature of devices which are being devel-
oped at a given time varies.

with all the narrow specialization of these instrument 5:: (Specialized design of-
fice], they also have common engineering problems: engineering calculations. cal-
culations of optical systems, reliability, esthetics, packaging and packing. Spe-
cialized general engineering subdivisions also solve these problems. For example,
the engineering calculation design office, the artistic design office, reliability
laboratory and packaging and packing design office. Moreover, although the name
of the latter design office sounds very dull and prosaic, it performs the most im-
portant work. It develops beautiful, elegant packing and packaging for all the
association's products according to the specifications of the instrument SKE-

Development of this design office made it possible to standardize packing crates,
packaging and even individual components of their preparation-~to introduce a uni-
fied system of drawings and to introduce new, inexpensive and reliable materials
for manufacture of packaging: cardboard, styrofoam and plastics. As a result
cases of breakage of instruments were reduced sharply and labor productivity in
design of packaging and manufacture of it was greatly increased.

A department appeared which services designers with all auxiliary work in techni-
cal documentation. Photostats are manufactured here and an engineering archive is
maintained. Electrography is used here for rapid copying of any drawings and docu-
ments are microfilmed here.

All these and other auxiliary subdivisions have one goal--to free to the maximum
the time of designers directly involved in development of devices for creativity.

Before starting our voyage through the firm's design offices, I came to the chief
engineer of the rare Viktor Alekseyevich Zverev--a young scientist. In the recent
past he was a graduate of the Leningrad Institute of Precision Mechanics and Optics
and is now a candidate of technical sciences. 2verev and the Tst are responsible
for the technical level of products produced by the firm in all directions of de-
velopment of instrument building and they determine the main direction of scien-
tific research work at the firm.

Viktor Alekseyevich is enthusiastic about his work and recruits knowledgeable peo-
ple and specialists in many fields of science and technology who are related or
can be related to development of modern optics.

"we are convinced,” says 2verev, "that the most qualified specialists and scien-

tists should create new equipment primarily there where it is being directly devel-
oped. The development of science is dependant to a large degree even more so on

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the equipment which our firm develops. The 25th CPSU Congress," he continued,
”emphasized with special force the iuportance of rapid introduction of the advances
of scientific and technical progress into production. And we at wno have already
felt the contradictions when one organization is responsible only for working out
drawings or developing a prototype of an article and another is responsible only

for industrial production of then. As a result soil is created for irresponsibil-
ity and lack of accountability."

Under conditions of the firm. it is immediately important that all designers be

responsible for the quality of any device with the who mark at literally all sta-
ges of development. '

This principle is especially important now when we have entered a five-year plan
of quality and our main task is to bring the firm's entire production up to the
level of the best foreign models. This is a difficult task but we are now up to it.

The 10th Five-Year Plan opens up the broadest field for creativity: one labors.
takes risks, tests and looks bravely into the future.

I saw how this slogan is accomplished in practice, having visited many design of-
fices and research laboratories of the firm.

The Birth of Unique Telescopes

I cross the threshold of the design office. Externally this looks like any design
office. It is quiet and there are people at their desks. The most complex instru-
mnts such as a giant reflector telescope are born here.

The firm did not let down the expectations of astronomers who believed that "they
can do everything“ at who. Scientists at the Byurakansk, Crimean, Zelenchuk
and other observatories have already received unique telescopes. And a nuber of
the met valuable discoveries have already been made with them.

The Soviet interplanetary station Venera-7 was launched into the universe and
rushed toward the stars and it was recorded by the Crimean telescope when it was
a distance of 160,000-170,000 kilometers from the earth. The positions of the
station itself were precisely and sequentially recorded on film.

The Crimean telescope has a "brother” at Byurakan. It turns out that the ”broth-
ers" are in no way twins. This is the tradition at m: the next instrument of
the same type should be improved.

And now the Byurakan telescope already has considerable advantages: the optical
circuit was modified and the capability of simultaneous setting of three different
light-detecting devices was provided if necessary. This is very inportant in re-
search. E‘or examle, replacing the spectrograph with a camera requires 30-40 min-
utes in the Crimean telescope. In the Byurakan telescope it is sufficient only to
rotate a diagonal mirror. This requires 2-3 minutes.

Both telescopes have photoguides (an automatic star-tracking system). But the
Byurakan telescope has a remote device that permits one to see a celestial object

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on a screen, to control all systems from a single central station and moreover.
guiding accuracy is considerably higher.

And. finally. there is the well-known era with six-meter mirror which we! discussed
at the 25th CPSU Congress.

Putting these devices into operation has alone advanced the USSR to first place in
Europe in the number of operating telescopes that meet the most under-n requirements
of science and technology.

Que: designer Bagrat Konstantinovich Ioannisiani was awarded the Ienin Prize for
development of domestic telescopes and a number of other astrophysical devices.

I an talking with Bagrat Konstantinovich at his desk. The idea of developing the
largest telescope with which astronomer scientists obtained much of the most valu-
able data and made unique investigations of distant stellar systems and intergal-
lactic nebula which could not be "reached" previously because no one had a detailed
astronomical instrument to cover the distance of millions of light years, was first
born here. And now it exists and was developed at zone. This is the largest, most
powerful and most all-seeing eye on the planet. This unique telescope was con-
structed over a period of 15 years under the direct supervision and with the par-
ticipation of general director of mm M. P. Panfilov.

Bagrat Konstantinovich talks simply about things of enormous significance and is
slightly ironic about himself.

"How and why did I become a designer? Simply because there was nothing else I
could do."

His life's path began at Leningrad many years ago even before the First Five-Year
Plan at the Ravenstvo plant. He was a transmission lubricator in a shop and than
a draftsman at KRASNAYA ZARYA. And later he dreamed at one time of becoming a
musician.

he did not become a musician but the harmony inherent to music and inspiration can
all be followed in his amazing creativity when he develops telescopes. A fusion
of beauty and power. And always the most optimun solution of the most complex
problem.

He began with the design of a school telescope. He developed a meniscus telescope
«the world‘s first--a telescope with mirror diameter of 2.6 meters. And finally
he developed the ETA.

"The main problem? There were many main problems." smiles Ioannisiani. "One of
the cost unpleasant was the rigidity of design. mis has always been a problem
for telescopes. The dimensions increase and the tubes increase and everything be-
comes many times heavier. And the law of deformation comes into effect. Finally.

the telescope tube bends and becomes distorted by its own weight. Finally, there
is a misalignment of some tenths of a millimeter. But this would have a harmful

effect on the quality of optical images. Hays must be found to compensate for
this."

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One looks and looks!
How much design and production research development of the mirror required.

One can ideally pour a gigantic piece of glass for a telescope but it still does not
become a mirror. The inevitable internal stresses occurring during casting must
still be removed. Otherwise the mirror ”walks" or rather "creeps" and becomes prac-
tically unsuitable for astronomical observations. Internal stresses were removed by
annealing which continued for 738 days! The most careful polishing of it continued
for about 2 years and then the six-meter “eye" had to be covered with the thinnest
aluminum layer no more than one thousandth of a millimeter thick in a vacuum This
operation with a part weighing 42 tons has never before been done in the world.

Or take the telescope supports. One hears simply "supports.” And each is three
stories high. It contains laboratories and auxiliary room. Elevators move inside
the supports.

"Yes, we developed the world's most powerful telescope with great light-gathering
capability or, as journalists now love to write, the earth's big eye. This permits
investigation of processes occurring in the most remote sections of cosmic space.
These investigations are inaccessible to other telescopes.”

Bagrat Konstantinovich related in detail about installation of the gigantic ETA,
about its capabilities and presented figures. technological data and calculations.
Ioannisiani took a pencil and began to calculate. He thought, knitting his thick.
black eyebrows on the bridge of his nose.

"Well. if one eliminates atmospheric interference and does not take the earth’s
sphericity into account, our telescope is capable of recording the light of a can-
dle ignited at a distance of 25,000 kilometers!"

This is what the prominent English astronoser Radish wrote to the chief designer:
”Dear Doctor Ioannisiani! Doctor Davis and I are exceptionally grateful to you for
useful consulatiion on the altazimuth telescope design. Your report on this was
favorably received. We here have good hopes for the future."

The gigantic telescope constructed by who has advanced worldwide science and en-
gineering practice.

Chief designer of the telescope. In the given case are not so much a designation
of an official position. They contain the very essence of the matter in which
Ioannisiani has been involved his entire life. after all. one can simply designate
a chief by position and he can be replaced. but to be the chief in such an extensive
sive. important and crucial matter due to his own talent. unlimited creative inter-
est and to have the skill to ignite it in others--not everyone can become such a

person .

Chief designer loannisiani has extensive experience: he designed the telescope for
the Alma-Ate observatory, a meniscus telescope for the Abastumani observatory and
2.6-meter reflector telescopes for the Crimean and Byurakan observatories.

19

roe omau. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when he was developing the 2.6-meter telescope, Bagrat Konstantinovich suggested an
essentially new deVice. simpler and more improved, instead of the long and univer-
sally accepted yokes that support the tube. There were also many proponents and
many opponents. Bagrat Konstantinovich listened to one and the other with identical
attention. Both versions were sent for confirmation. Ioannasiani's version was
given preference. The advantages are more than convincing: the compactness of the
design and mainly the complete guarantee of high observation accuracy.

And here is the new building of the USSR Academy of Sciences, already comparably
more complex with a gigantic reflector with six-meter mirror.

Up to this time only in the United States did they know how to develop a reflector
telescope with mirror diameter of five meters. The telescope mirror, as already
noted, is exceptionally complicated to manufacture, machine and relieve the stress.
The precision of the mirror working surface is determined in fractions of a micron
and itself weighs approximately 42 tons with an area of approximately 27 square
meters. And this mirror must be firmly held and rotated. That means a movable
support that excludes deformation of the mirror reflecting surface must also be
developed. And then one must decide from what material to make the mirror itself
and with what and how to machine it. This technology did not exist previously.

At today's level of science and technology with the endless variety of fields re-
lated to each other, it is impossible to image a designer of such a multicomplex
instrument as a modern telescope in isolation even one who is supertalented.

These problems can be solved only through the efforts of a large, friendly collec-
tive of scientists. designers and investigators joined together at the firm. That
is why Bagrat Xonstantinovich talks with great warmth about his own numerous col-
leagues at the design office and about such prominent specialists in this field as
N. s. Samofal, V. V. Bobashov, V. A. Kovalev, I. K. Pavlov, L. P. Karabutova, H. V.
lobachev, V. N. Pavlov and others who headed the group which made complex calcula-
tions with unprecedented accuracy of special relieving of the unique mirror on the
support, preventing deformation of it.

To aim such a gigantic telescope more accurately and more rapidly, a complex tele-
scope control system had to be developed which includes a digital control computer.
And they developed this system and the control computer at the firm itself in one
of the laboratories which is managed by candidate of technical sciences Ye. N.
Neplokhov. Bagrat Konstantinovich also notes many other names of scientists. en-
gineers and technicians from the astronomical office itself and the workers and
people of unprecedented skill and inexhaustible creative thought intimately asso-
ciated with them. These are engineers V. B. Labinskiy and B. G. Kovalev, engineers-
assemblers I. M. Varvarkin, A. A. Nekrasov and F. M. Barkovskiy, young engineer

G. !. Amur who managed the machining of the unique mirror and these are experienced
"celestial optics' technician V. V. Oshurko, a researcher. and many others.

An now a few words about similar BTA telescopes developed at who. also unique in
their type.

"we made three telescopes quite recently," relates the chief of the design office
and chief designer of these telescopes v. V. Demidov, "which indicated the begin-
ning of a new phase in astronomical instruent building.”

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, take the AZT-l2 telescope. This is a l.S-meter mirror reflector. It
has three optical system. The first of them is a so-called primary focus system
with quartz corrector designed to photograph elongated sections of the sky. the
second system is used for observations by photographic, photometric and spectograph-
ic methods. And the third system is needed to conduct spectral investigations.

Transition from one optical system to the other is accomplished by simple replace-
ment of individual optical components. This is carried out autunatically.

There is also the AZT-ll telescope. It is totally automated. It is designed for
photometry of the luminous fluxes from stars. The main mirror has a light diameter
of 1,250 millimeters. Aiming. tracking and control of the observation process, in-
put and output of filters, references and diaphragms, photographing the results and
making corrections--all these many operations are completely automatic. And a
special cybernetic machine controls the telescope. The memory of this machine is
such that it permits an observation cycle of several hundred stars to be programmed
and to make photometric measurements of them during a single night! But this is
already behind.

”And what is in the near future?"

”In the very near future there is a solar telescope for the new solar 'service.‘
There is also a series of chromospheric telescopes. There is also a meridian disk
for astronomical measurements."

"what things new are being done at Ten to accelerate the development of astronom-
ical instnments?"

“That is a valid question," says Demidov, "especially if one takes into account that
the number and complexity of problems in this field will increase sharply even dur-
ing the current decade."

Development of a single medium telescope 1.5 meters in diameter alone required 4-6
years in the past. If one takes into account the growing rates of ”moral" aging of
equipment, the problem of acceleration of development and introduction becomes one
of the main conditions of technical progress. We are faced with the problem of re-
ducing the cycle of developing astronomical instruments to 1.5 to 3 years. And
with the same if not fewer forces since a reduction in the development cycle should
be "won” by skill rather than numbers. And we have concluded that standardization
(even under conditions of individual production) becomes one of the levers with
which the periods of development and preparation of production and expenditures can-
not only be reduced. but labor productivity and the quality of our instruments and
their reliability can also be increased. This is the main task in development of
new instruments that are at the level of the best worldwide models and that some-
times exceed this level. And the efforts of the astronomical instrument builders
have been directed toward this task.

However, we must knock on another door.

21

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interview at the Special Design Office of Microscopy

The first microsc0pes were developed at Nurnberg more than 200 years ago. Many of
these old-timers have been exhibited in Moscow at the Polytechnical Museum along-
side modern microscopes. The tourguide, showing you their collection, says with a
smile: ”The difference between thn is like that between a postal carriage and a
spacecraft.“

A modern microscope is a most complicated device where electronics and automatics
serve optics and this makes the microscope an irreplaceable instrument of investi-
gators in the most diverse fields of science, engineering, medicine and industry.

To the question what sections of physical optics does the work of the office encom-
pass, they answered me: all sections.

The 5K8 of Microscopy produces the most diverse microscopes: biological, lumines-
cent, ultraviolet, infrared, polarization, metallographic. high-temperature and
microscopes for nuclear research and for microelectronics. The list of them is
very long. And there are also devices for microphotographic filming and micromovie
filming. The 3K3 is a unique organization in the USSR which is engaged in develop-
ment of luminous microscopes of different designations. The office also develops
masuring devices to investigate the roughness of machined surfaces and also works
on development of devices for local microspectral analysis.

One of the leading designers shows me an experimental model of the new loin-4 micro-
scope. They have long been waiting for it at the metallurgical plants and at sci-
entific research institutes.

It is very important in manufacture of metal to determine as accurately as possible
the structure and different inclusions. The Him-4 metallographic working microscope
helps metallurgists to investigate more precisely the structure of alloys. It is
equipped with optics with plane fieldnso-called plane optics. Due to this, the
microscope clearly "sees" an object through the entire visual field, whre as its
predecessor produced a sharp image only in the center.

"How does standardization in microscope design appear in practice? Here is at
least one exanple."

"An entire series of polarization microscopes was renovated during the Ninth Five-
rear Plan. Transmitted light microscopes--the MIN-8 and MIN-l0 (for investigation
of transparent minerals) and the reflected light microscopeuthe MIN-9, designed to
work with opaque minerals--have been replaced by standardized devices of the Pom
[expansion unknown] type. The labor productivity of geologists will be increased
significantly by increasing the operating qualities, introducing new optical com-
ponents and changing the design paramters."

The designers, mathematicians and investigators of the 51:3 are working on a broad
topic of standardizing these microscopes. A group under the supervision of R. H.
Raguzin manages the design part, investigations are conducted by the group of chief
engineer A. 1. Prez, while new optical systems are calculated by specialists headed
by engineer 1'. A. Ivanova. Many microscopes developed by them have won the State
Emblem of Quality.

22

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Does your SIG develop only microscopes?“

“The thinking of designers and investigators of the SK! is directed toward develop-
ment of devices that considerably alleviate the work of geologists. For example.
we are working on an integration device to measure the quantitative composition of
minerals--a microrefractometer that permits one to determine the refraction of flu-
ids and others."

Incidentally, it becomes ever more difficult to determine where a microscope ends in
"pure form“ and where other devices begin since all modern optical devices are a com-
plex installation and include both a microscope, spectral equipment and also laser

equipment .

Incidentally, a word about the devices which the firm makes for geologists and met-
allurgists. There is amng them one which is a "hybrid" microscope and laser. Its
designation is microspectral analysis.

Geologists have discovered, for example, a hardly discernible point-~impregnation--
in a rock specimen. This is possibly a substance or mineral, a trace of which they
are seeking. But try to extract it to make an analysis. The problem is solved
simply by using the device: the specimen is placed under a microscope coupled with
a laser and this valuable point is found and the crosshairs visible in the micro-
scope are aimed at it. This means that the laser is also aimed at the point. A
flash and the impregnation is converted to steam while a spectrograph (it is also
contained in the device) records the composition of these vapors. This is a "three
in one” device for you: a microscope-spectrograph-laser. But lasers are another
matter of the SIG.

On the Trail of the Magic Ruby

Yes a laser is now known to everyone. During childhood many love to asuse them-
selves with a magnifying glass and to ignite a sheet of paper with the rays of the
sun. One or several watts of power are produced during this. modern physicists
who utilize light rays in their work have learned how to concentrate power of
100,000 kilowatts on a single square centimeter. The temperature of the light spot
reaches 100 million degrees. The thinnest light beam drills through diamond within
a fraction of a second. Impressive data!

The operating principle of the laser is quite simple. a crystal ruby rod is placed
alongside a powerful flash lamp. The ends of the rod have a coating. The electrons
in the ruby atoms are set into oscillating motion due to the light pulses until the
beam generated by them breaks through a narrow aperture in one of the deped ends of
the crystal.

They sketched the circuit at the design office and I saw a laser in operation in
the demonstration hall of the firm. It is demonstrated to touring school children
and in their presence the laser beam drills through a metal plate which the lads
and lasses take with them as a treasured souvenir.

Industrial production of lasers was first developed at who with the assistance of
scientists of the State Optical Institute and peaceful lasers designed for our

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

industry and medicine were also developed at m. Surgeons call them bloodless
scalpels. The most delicate operations on the eyes are made with these remarkable
instruments and oncologists use them successfully.

the laser design office is the youngest in the firm because this field of technol-
ogy is also very young. And the chief designer is comparatively young and we walk
with him into one of the optical shops to watch the birth of a laser.

A worker brought a ruby rod from a case. He was supposed to machine its ends with
very high accuracy.

I saw those people who were attentively following numerous instruments. The people
studied all parameters of newborn lasers, noted the slightest deviations from the
nouns and immediately decided what to do to eliminate these deviations. This was
also the main task of the adjusters.

workers--but the level of problems which they sole was an engineering level that
requires broad theoretical knowledge. The laser adjusters, like adjusters of other.
most complex devices at LOI'D, are usually people with an engineering education or
are students of vuzes.

Behind each door are enthusiasts and developers of models of new equipment, new
devices and apparatus which are thought up here, calculated and acquire the first

outlines in drawings .

Incidentially, almost all the movie theaters in the Soviet Union are equipped with
movie projectors with the mark who and the sound engineering equipment developed
and created at Loonuthe largest USSR enterprise in production of modern apparatus
for creation and showing of movie films--is used in almost all movie theaters and
in all the largest concert halls of the Soviet Union.

The deputy chief of the TleB Tamara Hikhayloma Senchugova talks about this:

"The engineering process of developing a film is very complex. Different devices--
preliminary sound recording equipment, dubbing and duplication. Sound amplifica-
tion equipment, modern microphones and loudspeakers are required for movie concert
halls and places of entertainment. The specialized design office develops all these

these devices .

The best specialists were concentrated in the office during organization of the
firm. This made it possible to carry out developments at rapid rates and at a high

technical level .

For example, the essentially new apparatus 2vuk reproduces the sound of ordinary
and wide-format films. Its sets are designed for the most diverse outputs. And
they can also be used for operating with an ordinary microphone, tape recorder,
radio receiver or phonograph-4n general, in the widest range of operations. The
2vuk immediately forced out many expensive amplifying devices of different types.
They were immediately taken out of production. The new apparatus is more improved
but is simpler to manufacture. It is designed on the basis of standardized units--

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preliminary ampli fication, power supply, loudspeaker heads and so on. Standardiza-
tion makes it possible to use a progressive technology, efficient organisation of
labor and naturally leads to an increase of productivity in the shops and also
makes it convenient to operate.

Movie theaters and clubs have received an interesting innovation during the past

few years. The KZVP-lo universal portable sound-reproducing device was developed
and put into serial production. It is designed to serve movie theaters and clubs
with capacity up to 200 viewers and also for mobile movie installations which num-

ber up to 150,000 in the country. This is a small, transistorired device designed
on the modular principle.

The Solist mobile sound engineering equipment, which is designed to serve stage
presentations, wag first developed in th. comtry at this SIG.

Cinematographer: who must frequently conduct filming during expeditions are assisted
by the Ritm-Z tape recorder, designed to record speech and music under full-scale
filming conditions. A special recording console that permits 10 pieces of equith
to be switched on simultaneously (monitored by the sound engineer) offers great op-
portunities to sound operaters.

The 5K3 has conducted considerable research to improve the sound amplifying equip-

ment which is designed for multipurpose halls. It now completely provides stereo-

phonic and monophonic sound amplification and sound reproduction when showing wide-
format. wide-screen and ordinary movie films having magnetic and photographic sound
tracks.

Unique sound amplification equipment has been installed in the large Kremlin palace,
in the building of the Presidiua of the USSR Supreme Soviet and in the reception
building. '

The design office develops standardized sound engineering apparatus for recording.
re-recording and copying magnetic sound tracks. Integrated circuits and transistors
will be used in the electronic units.

"We now have everything for successful operation,“ continues Tamara Hikhaylovna
Senchugova, "the firm makes available to us a special acoustic test room and a re-
search center of the laboratory."

Now work, create and bravely experiment.

The Great Grandsons of Potokor

The reader knows already that one of the first Soviet caterer-the totokor with
bellows camera-was born during the prewar years in the shops of com.

Now millions of modern amour-grandsons of the l'otokor with the mark Loam-are in
the hands of amateur photographers not only in the USSR, but in many countries of
the world-"England, Italy, West Germany and others. According to general acknowl-
edgement, IDMO cameras are now superior to the products of some foreign countries

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in their class in quality and, which is no less important, in cost. A number of
models and mockups of the latest cameras can be seen in the camera SKB and one can
meet their developers.

How many generations of amateur photographers dreamed about an automatic camera
which would free them from selecting the exposure time and diaphragm size prior to
taking a picture. And many factors must be taken into account to correctly deter-

mine these values: brightness, contrast, the light sensitivity of the film and so
on.

Hence there are frequent uncorrectable errors which not only amateur photographers
but professional photographers as well make.

"Our designers,“ they related to me at the camera 5K3, ”helped to a significant de-

gree in making the dream of amateur photographers come true by developing the Sokol
camera.“

The required shutter speed is set prior to filming. It is known that a fast shutter
speed of approximately 1/250 or 1/500 second must be set when filming moving sub-
jects, while the shutter speed has no significance when filming a landscape but in
this case it is very important to set the aperture size so that the depth of image
sharpness is increased when the object is diaphragmed. An automatic camera selects
the diaphragm size for the set shutter speed. If the amateur has set an incorrect

shutter speed for which the necessary diaphragm cannot be selected, the automatic
camera corrects the error.

LOHO designers went further, having developed the world's first five-program auto-
matic camera with preliminary information in the viewfinder on the actual values of
shutter speeds and diaphragms. The amateur only has to lightly press the start but-
ton prior to filming and the digital values of shutter speed and diaphragm appear in
the viewfinder which the automatic camera triggers.

The developers of the Sokol camera have obtained an inventor's certificate for it in
the USSR and LOMO has patented it in France and Japan. Moreover. this camera was
awarded important gold medals at VDNKh [Exhibition of Achievements of the National
Economy] of the USSR and at the International Leipzig Trade Fair. And despite this,
the joint work of designers and technicians is persistently continuing at the design
office on improving the operational characteristics, on simplifying the design and
on reducing the cost of the camera.

The enthusiastic designers are ready to talk continuously about the newest and lat-
est cameras for amateurs. This includes their contribution to fulfillment of the
socialist pledges of Leningrad workers to assimilate production and produce new con-
sumer goods.

Among the new goods is also a family of modern, reliable amateur movie cameras, the
Aerra.

"The Avrora-l4 is the latest representative of the so-called simple class of movie
cameras,” explains the chief designer N. I. Panchenko. And here he notes with a
smile: "However, what does simple class mean in our time? The amateur movie

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

photographer needs a convenient and siaple camera. The new camera also meets these
requirements. It is supplied with the most complex systems which ensure filming on
color and blackowhite 8-millimeter movie film of super-8 type. Cartridge loading
of the camera is used for the first time. This is a great convenience for amateur
movie makers. An objective with variable focal distance was used for the first time
in a camera of this class. This permits the scale of the image to be changed during
filming a large background and to diversify the film.‘I '

Even prior to production of the last model, the movie camera had recieved high marks
of Soviet and foreign amateur movie makers. Here is just one letter from England:
"Gentlemen. last year I acquired your movie camera Avrora. Until now I had never
made amateur films. I found that the camera is simple to handle. My first film was
quite acceptable. I feel that I should thank your association for developing such
an inexpensive and good design of a camera. I hope that I can make even more ama-
teur films. 3. J. King, London.”

Those Who Saddled the Rainbow

The rainbow. the rainbow-~it is long ar oused not only the fantasy of poets but the

thinking of scientists as well. Scientists have established that thisintriguingarc
is nothing more than refraction of light and splitting of it into the spectrum. De-
velopers of spectral instruments which now find the widest application in all kinds

of scientific research and to monitor various production processes, make use of

this phenomenon.

Yevgeniy Ivanovich Lebedev has for many years headed the specialized design office
of spectral instruments, without which progress in different spheres of modern sci-
ence and technology, from metallurgy to medicine and chemistry, would now be prac-
tically impossible. Yevgeniy Ivanovich is in his forties. 8e is a broad-shouldered
and broad-faced man with cheerful hazel eyes.

In 1944 his father enrolled him in the plant technical school where they trained
optical specialists. Yevgeniy was attracted to optics. Not having yet defended
his diploma, student Lebedev, who had only turned 18, was assigned to work in the
plant design office. Together with the other engineers, he was immediately entrust-
ed with developing an optical device.

An the facets of his talent were discovered here: independence, initiative and
creative daring!

In the shop the metal workers and engineers assembled a device "from paper." They
are the first advisers, consultants and critics. Since then there has remained a
special attachment, a special partiality and trust in these consultants in the work

shops.

But even long before Lebedev received a vuz diploma, the young designer was sum-
moned by the then chief of the design office, who said with a smile:

"Be glad, Lebedev. It has been decided to appoint you the leader in the group who
will develop the IKS-iS.”

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”The IKS is an infrared spectrophotometer. A completely new model of a device,
more improved to determine and measure the chemical composition of matter, had to
be developed. These devices were required for research institutes studying the
structure and quality of materials.”

The future device was represented by an entire complex in which both optics, mechan-
ics and electronics would be combined. when the IKS-ls was born, an entire collec-
tive labored on it--engineer Nikolay Sergeyevich Golyandin was responsible for the
electronics. Neonila Ivanovna Ivanova. a specialist in physics, conducted physical
investigations and Natal'ya Sergeyevna Hoskaleva supervised the investigations.

But Lebedev remained the leader. He was responsible for joining all the systems

into a unified organism and for giving the device its final form. And his word was
last in all debates. inevitable during creative search.

After LONG was formed, the 5K3 acquired well-organized and equipped scientific re-
search laboratories: electrical engineering. optical-physics and diffraction grat-
ings. Ye. I. Lebedev headed the 5K8 which now reminds one in scope and scales of
activity more of a large scientific research and design organization.

What are they now doing, what are they working on and what are they developing?

Yevgeniy Ivanovich shows an installation connected to a gray metal housing, inside
which is hidden a secret miraculous rainbow.

What is it for?

Now imagine an open-hearth shop and a molten flow of steel filling a gigantic ladle.
But before releasing the steel from the furnace, one must find out whether it is
ready or not and whether it will receive the mark which it has been given. This

was previously done thusly: a sample of steel was taken with a special ladle and
the metallurgist guessed "by eye” and by color whether or not it was time to pour it.

This was in the past. The development of metallurgy now requires precise and objec-
tive analyses. And chemistry came to the aid in this case. But the foundry worker
at the open hearth waited for 30 minutes to an hour until the chemical laboratory
provides an answer. As a result the process itself was delayed. Chemical analysis
took too long.

But could it not be done more quickly?

It cauld. Metallurgists take a sample of steel and receive a precise answer about
the quality of metal within minutes by using a spectral quantometer. The special-
ists figure that if quantometers could be universally introduced into metallurgy.
the productivity of smelting would be increased considerably.

"hetallurgists were pleased with our device," says Lebedev, "but even so this de-

vice required too much time. Follow the pointers on the scale. take the readings
and calculate from special graphs."

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And a group of designers developed a special automatic electronic device. And they
equipped the new quantometer with it. Now it not only makes an analysis within 3-4
minutes, but automatically issues an answer in written form on a form: the percen-
tage of manganese, sulphur, nickel and so on.

The long row of desks in the 8:8 is just like sailboats arranged near a dock wall.
Every draft of the assignment is sent directly from the drawing board to the exper-
imental shop, is converted into a model, then into an experimental prototype and

again undergoes investigations in laboratories until it receives authorization for
serial production.

For example, the HFS-S is a new type of quantometer. It predicts whether it is
time for an article, machine or engine to undergo major overhaul. Only a drop of

oil taken from the engine subject to checking is required for this. And the degree
of wear will be determined instantaneously.

Yevgeniy Ivanovich shows letters from the depot of vologda Station: "Your MES-5
monitors the condition of 300 diesel locomotives. The saving is approximately
100,000 rubles annually." And this is at one depot alone.

Somewhat later I am in the shop of assemblervmetal worker Yuriy Ivanovich Murav'yev,
who developed the first of these devices and explained its operating principles. he
related how oil specimens ignite and metal residues are detected during this and how
the device fixes the percentage of metal saturation of the spent lubricant.

And the developers of this device--engineers I. Trilestnik, u. Pridman, N. sidoruk,
A. Livshits and s. Orlov--have long been working on new, more improved models of the
device. The first device is only a starting point.

Workers of the Lebedev SKB designed a spectrophotometer for medical workers. The
devices makes a diagnosis rapidly and without error. Take, for example, a throm-
bosis or hemorrhage. '

And I would also like to note one characteristic feature of the spectral SKB.
Lebedev recalled a case which caused serious speculation among the designers. Once
a new universal quantometer was installed at one of the metallurgical plants. Be-
fore shipping it, it had been carefully tested and checked at the firm. The device
operated perfectly. And suddenly there was the alarm bell: the device was not op-
erating! A colleague of the 5x3 flew immediately to the place. What was wrong?
And the fact was that the person did not really know how to work with such a com-
plex device. Printed-circuit designs, even the most detailed, were inadequate. The
least inaccuracy and the device failed.

They decided that the operators should be trained at the firm. That is to say at
the primary sources. And so representatives from Moscow, Izhevsk and Donetsk were
in the 5K8 laboratories. And engineer-researcher Svetlana Vyacheslavovna Podmo-

shenskaya, one of the developers of the quantometer, conducts exercises with the
operators. A dependable device should be in dependable hands!

And when does custody of the 5K3 over its child generally and?

29

INJR‘OFF1CLAL USEZCN‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"This is not a simple question," says Yevgeniy Ivanovich. "After all you can't pre-
dict everything and foresee everything beforehand. Take the DPS-lo quantometer.

It seemed to the designers that everything in it was "absolute". But the device op-
erated for some time in the metallurgical shop and it suddenly became clear that
dust, despite special protection, still penetrates onto the optical mirrors. And
this means that they must be carefully cleaned from time to time, but the coating
is worn away with this. And the concerns of the investigators again begin anew:
what to do? What should be done? Formally we are perhaps not responsible. How-
ever, we cannot act on the principle: "Once the customer accepts it our duty is
done.“ Our investigator requests the assistance of the electrovacuum laboratory of
the firm: the mirrors must be enclosed in a reliable protective layer. And they
search, test and set up experiments immediately in this laboratory. Finally they
find the method. And the optical mirrors are enclosed in a strong protection.”

Yevgeniy Ivanovich relates how literally every day ever higher requirements are
placed on the quality of modern spectrophotometry. The range of customers is ex-
panding continuously and each has their own specific requirements.

I saw a list of new customers. The Scientific Research Institute of Cardiology, the
Alma-Ate Airport and the Belgrad Vitamin Plant, the Agricultural Experiment Station
in the Ukraine and the Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology in Georgia request
spectrophotometers. Tens of new and the most different devices in innumerable ver-
sions are required. Are now the limits of the SIG too confined for this?

"This is a flexible concept--confined or not confined. We look at this thusly: the
more diverse the instruments which we develop. the more flexible and more efficient
should be the approach to solution of any creative problem. Those high requirements
which are placed“, let us say, on spectrophotometers, can be satisfied primarily by
"families" of instruments that solve different problems on the basis of a single
baseline instrument rather than by development of new models and consequently stan-
dardization of numerous assemblies and parts is necessary. There are immediately
many advantages here both for production and engineering."

Incidentally, this standardization made it possible for a group of SD designers to
develop a thematic plan ahead of schedule for yet another mark of ultraviolet
spectrophotometer.

A step was then made toward improvement of spectrographs. The designers developed
and created for them special photoelectrometric recording accessories. And it
turned out that many research institutes had no reason to acquire the expensive new
instruments. It was sufficient only to acquire the accessory. Thus, yet another
feature of this collective of designers of little importance was manifested: con-
cern not only about the economy of their own 510 or their own firm, but also about
the economic interests of all for whom they work.

Concern about economy pushed toward a new important direction in the work of the SIG
designers-~a reduction of the metal consumption of instruments. They do not conduct
a campaign because of some slogan. but from sober thrifty calculation. After all,
for example, tons of pig iron are expended on massive castings for the bases of
instruments alone.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lebedev and his colleagues began to calculate not only the excess weight of metal
but also the excess time and escess labor of the machine tool operators which is
expended on machining the heavy castings. And it was suggested that they reject
these castings and replace them with a design from sheet metal.

Initially there was much concern even about this. An unusual approach! But even
so the latest model of the IRS-29 spectrophotometer sits on a sheet rather than on
a cast iron foundation and the results are excellent. And at the same time tons of
cast iron are saved from being machined into cuttings.

As you can see, the people "who have saddled the rainbow" have their feet on the
ground. but sober thrifty calculation does not interfere in any way with the flight
of creative thoughtl

An excursion through the engineering building is similar to an excursion into the
world of the latest modern technology of instrument building from its very sources,
where it is "created,“ where unusual monitoring and measuring instruments begin
their journey from the drawing board to the real world. Here is an instrument for
measuring the diameters of quartz tubes by the contactless method, here is an inter-
ference inside micrometer designed to measure openings with accuracy up to 0.1
micron, an automatic dividing machine for high-frequency hatchure gauges, an auto-
matic scale monitoring device and mockups of video tape recorders for the country's
television centers.

It is difficult to imagine that all this innunerable variety of the most complex
equipnent is created at one enterprise and at the highest level too.

What are the most pressing problems col-non for the entire 'l‘sKB that are being
solved today?

“One of the most pressing problems," relates the chief engineer of the T30, is
universal introduction of microelectronics into design of optical instruments and
equipment. 'mis alone will ensure their high reliability and will reduce the weight
of many instruments by a factor of tens. ‘l'he laboriousness of equipment manufacture
will be reduced through extensive use of integrated microcircuita.

The problems are many and complex, but they are solvable.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE FIRM CONDUCTS RESEARCH

What is a modern enterprise and a modern production association? Today these are
not only shops which are saturated with automatic lines, machine tools with program
control and remote control devices but these are also design offices and scientific
research laboratories. The joining of production and science has entered the epic
of the scientific and technical revolution as one of the main indicators¢3£the time.
New production precesses, new materials and new designs are being developed in in-
dustry ever more frequently through their own efforts.

An example of this is the Leningrad Optical-Mechanical Association imeni v. I. Lenin.
There are many doctors and candidates of sciences here. The design offices and
laboratories of the firm are ever closer to the level of scientific research insti-
tutes in the scope and scale of their activity and in their practical results.

A designer-scientist working in industry is now a widespread phenomenon. -These are
people who combine high theoretical training and the capability of independent re-
search with the grasp of managers and with extensive knowledge of the characteris-
tics of serial production in the fine points of its technology. They also now
emerge as leaders in the competition of Leningrad workers to reduce the deadlines
for development and introduction of the new begun at the initiative of the leading
associations.

: shall attempt to talk in these features about two engineer-researchers of LOMO
who participate in solution of this problem.

Pomenko, "who Can 00 Everything“

There is absolute quiet behind an ordinary door with an ordinary nameplate “Electro-
vacuum Laboratory" if one does not consider the low conversation of 2-3 persons in
cream-colored smacks. You look around and everywhere glass or metal domes and domes
of themostdiverse sizes and shapes, transparent and opaque, flash. Then somewhere
aside you notice the blinking of small different colored lamps on a console.

My escort, an elderly stocky person with very kind blue-gray eyes, Pavel Nikolaye-
vich Fomenko, conducts me now downward past enormous black cylinders, now along a
narrow steep stairway, now upward onto a platform from which yOu can see the blink-
ing hemisphere of a gigantic disk. Pomenko's movements are light and precise and
he enthusiastically points out the most diverse equipment and fantastic
installations.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus we complete an amazing excurions: here under each dome or rather under each
cap a small ”cosme" has been created, that is, the air has been pimped out with
special suction equipment and the same maximum degree of vacuum has been crated as
in circumterrestrial orbits. Under these secret caps installed on heavy slabs,
glass castings polished with maximal precision, of different sizes and shapes,
make planetary motions with the aid of the most precise mechanisms. And the glass

under these same caps is bombarded by billions of alulainum, tungsten or gold
molecules.

The molecules are “blown off" from metal coils or rods through which an electric
current passes. There is nothing threatening about them since there is no oxygen
in a vacuum and they cannot burn or become oxidized and nothing interferes with
their flight since there are no counter molecules of air in their path and they
settle firmly on the bright polished surface of the glass and are transformed into
the thinnest, imperceptible film fractions of a micron thick. This film transforms
the glass into truly magic mirrors which are installed in a special microscope to
penetrate the secrets of the structure of a cell or into powerful telescopes to
trap the glow of remote stars and galaxies. Optical mirrors different in design,
shapes and sizes are required for hundreds of modern optical instruments most di-
verse in golds and designation.

Until these mirrors were developed there could be no talk about modern optical in-
struments. But until they mastered and assimilated in industry the creation of

the thinnest and nost precise film by means of the electrovacuum method of coating,
it was impossible to dream seriously about manufacture of these mirrors.

These films were first assimilated and introduced at who. One of the main enthus-
iasts of development, introduction and creation of these and many other optical
films, the author of the most important inventions in this field, is winner of the
state prize Pavel Nikolayevich Pomenko. '

The electrovacuum laboratory which he has undoubtedly headed for many years is his
child and his pride.

The name of the future engineer-researcher first appeared in the press in 1937.
But this had no relationship whatever to his occupation. They wrote about him as
about a master in classical wrestling. It turned out that Pomenko, who is now 70
years old, was along the 10 strongest wrestlers of the Soviet Union in the semi-
heavyweight class and occupied no lower than fifth place in the championships of
the country. And before this he was a boxer for two years.

But the chief attraction of the young Pavel Pomenko was always engineering. First
in the small town of Tetkino near Sumami, where his father worked in the rural mill
and then at a sugar plant as a fitter-machinist, then in construction, where he
liked the occupation of installer. And later he worked in the university
laboratory.

Pavel Pomenko liked everything only he hadn't formed his own character. Once he
went into the forest with his father hunting--he didn't raise his weapon. His
father joked: "book, the rabbits are amazed at you. They are running around in
front of your nose and you are still looking for mushrooms and berries.“

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL LSE ONLY

After being admitted to the physics faculty of l£U [leningrad State University],
Pavel simultaneously decided to "develop his character.“ The studies were easy and
as is known, his character was being hardened if one overcomes the difficulties.

0n the advice of his friends, Pavel engaged in classical wrestling. It is not known
whether Pavel Nikolayevich's character was changed or whether it needed to be
changed, but the physical hardening prepared him for the future.

A boy from the remote Ukrainian countryside intelligently solved the most complex
problems. Once Professor Vladimir Ivanovich Pavlov, who at that time taught elec-
tronics theory, entering the faculty laboratory where practical exercises were usu-
ally conducted, suddenly turned his attention to the electronic instruments. How
much time they had not operated, gathering dust and being inoperational. And even
so there were not enough people or skilled masters who could repair them. And here
they are standing in complete working order ready for operation.

"Who did this?” asked the amazed professor.
"I,“ timidly answered Pomenko and thought with alarm: Have I broken something?

"Have you previously worked on such instruments?“

"No," admitted Fomenko and began to justify himself: "They were simply interesting
to me."

Pavlov smiled and continued:

"would you like to work at the Institute of Applied Physics? As a laboratory
technician. It is right alongside. If so, then come to me tomorrow.“

It wasn't far to walk. The laboratory of the institute was then located in the
university courtyard. Ponenko's duties were formerly simple--to assist the scien-
tists in conducting investigations.

Academician Sergey Eduardovich Prish capitvated him with problems in the theory of
light, spectroscopy and geometric optics. Pomenko grasped the prospects and prac-
tical possibilities that had been opened up on the mutual positions of electronics,
optics and chemistry. He was the first to encounter the first attempts to apply
films to optical glass under high-vacuum conditions. he was very interested in
this. And he did not think at that time that his whole life would be devoted to
this field.

The university graduate was seemingly given an honored appointment-~to teach at the
industrial academy. He taught physics and higher mathematics there for several
years but his heart ached for something different and he was attracted to research.
After all the daring fellow noted precisely that he who accumulates knowledge and
does not use it is like a man who plows but does not sow.

And there was a happy encounter with Shoshin. Ivan Alekseyevich Shoshin, a scien-

tist of many talents who at that time was the scientific manager of the design of-

fice at Gcsz and a university instructor, was distinguished by yet another quality:
he loved talented people and brought them to the plant.

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FFNHA1.US£10NLX

He had no difficulty in convincing his former student, about which they said at the
university that he has a clear head and skilled hands, to come to COM! as an en-
gineer-researcher in the department of the chief technician.

They tried in the modest laboratory to manufacture by the cottage industry method
a vacuum installation for coatings and tried to apply silver to mirror glass.

Pomenko was innediately involved in research work. As an inate engineer, he noted
the imperfection of the first vacuum installations and equipment and suggested that
they be modified. At the same time he was involved in other problems, including
one of the timely problems at that time--magnetic flaw detection. It turned out
that very important parts, immaculately machined, suddenly broke and failed under
loads under a press or when rotated at high rpm's.

How could they check beforehand whether there was a hidden defect or crack in these
parts? Pomenko recalled a prediction described in one of the scientific papers:
the properties of permanent magnetic permeability may be useful for flaw detection.
If one can magnetite metal and cover it with iron oxide powder, the powder will be
arranged in parallel lines on a 'healthy' surface. And the lines will follow a
crack hidden in the interior and will be bent on the same surface.

Fomenko began investigations and worked out a method and practical method and hand-
book on magnetic flaw detection. A special instrument was developed which techni-
cians jokingly called a "Fomenkoscope.'

Fomenko remained in leningrad during the blockade. He was the last among the plant
staff to be evacuated. The order was issued: the remaining specialist Opticians

were to be used in work for the front. Combat vessels urgently needed special non-
magnetic instruments at that time. 'If they need them, we will make them," an-
swered the Opticians.

On one of the days the warehouse where the necessary machinery for these instru-
ments was stored burst into flames, ignited by fascist bombs. And then Pomenko
together with his comrades rushed to the burning warehouse. The necessary mechan-
isms had to be saved. Production of nonmagnetic instruments for combat vessels was
organized.

And again an important question arose: where to obtain transport to deliver the
parts? There was no fuel and almost all the vehicles were at the front and there
was no one to drive them either. The only lorry was a gas transporter which "puffed
and blew" and stopped frequently. The driver was unable to start it. Re cranked

it in front by hand in the old fashion. who had the strength? They asked him, the
former wrestler, Pomenko! Here at one time was accumulated some strength!

Pomenko did this willingly, but like a true engineer, figured that the efficiency
from this effort was not so high. And what would happen if he himself sat behind
the wheel? And he learned how! He received an official driver's license. And the
engineer-researcher, "who held more than one office," took the wheel, as they would
say now, “like he was born to it."

35

FOR OFTWC1AL.USE10NLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But what is one machine for a plant? And once in the plant yard a gas-delivery
truck of completely unique design began to rattle in the plant yard. It was
Fomenko's design. He collected parts, assemblies and components from former trucks
at dumps and along the sides of the roads to the front. This was probably the
first case in history when an Optician had built a truck. This now sounds like an
amusing curiosity. But at that time the Fomenko truck labored quite successfully
in lumber procurement.

Later, toward the end of the war. Pavel Nikolayevich. with the firm reputation of a

person "who could do everything," supervised construction of the plant railroad
branch.

Thus, during one of the most severe days of the blockade he made a "invaluable"
gift to his comrades for those times. They opened the newspaper and in it was
fresh bream!

Where did this miracle come from? Did God send it or did it create itself? Inci-
dentally, it is obviously no accident that Pomenko can do everything.

They found out accidentally that there was a fish artel at iakhta, and people go
there only once or twice. And there are wages there which nature pays out. he
hired himself out. As the strongest one, he manned to oars. The remainder let out
or drew in the net. He was soon “elevated" and became the brigade leader on the
boat.

He worked all night. He slept a maximum of three hours. And in the morning he
came to the plant as if nothing had happened and began to fulfill his numerous
duties.

Once Ivan Alekseyevich Shoshin, excited and joyful, came up to him.
"Pavel Nikolayevich, that's enough! There is a time to finish and a time to begin."
"I didn't know that it was time for me to finish."

"It's time for you to finish everything unrelated to electrovacuum equipment. And
it's time to begin everything related to it. We will obtain the equipment. Biery-
thing--suitable or not, complete or not. I don't know. Disassemble it yourself.
Besides yourself. there are no other vacuum specialists. You will have to begin
from the beginning. This is a new section!"

The days and nights were the same for Fomenko. An a small, close room similar to
nothing more than a production section rather than to a laboratory, he assembled
each device, evaporators, transformers and filters, frequently even without draw-
ings, simply on the intuition of a born engineer. At the same time he developed
the production technology and equipment for manufacture of various coatings, in-
cluding clear films for the most important models of optical equipment which they
had begun to develop at that tin-e.

It is easy to say to develop. But with whom? They gave him several teenagers for
assistants at that time and he talked of himself as their "kindergarten."

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, he taught each one with envious persistence, giving each one as be-
fore his boundless energy and teaching than love for a difficult, very difficult
occupation that requires maxim attention, concentration and a special feeling.
The young boys and girls from Pomenko's ”kindergarten" imperceptibly grew under his
instruction into qualified masters and later became prominent specialists. And now
they are leading engineers of the firth-Vladimir Nikolayevich Skorodumov, Georgiy
Pedorovich Zubov, Ivan Romanovich Aipolotov and many others and they are now in-
volved in development of large mirrors and the most powerful telescopes.

The tasks of the ”laboratory-section" were expended and newer and newer specialists
were required. One feature at Pomenkc's character also helped. He knew how to re-
cruit and ignite with his energy and attraction people of different occupations.
Soon enthusiastic researchers were working alongside himo-Iarisa Yakovlevna Pinskaye,
Nikolay Pedorovich Makarov, Shmul' Abramovich human, Nina Alekseyevna Helinina and
others.

It seemed the simplest things required experiment and creativity. How does one
position or place a part under a vacuum cap to spray its surface with tungsten? How
does one evaporate chromimn so that its film protected aluminum against oxidation
and how does a layer of protective zinc sulphide behave on glass? Can a tungsten
coil evaporate in a quartz cone?

This and much more must be known to design the most sensitive bolcmeter device that
permits one to record invisible heat rays. One must also gain the interest and re-
cruit consultants from the Physicotechnical Institute. USSR Academy of Sciences, for
this. This is one aspect. And on the other hand, one must seek out a magician-
glass blower who would clearly understand that he must create from glass for an in-
strument that has never before existed.

Fomenko tound both the scientist and the glass blower. Moreover, Sokrat Yevgen'ye-
vich Gur'yanov--the oldest master glass blower from the optical show-brought in
trusted assistants--two at his sons Leonid and Aleksandr.

Pomenko had to be directly a researcher and a "coordinating center" between scien-
tists, designers and workers in one person. The instrument which physicists-scien-
tists were awaiting so much was developed within a very short deadline: within one
month!

An enormous role in development of the scientific and technical revolution belongs
to modern optics and consequently to electrovacuum technology. Iaproved optical
devices and optical instruments are being developed, by means of which one can in-
vestigate the earth's interior, the structure of metal and can aim the most power-
ful telescopes into the sky.

The new electrovacuum laboratory, which it was suggested that Pavel Nikolayevich
Fomenko head, began to be developed with the birth of LOMO.

Pomenko was somewhat perplexed. He had not worked in his own laboratory
for three years. Bagrat Konstantinovich Ioannisiani, the chief telescope designer,

"called" Fomenko to his office. Pavel Nikolayevich was involved at that time ex-
clusively with astronomical mirrors.

37

ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At first it was necessary to develop some special types of reflective and protective
coatings for the unique mirrors. Because nothing similar had ever been done before

in the country. There were attempts to order these mirrors from abroad. The lenin-
grad Opticians decided to make them themselves. A special design office was created
to which Fomenko also transferred in order to be exclusively involved in the diffi-

cult and complex problem of large telescope mirrors.

Together with the researchers. the designers made preliminary calculations and sub-
stantiated the specifications. They made a rough calculation of the unusual instal-
lation which had never before been done in Europe at that time. who can manufacture
it for us? It was suggested that one of the Gor'kiy plants could. Pomenko travel-
led specially to Gor'kiy with all data for the detail design.

when the installation arrived, Pavel Nikolayevich Fomenko headed the group of en-
gineers that installed it. He had to ascertain personally that each lead, each
joint and each assembly in the evaporator, each tiny screw and rod, all the count-
less components for the electric discharges were in the most complex system under
the gigantic hood made for the first time of special grades of stainless steel
rather than glass, and that everything was in place. That is the nature of Pavel
Nikolayevich.

But the telescope for the Crimea and the telescope for the Caucasus had already been
installed. And Pomenko sets out on a trip to see how his "mirrors'I are behaving.
The Order of the Red Banner of Labor, which he was awarded in 1961, reminds Pavel
Nikolayevich of those stormy and hot days.

While they were building the new laboratory, in planning and equipping of which
Fomenko participated most actively, Pavel Nikolayevich set up an experiment in the
optical shop and recruited prominent scientists to participate in the developments,
trained personnel and even when he "moved" to the new large laboratory of the engin-
eering building, part of the optical shop continued to remain his unique branch.

Accelerated work was begun to develop coatings on special mirrors in optical devices
that separate narrow spectral regions "upon order.“ Together with a group of his
colleagues, he is developing and putting into production so-called interference
filters required in quantum electronics, photometry, microscroscopy and various
fields of instrument building.

The work of the firm laboratory acquires such a scope and scale that people began

to come here from the most diverse cities of the country, optical enterprises and
institutes for consultations,to borrow the experience and for joint scientific work.
The remarkable perfection of the technology for applying a film to astronomical mir~
rors strongly interested many scientific institutions. Thus, the firm's laboratory
became the epicenter of scientific developments for all the country's optical enter-
prises related to solution of similar problems.

Here are the lines from one letter (and there are many of them) addressed to the
general director of LDHO H. P. Panfilov: "The Institute of High-Energy Physics
thanks LOHO for the excellent quality of making mirrors for working in the ultra-
violet region of the spectrum, required to conduct scientific research on the
world's largest proton accelerator. And it requestsyou to express gratitude to the

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FI-1(1AI. llSl-Z ONLY

direct executors-ochief of the electrovacuum laboratory P. N. romenko, deputy chief
of the laboratory M. A. Purman and chief engineer A. A. Metel'nikov.‘

But for him this is a phase that has already been passed. The search continues.
And now Fomenko heads a creative group which is seeking a method of applying a
unique film in a vacuum on a six-meter mirror already installed in a strong metal
support. Otherwise the very thin reflecting layer may be damaged. This is an en-
tire epopee related to development of a completely new technique of metal coating
of mirrors and development of special evaporators for application of an aluminum
layer one-tenth of a micron thick. Moreover, there is the problem of strengthening
this layer and also of cleaning the future mirror whose surface should be super
sterile. If even a small piece of dust invisible to the eye falls on the coating
it becomes an eyesore on the ideal surface of the mirror and will make a rough error
in the coefficient of reflection and may spoil the mirror.

And the workers of Pomenko's laboratory must successfully solve these problems. The
large computer complex developed at LOMD renders invaluable assistance to them in
this case. The computer selects 10 of a thousand possible versions and suggests
them to the investigators. It is of course much easier to select the one, most
suitable version from 10 versions.

Fomenko jokes: "If this proceeds any further, we will become totally lazy and then
what will we do with our time.”

But the electrovacuum workers have no free time. Experiment generates new possibil-
ities. And the most unexpected ones at that.

For example, they reported from the Chamber of Commerce that cameras with the mark
LOMo--Smena, Sokol, Avrora and others--were enjoying popularity on the world market.
But they must now be made even better. They should have an especially illuminated
objective which permits one to take pictures without the least distortion of light.
Exceptional accuracy is required here. Because variation of the thickness of the
coating by the most negligible fraction of a micron--one-tenth or one-hundredth--
already produces an error.

But there were not only production difficulties here.

The fact is that old wizard vacuum specialists, who knew how to determine intuitive-
ly and erroneously the proportion of the coating, were involved in this most com-
plex operation, but the number of these old "wizards' has decreased.

And Pomenko's “guard" of electrovacuum workers developed the technique of amber

coatings and determined all the required calculated data for the required propor-
tions. But during the first days thousands of objectives were decisively rejected

by OTK.

They referred to Fomenko in the shop. This was rejection of his laboratory. How-
ever, when the researchers themselves went to the shop, everything turned out fine!

Fomenko did not make excuses, although he firmly knew that the technology had been
develOped and calculated precisely. But he also knew something else: to work out

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFN'MI. USE ONLY

something little, one must introduce it and one must count in this case on hundreds
of ordinary young glrls--graduates of PTO who were working for him, rather than on
the notorious “wizards.” And this was also in the tradition of line): a development
was considered finished when it could be “released” for mass production so that it
produced no less effect in the shop than in the laboratory under special conditions.

And these "special conditions" existed. When they were only working out the tech-
nology in the laboratory, a special instrument-~a photometer to determine the pro-
portioning of the coatings-~was created through their own efforts for the process

of investigation itself. What would happen if this photometer was made not only a
laboratory instrument but a shop instrument as well? It permits automatic determin-

eesides the planned topics, Fomenko's laboratory was also involved in rssearve top-
ics. Thus it was with a number of problems that had ripened with regard to the
vigorous process of improving color television. Pavel Nikolayevich foresaw that
the association would have to become involved in manufacture and improvement of
special units that split white light into red, blue, green and other colors. The
laboratory was linked to scientists: they jointly studied the physical and chemical
processes related to this and preliminarily worktl out the technology, testing its
components in the shop.

Sometimes the scope of research of Pomenko's electrovacuum laboratory acquires such
scales when the special assistance of colleagues from laboratories of completely
different profiles is required. This causes no difficulties whatsoever in the firm.
The electrovacuum workers, for example, must apply coatings to optical parts which
are attached to metal supports by means of an airtight seal (a special glue which
should guarantee absolute sealing of the seam). The sealer is a polymerized compo-
sition. It is initially similar to cream. It is injected in this form into the
gap between the lens and metal support. It is then vulcanized and becomes hard.

And absolute airtightness is achieved!

But hermetically sealed connections that can at the same time be "disassembled"
must sometimes be made in modern optical instruments.

And the laboratory of organic chemistry develops a nondrying hermetic seal. But
this hermetic seal emits gas under high vacuum conditions. And both laboratories
jointly set up experiment after experiment and new types of hermetic seals are de-
veloped. One of them, used in application of chromium to a glass plate, yields
excellent results. But what was done was unusually important for all optical-me-
chanical production!

Fomenko finds "related" problems among the "global" problems of optics. For ex-
ample, how to force ordinary glass to perform and be irrideacent like real semi-
precious stones? The problem, solution of which is local industry, was incidentally
solved quite unexpectedly. Its simple technique made it possible to produce women's
jewelry that sparkles in all colors.

40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When I became'acquainted with Pavel Nikolayevich and with his concerns, problems and
research, it seemed to me that the laboratory did not leave him any time at all.

But then i see in the hall of the engineering building the announcement: "The next
lesson in the system of party education is being held. Propagandist P. N. Pomenko
is conducting a seminar on problems of economics.“

The old communist has been conducting propaganda work for many years now: the
history of the party, philosophy and a range of economic knowledge. The range of
his interests are broad. And not only in the field of technology or ideology.

Once when we were arranging the next meeting, Pomenko said:

"I can't tomorrow."

"But tomorrow is Saturday."

"Tomorrow I'm travelling to Dibuny. There is urgent work in the garden."

He grows flowers and fruits in his garden and of course with the inventiveness in-
herent to him.

"Can you not postpone it until Sunday?"
"No way! Otherwise my father will begin to do everything himself.“
"Your father?"

“Yes, he is already 90 years old," Pavel Nikolayovich smiled and added: "He is my
primary support in engineering. But he still does not trust very much what I plan
to do in horticulture. what can you do!"

Man and Miracle Gratings

Sometimes one can hear the following question in the conversation of opticians: How
are things going with Rowland's ghosts?

Ghosts? But there are no mystics here! Although there really are “ghosts." As you
can see, they even have a name. And it is not so easy and simple to control them,
especially when manufacturing such a miracle of optics as a diffraction grating in
the literal sense. The grating is the main component of all modern spectral in-
struments and was designed to split light into the spectrum. It consists of an op-
tical mirror on which almost invisible lines-channels are out. There are hundreds
and thousands of these grooves on each millimeter. The more precise and improved
the spectral device, the wider the range of problems which can be studied by using
it.

The prominent Levsha would not take up this work. Because it is a simple matter to
shoe a flea compared to cutting diffraction gratings. And if he had taken it up
and if he had suddenly become able. then five of his lifetimes would not have been
adequate to out only one of the smallest mirror blanks. Imagine--2,400 grooves on
a single millimeter! The accuracy of arranging them is determined in thousandths

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFlClAL USE ONLY

of a micron. And each groove should not differ in depth and angles of profile,
regardless of whether the mirror surface is flat or curved.

Unique dividing machines developed especially for this purpose seemingly achieved
superaccuracy. They achieved it and even so the meticulous researchers, or rather
the American scientist Rowland found that even the best modern diffraction gratings,
despite all the perfection of machining, splitting the light into spectra, sometimes
create illusions of nonexistent and false spectra. They are called Rowland's
“ghosts." These “ghosts," despite all their “transparency," can lead to very real
errors. Only a superfine diffraction grating, which in itself is a very accurate
physical instrument, can erroneously split light into the spectrum and can align

the emissions in a specific order by wavelengths.

And now imagine that manufacture of these gratings with incomprehensible machining
accuracy is no longer a problem for Leningrad Opticians. The IOMO firm, which pro-
duces still and movie cameras that have become known throughout the world, has
become the leading enterprise in development and manufacture of the most complex
spectral equipment. But as before, the basis in any spectral instrument is the dif-
fraction grating. It was developed by the cooperation of 601 [State Institute of
Optics imeni s. I. Vavilovl scientists and was put into serial production by the
firm's engineers and workers. The technology of manufacturing it is being improved
in a special laboratory headed by Ivan Zakharovich Semenov. He is unobtrusive in
appearance. he is short, lean with blond hair and has kind cornflower blue eyes.
When you see him for the first time it seems that you have met him already somewhere.
He is very similar to an agricultural worker.

In fact he is a native of a small, quiet village in Novgorodskaya Oblast, from a
peasant family.

"There were five of us," he says. "I am the youngest. After seven years of school
I cane to Leningrad to become nothing else but an architect. Generally I took the
first exams and in my thoughts I already saw beautiful homes constructed from my
designs. But optics? I never dreamed that I would at some time have any relations
with it. Incidentally, my childhood dreams did not proceed further in architecture.
After the second exauII took my papers. There were family circumstances. My
father died and my eldest brother--the commander of a regiment--was killed on the
Volkhov front when he was 43 years old and my mother became ill. In short it was
decided--I had to enter a trade school and had to stand on my own feet as soon as

possible. My air castles could wait."

“It was necessary! And if it was necessary then so be it. I understood this. And
now I was in the trade school on Kondrat'yevskiy Prospekt. I was studying to be a
metal worker-pattern maker. I finished with excellent grades, with a high rank and
it seemed to me that there is no better occupation in the world, so fine, accurate

and amazing. "

”Later there was urgent service in the navy and they taught me a new specialty on
the ship--I became a navigator electrician. There is a new technology in my con-
sciousness--gyrocompasses, radio direction finders, echo sounders. Again I applied

myself and it seemed that I changed my previous occupation. Instruments, precise,
complex instruments was now where my heart lay. It was a pleasure to tinker with

42

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

them. As soon as I was released from the navy, the first day afterward I headed
toward an address that I had long loved: LITMO--the Leningrad Institute of Pre-
cision Mechanics and Optics, to the radio engineering faculty. I was attracted by
electronics. I defended my diploma on the subject I"i‘racking Systems for Remote In-
stallations." And I did my prediploma practice in laboratories of the just founded
firm LOMO. And again I think there is nothing better and more interesting in the
world than this occupation of an engineer-optician. At that time optics was a
modest duet of glass and metal. Now optics is radio engineering, electronics, tele-
mechanical and chemical. Here I understood that I had not "changed” my former occu-
pation in any way since they all served me in good stead for the present and the

main thing which always requires newer and newer knowledge from the person who has
selected it."

During the year when Ivan Semenov finished LITMO, both the institute (Semenov was
already seen as a graduate student, bearing in mind his extensive knowledge and
tendency toward theoretical, scientific work) and industry were quarrelling over
him. Even during practical work. he managed to manifest those qualities which are
especially valuable in an engineer at LDMO—-breadth of knowledge, the creative vein
and the strong grasp of an organizer.

The young engineer, during the first steps of the firm, participated together with
other engineers of the firm in development of the large astronomical telescope (STA).
The chief designer of the ETA Bagrat Konstantinovich Ioannisiani, unexpectedly for
Semenov himself,entrustedthe young engineer with the most responsible assignment--
development of an automatic system for aiming the telescope at the stars in azimuth
using a computer.

It is a tradition of LOMO to trust a young specialist. The important, serious mat-
ter in which he revealed himself as an engineer without any excess delays, shows
what he is worth.

When Semenov heard about his first assignment from Bagrat Konstantinovich, he was
glad and at the same time alarmed: could he cope with it? One can imagine with
what fervor he took up the work together with the other engineers and specialists
in automatic control and computer technology. when this system was designed and
installed at LOHO, it had to be checked and worked out on an existing mockup of the
telescope. This mockup was a reduced model of the future, the world's largest and
most improved telescope, which was later installed at Zelenchuk. But the noekup--
with 60 millimeter mirror--was installed in one of the towers of Pulkovo observa-
tory. It also underwent plant trials in the tower. During those days or rather
nights, Semenov was the chief in the tower and supervised the tests. Then for the
first time his look "jumped over" the terrestrial threshold and saw the stars in
the eyepiece. For the first time they were quite close.

Here even a star was not called a star, but an object. The task was to see that the
telescope tracked a celestial object, equalizing itself to the rate of motion of it
through the heavens. Otherwise a photograph or spectrogram would record a smeared
image.

"This was done thusly," quietly relates Semenov. ”He took several stars, calculated
their coordinates and trajectories, entered the data in the computer and the compu-
ter transmitted signals to the automatic processing system."

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But this was not done immediately. Ivan Zakharovich's friends and colleagues re-
call those restless days and nights in the tower of Pulkovo observatory when all
this intertwining of the most complex systems suddenly broke down and the synchron-
ism that they had achieved with unbelievable labor was suddenly disrupted.

Semenov was the first to determine the need to use a special linear converter to
improve the system: a machine to control the signal of a moving device. The inno-
vation freed the system of errors related to the inevitable mechanical oscillations.
This made it possible to precisely aim the telescope automatically without fluctua-
tions from the given value.

Everything that the young engineer thought up and suggested was initially realized
in a mockup and later in the gigantic telescope itself.

And incidentally, there is yet another tradition of the firm: the young engineer
here is not only inmediately and daringly trusted with a lot--many people help him.
The most experienced people, the most talented people, engineers, designers and sci-
entists. After all, they have a ”profitable” interest in the success of each other.
Because the overall success of the firm depends on the success of each one.

After the gigantic telescope had been intallcd at the Zelenchuk observatory. the
chief of the TsKB suggested that Semenov head the laboratory of diffraction gratings.
The young specialist was again trusted with a very complex assignment--to improve
their manufacture.

Imagine six large booths with transparent walls whose doors are sealed just like
safes in a bank. No one can enter there. You can observe the "secret" occurring
during operating of the dividing machine, whose quiet no one dares disturb, only
through the window. Even the machine itself has no right of the slightest deviation
and is therefore installed on a special floating foundation. The motor of the ma-
chine is located in another, adjacent hermetically sealed separate booth and is in-
stalled on the same floating base. And there ezen the motor or the breathing of a
person can distrub the specific temperature and humidity required for a precise
production operation. A difference of more than 5/lOOths of a degree in temperature
fluctuations may lead to rejection.

If an adjuster enters the booth, and this occurs approximately once per month, then
the machine operates on "idle" for one or two days afterwards until the instruments

show that temperature is normal. One can work.

And then the diamcnd cutter on the mirror surface begins its infinite motion. The
diamond labors for hours on each millimeter of mirror area. Day and night. And
the cutter is hardly worn in this case. And the grinding of the drive screw of the
dividing machine, on the “spacing“ of which the accuracy of cutting the lines also
depends, continued for no less than 6-8 months and the most experienced masters

were involved in this.

These superprecise machines must be improved even more! Rowland's ghosts--what
about them? How can one eliminate these ghosts? Ivan Zakharovich's laboratory was
now supposed to answer this question.

44

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The appearance of the first dividing machine and the first diffraction grating is
related to the State Optical Institute (601). LOHO specialists studied the model
developed at GOT and designed and manufactured six unique dividing machines at the
firm on its basis that became the production base for manufacture of diffraction
gratings.

The struggle for accuracy began from the first steps of developing the machines.

The most accurate optical checking instruments--collimators--suddenly revealed un-
desirable surprises. For example, mysterious black and white, so-called moire pat-
terns that altered the true brightness of light, appeared in the visual field of the
collimator.

One of the leading scientists of the cptical institute, doctor of technical sciences
Fedor Maksimovich Gerasimov, with whom Ivan Zakharovich later became closely ac-
quainted, then worked out special scanning sensors and an original electronic cir-
cuit for taking these moire patterns into account, which had to be taken into ac-
count during use of the gratings.

However, that which the scientist proposed and developed could be used only on the
single-screw machine of the institute itself, whereas the two-screw version of the
dividing machine was being operated at LOHO. One screw was a rough ”transport"

feed screw and the other was directly a dividing screw. The LOHO version guaranteed
the highest accuracy and the highest productivity.

Semenov together with his colleagues in the laboratory Yuriy Iosifovich Braynin and
Aleksandr Ivanovich Solntsev carefully studied that which scientist Gerasimov had
worked on and learned how to apply his electronic circuit to the designs of machines
developed at LOMO. As a result the diffraction gratings were of very high quality,
which made it possible to sharply expand the range of spectral instruments. The
machine was checked again and again and so—called "creep‘ phenomena were found when
the carriage supporting the diamond and responsive to an electronic signal was sup-
posed to stop, but continued to move forward for some thousandths of a micron due
to inertia. Braynin and Scintsev attempted to replace the cast iron carriage with
a lightweight aluminum carriage. They felt this was supposed to somehow neutralize
inertia,

Experiments were again conducted. They served as a thrust to broader investigations
in developing methods to utilizetheprinciples of compensating for the "creep“ fac-
tor caused not only by mechanical stress but as it seemed by temperature conditions
as well.

A discussion arose once in the small group of investigators. Some were proponents
of precision mechanics and others of electronics. Ivan Zakharovich, knew from his
experience of working for the ETA that only fusion of precision mechanics and elec-
tronics and their combined efforts could reach the goal in modern optics. And they
worked on the problem of “joining“ the dividing machine to an electronic circuit

which would guarantee absolutely precise and strict stopping of the carriage at a
given point. Many scientists of research institutes were involved in this problem.

Thus the firm's production laboratory became a unique epicenter for improving every-
thing new that was being developed in this field of technology.

45

FOR OMCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. USE ONLY

As a result work of theoreticians of the institute and investigators of the firm
began in developing completely new types of gratings.

Besides doctor of technical sciences F. M. Gerasimov and Semenov, engineer Galina
Nikolayevna Rassudova and the amazing engineer, the local ”lefthander' Yuriy
hikhaylovich Balyasnikov participated in this tedious and complex work.

An arsenal of weapons was gradually accumulated for a decisive attack against Row-
land's ghosts--the enemies of precision.

Rowland's ghosts were reduced to a minimum under production conditions and the moire
patterns were first 'made harmless" in the unique dividing machines designed and
constructed at LOMO. Semenov's laboratory was the first to develop and introduce a
photoelectric system for monitoring the main nerve of the working member of the
machine instead of a mechanical system. This system automatically and with maximum

accuracy checks the path of the screw and makes the dividing machine free of residu-
al errors.

News about the victory over Rowland's ghosts quickly spread throughout our country.
The miracle gratings received high marks of scientists from many countries. Spec-

tral instruments with the new gratings were require by those who observe stars and

satellites and by those who must conduct the most precise analysis of metals during
smelting and by those who desired to look into the secrets of cells.

Thus the most complex task in modernization of dividing machines was accomplished.
This permitted the firm not only to improve the quality of gratings but to produce
completely new types of spectral devices. The possibility of cutting 1,800 or 2,400
lines per millimeter instead of 600 lines, which was considered the maximum, was a
new achievement in serial production.

Modernization under conditions of the firm's modern laboratory is not only research
and checking one or another systems. This is both development and creation of all
the required equipment for modernized machines and this is improvement of the tech-
nology itself and application of it in practice.

And it is really not surprising that only five engineers and eight workers were in-
volved in this large laboratory with multicomplex equipment.

And here is the enchantress--the dividing machine is "under complete control” of
the worker servicing it. He adjusts it himself, repairs it himself and installs
blanks and diamond cutters himself, manufactures test gratings and himself partici-
pates in checking their quality on special instruments. This in itself requires
the highest qualifications and extensive, universal knowledge of a rank and file
worker servicing the machine.

The senior engineer of the laboratory Anatoliy Ivanovich Malyshev, a knowledgeable
and talented inventor, began work here as a rank and file worker. Working as a
mechanical engineer, he studied at the Northwest Correspondence Polytechnical Insti-
tute. here he developed a new spindle assembly for a machine on which diamond tools
were sharpened.

46

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sharpening the diamond cutter to cut gratings is one of many of the most important
problems for the laboratory, both engineering and economic. The fact is that a
diamond cutter is supposed to cut approximately 25 kilometers of grooves without
stopping. It is impossible to replace it during operation. The research of Maly-
shev immediately led to solution of the problem of predicing the wear resistance of
a diamond cutter, which is related to its natural microstructure and the flexibility
of the surfaces being machined. Almost all the laboratory collectives began to work
on this problem and subsequent investigations led to development of new instruments
which helped to finally solve this problem.

The design office of microscopy needed a standard instrument to determine the rough-
ness of optical surfaces. Malyshev developed and manufactured such a standard.

Much can be said about this young, light-haired engineer. Semenov talks about him
briefly and expressively: Malyshev knows all and knows how to do everything.

Such a definition is quite suitable for mechanical engineer of the laboratory Yuriy
Hikhaylovich Balyasnikov. Yuriy Hikhaylovich thought up many accessories for cut-
ting gratings. The effect of the accessory is equal to starting up yet another
dividing machine! The accessory cuts two gratings iumodiately rather than one dur-
ing the same cycle, but with two diamond cutters!

But Malyshev did not stop at this. And what if two gratings could be cut with only
one diamond cutter? The laboratory engineers together with the chief developed a
new, completely original drive for the dividing machine that permitted this version
to be used. Malyshev's new machine tool then came to light for grinding diamonds.

Despite the high requirements on diffraction gratings, the laboratory turns them
over to the OTK without checking. And any OTK hardly checks them more strictly
than laboratory worker, engineer Maria Petrovna Ustyuzhaninova. She took on her-
self the voluntary duty of additional checking of the gratings.

The LOMO mark is on almost all the machine tools and Lachines of the laboratory.
The special nonstandard equipment shop manufactured them. Only the firm is capable
of having such a shop. How many designer ideas have already become embodied here
in metal!

When I was leaving the laboratory, Ivan Zakharovich Semenov suddenly opened yet
another door:

“amok in here."

“And what are they doing here?“

"Still the same--they are making diffracton gratings.”

“But where are the dividing machines and the diamond cutters?“

"They are not needed here. This is still an experiment. we are testing a laser
beam instead of a diamond cutter. But this is a matter for the future."

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFINAI. USE ONLY

WORKING GUARDS

If one begins an excursion through the firm from the engineering building and if one
becomes familiar with its numerous design offices and laboratories, then one can show
that LOMO consists primarily of scientists, engineers, designers and researchers.

This group of specialists occupies an ever more significant place in production un-
der conditions of the scientific and technical revolution.

However, the same scientific and technical revolution now requires even greater cre-
ative initiative than at any time from the broadest mass of rank and file producers
and from rank and file workers. They emerge not only as executors, even the most
faultless and highly qualified, in a modern socialist enterprise such as is LOUD.
But most frequently they are both developers, creators of the new and advisers and
colleagues of engineers, designers and technicians. They lead the chorus of com-
munist labor.

And it is obvious here at LOMO how quickly the functions of a worker change along
with his experience. level of education and occupational training.

I had occasion to become well acquainted with many workers at the firm and to ob-
serve their growth. Growth not in the sense when a rank and file worker becomes
an engineer, technician or chief of a section or shop. But primarily growth of
knowhow, skills, breadth of knowledge and feeling of responsibility for the en-
trusted matter. I have in mind the growth of a worker as a creative personality
and moral and ideological growth that provide the right to the proud rank of Soviet
labor.

Ivanov's Personal Hatter

Tuesdays are reception hours for personal matters at the general director's office.
It is known what these "personal matters“ are: concerns about housing, complaints

about some injustice and a request to transfer to a different post and so on.
Among those who requested a reception is Hikhayl Ivanov, a milling machine operator
of the experimental shop.

"I have come about the plans in our shop to arrange the new equipment. Imagine,
they want to locate the grinding machines under the very nose of the OTK. How can
sensitive instruments operate if everything is shaking alongside them?

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

"It is understandable. well, what is your personal matter?”

"This is it. They proved it in the shop--they did not listen. They said that the
planning has already been confirmed and it is generally not your concern."

Panfilov glanced at his watch:

"All right. Let us end the reception and go to your place of work. We shall con-
tinue the conversation on the job.“

The director's conversation with the shop specialists ended in that Mikhayl Il'ich
Ivanov's suggestion was approved. Panfilov later reprimanded the service chiefs who
were involved in replanning:

"It would not have hurt to have consulted beforehand with the workers."

This one episode milling machine operator Ivanov related to me at the association.
Therefore, it is admitted that Ivanov impressed me as a person with a stern and
authoritative character and with a decisive exterior. And here we were meeting him
in a small, one-room and very comfortable apartment in a new building on Vyborgskaya
Starona.

I saw a kind person. And although he was short, everything about him seemed large
and solid: a compact figure, a weatherbeaten face, thick black eyebrows and remark-
able smiling eyes.

he was about 50 years old, but he appeared to be the healthiest of persons. men
toward the end of our conversation I jokingly mentioned this to them, he laughed:

“This is true, I am an iron man.”
His wife, looking in to the room for a second from the kitchen, noted:

“You sure are an iron man. You carry 80 fragments in you. And all the time he
gives the appearance that there is nothing special about this. He should be treated
and observe the regime. He catches cold at the least drop. Not likely! He has
been a Komsomol volunteer his entire life. And you say he is 'the healthiest of

people. "'

"Now that's enough, Valya,” he softly interrupted her.

Ivanov's working life, like most people of his generation, began in the most literal
sense with “homeomol-volmteersﬂ He had hardly finished school when he was hired
at the plant and dreamed of becoming the same as his father--a shock worker of the
Third Five-Year Plan. But this was in the June of 1941. “They sounded the trznpets
of alarm" and the student milling machine operator together with other young Kon-
somol workers of the shop volunteered for the army. He was sent to a military-
political school. He was a cadet for 10 days and the school was closed. Everyone
left for the front. Like the others, he was issued a pass in which the unusual,
such capacious rank was denoted to which he remained true his entire life-~1vanov
was a political fighter!

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-"OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He received his christening at the front in Estonia, repulsing fascist attacks. On
the first day "Hesserschmidts bathed their antiaircraEt battery in a leaden shower.
He regained consciousness in a medical and sanitary battalion. He heard how, lean-
ing over him, someone was slowly counting: "78, 79, 81." And this same voice said:

"All right. The fragments from the bursting shell are small ones and there is no
time to dawdle. Prepare hir- for evacuation.”

But he was not sent to the rear. At first the roads were cut and then Ivanov him-
self began to refuse: “I feel better, I'll manage.“

And he really "did manage." Soon machine gunner Ivanov was defending Moscow. He
then campaigned in the Bryansk woods, participated in the liberation of Czechoslo-
vakia and fought in Manchuria.

He returned to the shop in 1946, which he regarded as his own, although he had been
working in it only a little more than three days before the war.

"So he returned," said the old master, looking Mikhayl over.

”And how else! The earth is round! No matter what point I left, I arrived here!“
They gave him a test. He helped to adjust machine tools and they gave him the job
of milling 200 of the simplest parts. Ivanov tried as well as he could and turned
them over by the deadline. But soon he heard the angry request from the OTK:

"th made this mess? They are all rejected. "

"Well, we got through it!" said the foreman. "Now get out of it yourself. Take the

rattail file and try to take off the corners carefully. It can and it will work
out well.“

Ivanov filed these corners until late evening. And the rattail file, as if to spite
him, had no handle and for that reason burned his palm-he had scratches, blisters
and callouses everywhere. He went home in an angry nood. He no sooner had crossed
the threshold than he met his father:

"That is it! 1 will not go to that plant again: look at these hands, just look."
his father looked:

"Poor thing, he has callousesl The fact that he is lacerated through and through
with bullets and fragments is nothing. But he can't tolerate callouses. rwhat do
you thinkuyou think they are playing games at the plant? You are in no way of the

working class."

Mikhay‘. became confused and suddenly everything became funny to him when he tried
to look at hirself through his father‘s eyes.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next morning he arose earlier than everyone, poured icy water over himself and
again went to the plant and decided to reqmst that he be admitted as an apprentice.
He found out with amazement that even so he was awarded third rank. He assuned for
himself that he had been given an advance.

Stormy days and nights of mastering his occupation began for him. he studied furi-
ously and did not let himself or others rest until he had meticulously learned
everything.

He mastered very rapidly the skills of many and achieved the highest, sixth rank.
And he immediately took on apprentices to himself. Young people love to work under
his beginnings. The generous unselfishness and kindness of this man attract the
fellows. Regardless of who else in the shop one studies with, you still cannot get
along without it in precision and complex optical production. Reckoning here is
only in microns and fractions of a micron. And experimental models mainly "travel"
in this shop. The technicians themselves rarely rely on the experience and inven-
tiveness of the machine tool operators such as Ivanov.

For exanple, take the history of one part for the objective of the latest micro-

scope. Such a casplicated thing had never before been done, even similar to this.
Mikhail Il'ich looked over the drawing for a long time and carefully read the pro-
duction chart. At which end to begin? If one proceeded according to instructions

it would be too long and would the part be produced with the precision as thought
out?

He walked around puzzled for a day or two. He readjusted the machine tool and
changed the cutting heads. And the result was an essentially new solution in the
technique of milling the most complex parts of optical devices. a method which per-
mits one to increase productivity thirtyfoldl This innovation of Ivanov, used in
the entire sector of instrument building, saved tens of thOusands of rubles.

The most refined innovations of Mikhail Il'ich also became the achievement of his
appreentices: Yuriy Sosnin, Oleg Hikhaylov and many others. When they note in the
shop how Mikhail Il'ich unobtrusively observes the work of young machine tool oper-
ators. they jokingly say: "Hellol Ivanov is looking for talent!"

He seeks passionate lovers, like himself, of ”headbreeking" work. And if he is not
given this work he finds it himelf. Once in the shop they were manufacturing eye-
pieces for special microscopes. A superprecise thread was required so that each
turn had an ideal surface. It was assueed that this fineness could not be achieved
with the most filagreed milling. Almost invisible scratches over which tens of
metal workers then sweated, removing them manually, remained inevitable. It is
understandable that this exercise of the metal workers was hardly joyful mrk: so
many times at meetings they teased the machine tool operators: "It comes out and
you have nothing to do with it one way or another without manual labor.“

Ivanov did not plan to protect “regimental honor.“ He extracted the next creative
task for hineelf from this criticism. He thought for a long time. He tested and
ground this way and that and gave unusual profiles to the cutting edges of the
cutter. He used an original “slotting head." And so they again began from the
beginning.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IS}? ONLY

Metal working labor was not provided for at all in the production chain proposed
by Mikhail ll'ich.

Ivanov was always modest about what he himself achieved. He travelled to the other
end of town, to the well-known Kirov plant. He studies whether there is something
worthwhile in the milling machine operators there. Or as soon as he has a day off
he heads for the House of Engineering Propaganda on Nevskiy Prospekt to find out
whether something valuable has turned up there. How can one compete otherwise? He
always says to his friends: ”Always hold the alignment to better and better!"

And it is he, M. I. Ivanov, Hero of Socialist Labor and delegate to the 24th Party
Congress, that is considered the best in the shop.

Some think that, having received the "highest praise,“ Mikhail Il'ich will settle
down and will cease to be troubled by rest. No way! Once they brought to the sec-
tion a blank weighing about 20 kilograms to manufacture an experimental part, and
the part should weigh one-tenth as much. Hikhail ll'ich immediately raised the
alarm~-metal could not be squandered! At the first party meeting he immediately
proposed that measures be implemented so that this was not repeated.

Once it was noted that hikhail Il'ich was a constant visitor to the job site of a
young communist machine tool operator. He would come up, observe for a little bit
and leave frowning. And hardly any complaints of any kind could be made against
the young fellow. He was fourth rank, he performs his tasks and there are no vio-
lations. what is it? But Ivanov shakes his head:

“What is this 'what now'?" Yes, I have known him for a long time. I have known
about his head and his hands--he could have control of mountains. but he remained
calm, became lazy and deprecates himself."

And the persistent question arises: should the machine tool operator be called to
the party group--it must be analyzed what kind of person he is and why he is stuck
among the "mediocre types“? And even more important how can he be helped? Mikhail
ll'ich is first of all ready.

And as always, the fate of this young fellow and the affairs of the shop collective
and of aLl Lono is Ivanov's personal business.

To Be First

The competition was being held for the rank of best in occupation among the young-
est workers of IOMO. The entire brigade of milling machine operators awaited the
result with excitement. The brigade leader, Yuriy Aleksandrovich Hetelkin, was
himself especially excited. After all, no one other than Viktor, his apprentice,
to whom he had tried to transfer his skills, craftsmanship and spirit, participated
in the competition. But the main thing is that Viktor at his own initiative wanted
to participate in this competition. Metelkin trusted the young fellow: he was
clever and persistent. And he had finished secondary school. But he was still a
youth! without any experience.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI". ONLY

Hetelkin was glad for his apprentice and he himself would have taken his place.
After all, like Viktor, he began his journey here in this very shop, 23 years ago.
As an apprentice. Only after demobilization from the Soviet Army. Someone advised
him to seek out a “non-dusty" position. but Hetelkin decided to become an apprentice
for milling machine operator.

He was an apprentice for a very short time. The senior foreman Ivan Pedorovich
Khlopchenko to this day recalls the capable apprentice. He worked with skill and
persistence. He loved the most complicated work. And all the time he learned. He
learned from his comrade foreman. No year passed that he did not gain a new rank
and finally he achieved the highest-~sixth rank! Having attached oneself to any
machine tool and to any system you could not go wrong with any task!

But Yuriy Metelkin, having seemingly reached the top in his occupation, still con-
tinued to study. He heard that Ivan Leonov from the Kirov plant was using a special
cutter of his own system--he immediately went to him: “Show me, teach me!”

He had occasion to be a guest in Moscow and he immediately headed to the capital
House of Engineering: what valuable things there could he take away and introduce
in his own brigade? But Metelkin's brigade was a guard‘s brigade: Nikolay Bogdanov,
Nikolay Lyubich, Anatoliy Illarionov, Gennadiy Uvarov and Vladimir Petrukhin. They
were all highly qualified milling machine operators. Not all of them were highly
qualified when they entered the brigade but they became so in it. Metelkin laid the
basis for the tradition: to help each other. always be ready to replace a comrade
and to manage oneself freely at his own machine tool. It is no accident that Hetel-
kin‘s workers bear the rank of brigade of communist labor.

And now Hetelkin wished that his Viktor, for whom he had felt pain in the competi-
tion, would also become such a real guardsman of labor.

His Viktor is not Hetelkin's son, his son Viktor also works at LCMD as an electrical
fitter. His viktor is Viktor Zhukovh-an apprentice for whom Yuiry Aleksandrovich
feels no less than for his own son.

The competition has ended.
And now the young fellow with eyes bright with happiness runs to meet his tutor:
”Yuriy Aleksandrovich. complete order!"

viktor Zhukov had become one of the winners of the labor competition among milling
machine operators.

It is interesting to follow the work of Yuriy Aleksandrovich and the expression on
his face. During these minutes he was seemingly carrying on a silent conversation

with the machine tool and finds a complete understanding with it.

And this may be so. After all, Metelkin can manage to do that on his own machine

tool that no one else has ever been able to do. Once, they received an unusual
urgent order in the shop--to manufacture specially precise cast iron plates for a
series of very important optical instruments. These plates were initially machined

53

FOR 0511C1AI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY

with great difficulty on the milling machines and were then sent to the experienced
metal workers. Their task was to quickly and methodically remove invisible micron
unevennesses on the surface of the metal and to achieve ideal surfaces whose pre-
cision could be determined only by special indicators. This is a long. exhausting
process in which hardly 4-5 plates could be machined and brought up to condition.

And Hetelkin suggested the improbable:

”We can turn out not 5, but 50 of these plates per shift! And without any scouring.
simply on our own machine tools."

And the improbable unexpectedly becomes the obvious. It turned out that Metelkin,
as soon as he learned what concerns his comrades in the shop are expecting with re-
gard to the unusual order. began to think: how can I help here? After an agoniz-
ing search, the idea of an original attachment to the machine tool was born. The
idea "was floated around” with his brigade comrades and the first experiments and
corrections to the thought-out idea were begun. Finally the first plate taken from
Metelkin's machine tool was in the hands of the inspectors. Indicators and microm-
eters are in operation. Not one error! This was a great victory!

And Metelkin now has a new concern. How to change the design of the cutter so that
two grooves could be made immediately by a single cutter? In turn he got the idea
of a single attachment which would permit low-qualified machine tool operators to
perform a number of crucial operations accessible only to experienced masters.

Yes, the plans were enormous.

I am talking with Hetelkin. His dark complected face is very young and devilment
is in his hazel eyes. He talks jokingly about himself:

”The occupation of milling machine operator? It is simply to know geometry. Here
we have a geometry circlel'

But then he talks about each one in his brigade willingly, warmly and even with
kindness. And he notes not without proudness:

“Almost every one of our workers now turn over products themselves without the OTK.
We have our personal stamps.“

"And you put the stamp on the parts?”
"Why?" he is amazed.
"Nell, and if someone suddenly”

"We don't have these 'suddenlys.‘ If it happened, it would be easy to find out by
the 'handwriting.'"

”Can one really determine who milled one or another part if all of them are identi-
cal and they were made from the same drawing?"

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Of course! Take for example musicians. They play the same piece. The same notes
are in front of them. But they sound different. It is about the same among us
milling machine operators. You recognize a machine tool operator by his 'handwrit-
ing' and by his style. The trained eye can innediately and erroneously determine
by external appearance the parts, who did it and whether the spirit of the machine
tool operator participated in the operation, besides his hands. Generally, we are
the same as in music."

"I see that you love music. Is this your attraction?”

‘Yes. I love music." He thought for a while about something and quite unexpected-
ly adds: "Once it helped me to find Gennadiy, my youngest brother."

And he continues:

"Hy father and mother died even before the war. My older brother worked as a lathe
operator at the Krasniy Viborg plant and he died when fascist 'incendiaxy bombs'
were dropped on the roof of the shop. And we and Gennadiy, understand, were orphans
in a children's home. we hold firmly to each other. He was still quite a small
lad. And I was almost grown-44 years old. And I was Genka's guardian and mentor.
And suddenly separation: I was taken into the army as a pupil in the military brass
band. I played the trumpet. Later, as you yourself know, the war interfered with
everything and Genka's children's home was evacuated somewhere from Leningrad and I
was stationed near Moscow in a military school. In the band. They don't send young
people to the front. And now the cadets are having a graduation party. The young
officers of tomorrow are going to their regiments and fighting the fascists. We
played marches, waltzes and polkas. And now we were supposed to play my favorite
waltz Amur Waves, I couldn't stand it any longer and I asked the band leader to let
me dance. I was dancing with some unknown girl, I had hardly managed to look at
her and the dance was over. And already here the voice of my chief: 'Hetelkin, re-
turn to your position! '"

Suddenly the same girl touched me on the sleeve and looked at me closely: "So you
are Metelkin?’ “Yes, I am Hetelkin." "And you have a younger brother?"

I felt a shock. "I have. His name is Gennadiy. Where he is I do not know. But
why do you ask?" "Because I probably know your brother well and I saw him quite
recently. He talked so much about you.” I'l'ou know him? You saw him? there? How?"

And this is how it was. It turned out that the girl had come from Ryubinsk a few
days ago where her father worked as the director of a children's horn and my brother
from whom I had been separated by the war was being educated in this home.

The very same evening I go to the company couuander. I outlined my situation: I
need to meet my younger brother. Either I go to him or he comes to me!

My brother: came to me and we were never separated again. The company commander

assigned Gennadiy to the band as a pupil. But we decided as soon as we were de-

mobilized to go imediately to someplant. Our father was a lathe operator and our
older brother was a lathe operator. So we also inherited the "working stone."

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I soon was able to see the younger brother. Gennadiy Metalkin works in a neighbor-
ing shop. Of course he looks like his older brother: the same tall, energetic
person with fast movements. It's true Gennadiy is not a milling machine operator.
During the postwar years at the insistence of Yuriy, who was for him the only author-
ity. he entereda trade school and studied to be an automatic metal worker. He works
in the neighboring shop and became a specialist in repair of metal working machines.

A few years have passed since then. They are both fathers of families. Yuriy
Aleksandrovich from time to time looks into Gennadiy's shop. "How are things going
with my younger brother?" And Gennadiy always turns to his older brother for advice.

The opinion of an older brother is important to everyone. Yuriy Aleksandrovich was
often elected to the people's control group, the party bureau and to the party
conittee.

In the shop they recall the time when Yuriy Metelkin headed the people's control
group. The history related to storage of finished parts, which sometimes rusted
and were roughly thrown into a corner, is especially memorable. The guilty parties
were found and no excuses of any kind helped. Hetelkin received a special order of
the shop chief in this matter and did not rest until he had checked that everything
had been done as it should be. .

But Yuriy Aleksandrovich has long had a new public comission and he does not walk
quitely past if he sees disorder.

Once Gennadiy asked Yuriyx

“Listen. where do you get such influence from? I know you better than anyone: you
are a kind and soft person and you do not at all have the character of a manager.
Share you secret like brother to brother.“

”My secret is the simplest,” answered Yuriy. "If you agitate and struggle for some-
thing, begin with yourself. In order that people cannot reproach you: after all,
everyone can make mountains out of a molehill. You have to test yourself.

Yourself! "

Probably this is the essence of the matter. If you want to show people how to
achieve an important and good matter begin with yourself. Be the first.

And he is one of the first. Milling machine operator of Leno Yu. A. Metelkin was
awarded the rank of hero of Socialist Labor for high indicators in fulfillment of
tasks during the third, decisive year of the Ninth rive-Year Plan.

Toward Maximum Precision

In an enormous shop with snow white walls, everything is lighted by a bright blue
light falling from above from a whole cascade of fluorescent lamps. Hundreds of
people are working with concentration at long desks. Here is the pinnacle of pre-
cision! These are universal measuring microscopes-writ. They are so sensitive
that air temperature fluctuations or even a loud conversation during assembly can
affect their accuracy.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And people are working quietly.

Here is an old man with thin face and blue eyes in horned-rimmed glasses. From
time to time he puts a secrewed up eye to the microscope eyepiece and with his
fingers slowly rotates an almost visible screw under the black scale. He writes
something in a notebook. thinks for a long time about the notations, then sighs with
relief, smiles, gets up and paces alongside his work bench with rapid, light steps.

This is Aleksandr Antonovich Bespalov, winner of the State Prize, and veteran of
the firm.

When future young workers hear about the amazing path which their enterprise travel-
led--from semicottage workshops to one of the world's largest optical firms, they
often hear the name of Bespalov among the other names.

If the talk is about the First Five-Year Plan when shorinophones were being devel-
oped--the first sound-recording apparatus-mm immediately hears: "Bespalov was the
one who assembled the first model" or if one is talking about the first Soviet movie

camera movements again one hears: ”At that time they came from Bespalov's light
hands."

A conversation breaks out about how the first astrophysical instrments were devel-
oped and again: "Bespalov began the assembly of an experimental model."

And Bespalov talks briefly about his own work:

"that do I do? Well, you can say that I assemble and adjust experimental models of
a gun for hunters of microns. There is now no letup from orders for ever newer and
newer models of measuring microscopes."

The work of Aleksandr Antonovich requires effort, the fullest attention, patience
and the most precise skills. when a very complicated optical instrument is com-
pletely assennbled, this is still only the beginning. The main and most difficult
thing then begins--so-called adjustment. The adjuster slowly "conjures“ over the
tiny assemblies, levers and lenses for long hours. days, and frequently even weeks.
And it turns out that during these minutes he holds his breath so as not to alarm
them and so that the “axis" of the instrument is not shifted by a hundredth of a
micron and so that the established and regulated ”focus" is not disturbed. Each
instrument of the series is adjusted in this manner. And Bespalov is responsible
for the standard instrument in the experimental section. He does not have the right
to make an error.

This same Bespalov at one time adjusted the first assembly of the um. Although
everything was correct in the drawings and calculations. the instrument erred. They
tried to assemble the instrument in a specially equipped room without vibration.

But the instrument still erred. And each time by ill-fated two microns. Regardless
of what they tried and what they changed the deviation from a straight line still
appeared upon maximun motion of the optimeter tube and still there were those two

little microns .

They tried newer and newer versions. And it was all the same. Deadlines passed
but the UIM was not delivered.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigators worked intensely and Aleksandr Antonovich and his comrades worked
late in the shop. And they found a solution.

They checked the path of the microscope table-~it was in complete order. Accuracy
was guaranteed. But as soon as the machine tool began its return path the pointers
of the scale deviated by a total of six microns. The specialists worked on this
problem and Bespalov found justice for this 'capriciouness,” having designed a de-
vice which eompletely eliminated the vibration.

The group of its developers was awarded the State Prize for this um and the name
of worker Aleksandr Bespalov was rightfully on the list of winners.

Many instruments have passed through his hands and there has not been one, develop-
ment of which has proceeded without his thought, creativity, clever and at some

times the most unexpected corrections in the calculations of designers, developers
and investigators.

They were demonstrating a unique measuring machine in the Soviet pavilion in Brus-
sels at one of the international exhibitions which could make measurements of all
parameters with high precision and speed by means of optics. This machine was
awarded first prize--the Grand Prix--at the exhibition. The machine operated at
full speed and performed the most complex measuring operations. The display guide
gave detailed explanations to all visitors through an interpreter but frequently
without an interpreter--in Conan and sometimes a little in French. mm worker
Aleksandr Antonovich Bespalov serviced this machine.

Long ago in the youth of Bespalov, which coincided with the years of the First
Five-Year Plan, the plant Komsomol workers, as now, insistently demanded from each
young worker--studyl

And Sasha registered for courses in foreign languages in order to study foreign
technical literature in the original. he engaged in boxing and strengthened his
character-with persistence he achieved that of which he thought and about which
he dreamed. This is his character: not leaving that which has been begun half
finished, one does not deviate anywhere until he is victorious. This is how it was
in the courses. No matter how difficult the German language was, he overcame it
methodically with an iron patience until he had mastered it.

During World War II, the Komsomol member, young optical worker Aleksandr Bespalov
campaigned near leningrad and was wounded. He found himself in the north in one
of the aviation units after being released from the hospital. Here the Optician-
inventor became an indispensible person.

He organized the instrument facilities in this unit within a short time. Moreover,
Bespalov fundamentally changed the instrument system of the aircraft, having de-
signed a special fixing mechanism which ensured reliability of the most connected
instrument with the aircraft in any position. m--Bespalov's aviation correcter--
was the name of this device.

When restoration of the demolished plants was begun, including optical plants,
specialists were rapidly demobilized. And now Bespalov in his overcoat without
shoulderboards hurries to Chugunnaya Ulitsa to a familiar passage.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suddenly someone called to him:

“Aleksandr hntonovich?"

Before him stood Mikhail Panfilovich Panfilovuthen a technician and the future
general director of the firm.

Panfilov told him how much the country was expecting of the toningrad Opticians
and how those such as Bespalov were now needed.

'You do not need to persuade me.“ answered bespalov. "I an a political fighter
myself.“

Yes, he, a working cosmunist, always felt that he was a political fighter all his
life. An he always tried to remain true to his party duty--to go forward, to take
on the most difficult and take charge of oneself.

During the early postwar years when the rubble of shops destroyed by fascist bombs
was being excavated, he saw an instrument changed to unrecognition which Leningrad
opticians had once been the first to develop in order to photograph the stars.

Aleksandr Antonovich well remembered with what love and care prominent scientists,
engineers and workers, including he himself, had worked on it here at the plant and
how much pride, romanticism and how many dreams were related to this instrment.

And now it's all ruined. A few fragments. He felt grief.

But in those days Bespalov became one of the enthusiasts for restoring the plant
and then became one of the first proponents for developing new optical equipment.
He was elected to the party comittee and he again felt himself a political fighter.
And how could it be otherwise. Be, a oomunist, could not longer see for himself
any other role than to always be a party fighter. And primarily in his labor and
creativity here in the shop, in his own experiuntal section and at his own job
site.

This became part of his flesh and blood: if something did not go right for someone
in his or in a neighboring section, he was ready to inediately find out, explain
and assist them. Thus it was when a finished lot of optical instruments were
turned over for measurement of caliber-a snag. It wasn’t so terribleuthree in-
struments of the entire lot "played tricks.“ And regardless of how the engineers
and adjusters fought and regardless of what they didnnothing worked.

And Bespalov imdiatsly went to look and to help them analyse, to find some omis-
sion and somehow to improve it.

And this is the way it is every day. But ask him to recall even two or three of
these episodes and he shrugs his shoulders: this is an ordinary thing. Incidental-
1y, everyone recognizes Bespalov as an innovator if you judge by the sunrise and
the few formulated innovator suggestions. This is something he does “by himself"
and he does not feel it is necessary to record all this.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

His constant concern is to teach, to pass on knowledge to young people and to trans-
fer experience accmulated at the plant over the long years of all the five-year
plans-~from the first to the present--to them. Wherever you meet his former appren-
tices today, he has given that one his thirst for creativity and his desire for the
new. Engineer Anatoliy Budinskiy comes into the shop-~this is Bespalov's appren-
tice, and he consults with innovators deputy chief of the design office Boris
Shustovnalso a pupil of Aleksandr Antonovich. Entire generations of young people
change at the firm, but in each of them there is an apprentice of worker-commist
Bespalov.

But not only the section in the shop--the entire firm is in his field of vision and
he sees all its concerns, anxieties and joys. And often, having completed work in
the section, Bespalov does not go home, but to the party comittee to consult with
the secretary of the party organization, to share his thoughts and to ask about the
news. Aleksandr Antonovich always came here with support and advice when he was a
deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the RSPSR and when he performed crucial comissions,
being a member of the municipal party comittee and as a member of the firm's party
committee. Many crucial cosmisaions are entrusted to him.

“So then," the secretary of the party couinttee said to him once, ”we have ex-
changed opinions and have reached a decision: you, Aleksandr Antonovich, are the
most suitable candidate to become mre familiar and to check how things are with us
in the chief technician's department."

And Bespalov carefully checked the work of the most important department. This is
how it is recorded in the reports: "30 devices were developed and created.“ Bes-
palov, not only as a member of the party committee and as an engineer-specialist
and innovator, was interested in looking at them and in analyzing and seeing the
work in the shops and in the sections.

These devices really do exist but for the most part either in drawings or if they
are in metal, why do they lay on the shelves. And how do they operate?

There are many questions. Bespalov gives a report at the party comittee.

The feeling of a manager in his plant brought ever greater acutenese in him as the
years went by. Yes he, worker Bespalov, is manager of a firm, a city and of an
entire country. And this feeling was especially developed in him during many for-
eign trips. he is a member of the administration of the Soviet society for Friend-
ship and Cultural 'ries with Foreign Countries and he is a member of the Presidium
of the Leningrad Committee for Maintaining Peace.

Bespalcv has been in Poland and in Czechoslovakia, in the GDR and in Finland, in
Sweden and in Norway. He has participated in many international meetings, discus-
sions and forums devoted to the struggle for peace. And everywhere he has appeared
as a representative of his own country and of his own Soviet motherland.

Once he was visiting the enterprises of the well-known Karl Zeiss firm. He talked
about the Leningrad firm L010. And he felt not without pride how the foreign spe-

cialists were amazed by the success of the Leningrad opticians. After all old
Russia generally had no optical industry and now the Leningrad firm was competing

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the world market. The mark mm became a symbol of high quality. And during
those minutes Bespalov was especially glad to recognize that he, a rank and file
worker of the firm, is directly related to this.

Yes, Bespalov, despite all his cmbersome titles of rank and awards (he was awarded
the Order of penis and the gold medal ‘Peace fighter'), is primarily a rank and

file worker-commzist for which the main party affair is his daily "commonplace"
work.

"mmnplace," this as before, together with designers and researchers, is to de-
velop the first models of ever newer and newer unique measuring instalments. He is
now working on a new model of a device of unmual accuracy and perfection. One of
the devices is a special optical thickness gauge for checking and focussing the
lenses installed in supports. It is a routine, commonplace matter. he himself
gave no special significance to his new innovation. But he received a routine in-
ventor's certificate for this device.

This ”cosmonplace" exists in everything. Participation in the work of the scientif-
ifc and technical society, a new commission of the party committee with regard to
exchange of party documents, correspondence with foreign friends. work on articles
for a literary journal about his trip to Scandinavia. And on a rare free evening
when his wife and son Vladimir have already returned from the plant, it is good
sinply to sit and listen what his old friend Vladimir Petrovich Vereshchagin has
to say. At one time they completed the factory training school together, they en-
tered the Xomsomol together in the shop, they went to the front together and to-
gether they mastered optics from the beginning. Vladimir Petrovich has something
to tell his friend. As an optical specialist he travelled to morocco, Vietnam and
to France. The firm has business everywhere, and they, like thousands of other
workers, engineers and scientists, are representatives of the firm and its main

people .
Fami ly Treasures

Goneharov looks at Goncharov. In order to see better without rushing to put his
hornrimmed glasses on, he brings the newspaper a little closer to his eyes.

This is LENINGRADSXMA PRAVDA, but an old, old editionudated 3 July 1945. On a
half-faded, yellowed page was preserved a still rather clear photograph. It was a
group portrait of the Young Komsomols of the brigade that assanbles movie projec-
tors. And in the center, in the forefront is the brigade leader: thin and ruffled,
staring with a victorious look into the lens. what is this! It was mentioned in
the caption under the photograph that the brigade leader produces three norms per
shift. Goncharov looks at Goncharov. noughtfully, with a soft hardly discernible
smile: and the young fellow was dashing.“ Re pronomces these words not with
pride, but with sadness. And again he looks closely at the photograph. He looks
at his friends of the same age and at himself as if his friends were in front of
him whom he met long ago and had again had occasion to see. And suddenly his eyes
light up with a mischievous, joyful fire. his face innediately becomes younger

and he unexpectedly tossles his hair combed smoothly back as if he wants to say:
"well. and what about it if some thick gray hairs are visible and what about it if
there are some wrinkles. But this is lo-this is I!” And for an instant I see him
as that "dashing youth,” as which he impressed his photocorrespondent more than 30
years ago.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”It is good to preserve this issue of the newspaper," he notes pensively. And he
adds as if joking: "It's something of a family relic. A family treasure. After
all I have three sons. One works with me in the shop, the second works in the
neighboring shop and the third--also one of ours, part of the firm, studies in the
technical school attached to the association 1040. These are treasures in their
hands."

The list of family treasures in the working familiy of engineer-metalworker of the
who firm Grigoriy Andreyevich Goncharov is not so small: among them are certif-
icates of shock workers of the First Five-Year Plan, combat medals of a Leningrad
defender, certificates for innovation and inventiveness, metals of VDNRh for suc-
cess in development of new models of movie equipment, an award of the Polish Peo-
ples' Republic and finally the highest award of the motherland-~the Order of Lenin.

But one of them is not kept at home but in the personnel department of the firm.
This is Grigoriy Andreyevich’s work book. And in the colun ”Job data" there is
only a one-page notation: 1933: admitted to post of engineer-metalworker.

Mrything began when Goncharov came to laningrad from the little town of Dorogo-
buzh, which is near Snolensk. ‘ihere he considered himself a confirmed "movie fan,"
and he went to see each film several times. And when he saw "The Battleship 'Po-
temkin" he decided that from then on his entire life would generally be related
to movies.

No, he did not dream about either the occupation of movie director or about a ca-
reer of a film star, he was attracted by something else. He looked at the old,
chirruping movie library installed in the passage between benches and that trans-
mitted enchanting beams onto a curtain attached to the wooden wall as a miracle.
The young boy was very envious of the two movie engineers who participated in this
sorcery, one of which turned the handle of the projector with an unusually import-
ant look, and the other of which operated the generator drive, producing electric-
ity. ‘ro touch this apparatus with one's hand was already happiness. And to find
out how it was made? And who made it? Once he looked at the mark on it: Lenin-
grad Optical-Mechanical Plant.“ And this decided everything. lie did not like to
put off anything. within a week he was already in Leningrad at the plant and in
the shop where they made movie projection equipment.

And busy days then began, and what days! The human voice was heard for the first
time on the country's movie screens. coming out of the movie house, they sang the
song of Maksim that had just been heard: "IA. blue globe spins and turns" and no
one knew that the lean worker, young Grisha Goncharov and his comrades had assem-
bled those first movie projectors.

But even outside the shop he again dared to hold a movie projector in his hands.
Once he heard from a friend from an adjacent enterprise: "I have not yet seen "l‘he
Opposite.' I can't get a ticket and they did not show it at the club. ‘l‘hre is no
movie engineer.” "'lhere isn't?" asked Grisha. ”That's no misfortune. we will
help them!“

Thus he also became a voluntary amateur-movie engineer. "the movie spun around"
on the latest libraries with the mark of his plant in clubs and in schools--

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

everywhere where they only asked for it. The audience applauded “diapayevf‘ and
were overjoyed with the success of Maksim and of the heroes of "The Encounter."
But Grigoriy was three times glad: both for the heroes of the film, for the view-

ers and for himselfuhe saw how necessary his labor was to people--apparatus which
he assembles with his own hands.

And one more thing: he can now not only be proud of the fact that he assembled
this equipment but can soberly and critically analyze their quality even on the job,
can note their merits and deficiencies even from the viewpoint of an experienced,
interested movie engineer. he thus became an innovator, unique counselor and con-
selor for those who designed and imper experimental models of projectors. And
how important this was at that time!

The Peoples' Comissar of heavy Industry 6. K. Ordzhonikidze came to the plant shop
from Moscow. Goncharov saw him several times. The Peoples' Comissar met with peo-
ple and became familiar with new marks of projectors and talked about how these pro-
jectors were needed in all corners of the country, especially on the kolkhozes.

the shop collective then developed a simple and most dependable projector and called
it Gekord, that is, the abbreviation for Gecrgiy Konstantinovich Ordzhonikidze. It
was pleasant to think and know that part of one's labor and one’s concerns, ideas,
hopes and knowledge was left in this Gekord.

And with regard to knowledge. the further he went, the more that he needed. He
entered the workers' faculty. It was difficult to sit behind a desk in the even-
ings, after a hard shift. But he did not give the appearance that it was difficult.
And not in order to embarrass his instructors. It was not them but a girl from
Svetlana in a red kerchief sitting quietly near the window. This girl was called
Xseniya. In Kseniya's presence he could not answer the instructor's questions at
all as if it was she rather than the instructor who was greeting him. It was as if
she was a controller over him.

It must be said here inmediately that this is how it happened in reality. Xseniya
Zakhsrovna became Goncharov's wife, came to work with him in the shop where she has
now been working more than 25 years and her duties are a controller of the depart-
ment of technical control, and it is frequently she who checks the movie projectors
which her husband and his comrades assemble. As Goncharov himself states. it is
very difficult to find a more particular and more ”pernicious“ controller.

In 1941 they interrupted their joint plans for the future. The first bomb dropped
by fascist pilots on the plant came into the shop where Grigoriy Andreyevich worked,
whose specialty had become manufacture of mines, antitank grenades and so on.

In May of 1942 several bright 150's rushed along the Ladogs, raising a spray of the
liquid ice. Their wheels were hidden under the water and the madxines, finding
themselves under fire, could be seen from a distance as some fantastic squadron.
They soOn unloaded not far from Volkhovstroy, from which the line of the front

passed three kilometers away. And the just delivered machine tools were installed
in one of the empty shops of the Volkhov aluminum Plant. The two surviving tur-
bines of the Volkhovskaya station provided power and after the second day here they
began to produce weapons for the defenders of Leningrad. Young worker Grigoriy

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Goncharov organized this production. He trained the unusual personnel on the way:
housewives who had never seen a machine tool before and still quite green teenagers.

Nevertheless each day the weapons manufactured by Goncharov and his comrades were

sent directly from the shop to the front from hand to hand. They were sent from
the workers to the troops.

Thus was established the basis for the character of the future ancestor of the
working dynasty of Goncharovs. And primarily a keen feeling of personal responsi-
bility for the fate of the entrusted matter. A beloved matter, great or small, but

needed by the people. Thus the moral heritage of the Soviet worker was accumulated
which he later, years later, could trasnfer to his own sons.

The growing sons unwillingly learned facts and events from the unwritten family
manuscript, perhaps not very significant for others but for them important, that
entered their consciousness and comprised the object of their pride.

It will always be remembered in the Goncharov family how, returning to the plant
even before the end of the war, Grigoriy Andreyevic‘n together with his canrades
examined every piece of the territory under the snow: there they found a cartridge,
there a roller. there a lens--they assembled sound projectors for hospitals and
clubs. And later, after the end of the war, having finished his shift, he went to
restore the equipment of the bombed-out movie theaters on Revskiy Prospekt. They
recall how the head of the family did not return home until late-~they found out
that he was organizing assembly of new complex instruments for spectral analysis.
The instruments were made in the neighboring shop and they were needed by many en-
terprises. Grigoriy Andreyevich came to assist. A person of enormous skill, a
born engineer who had if one may say so "engineering intuition," he entered the
course of affairs quickly. He trained an entire section of assemblers who were
transferred to another shop. They suggested that Goncharov also transfer there.
They promised high wages. he did not go. "It's more interesting for me here. I
am a movie fan.‘

And that is true. It was not easy to find a skillful master in manufacture of
projection equipment of any system and any models--portable, stationary and those
designed for showing of any films.

The rank and file worker becomes a full representative of the firm Lona abroad.

The famous hall of science was erected in Warsaw and the sons accompany Grigoriy
Andreyevich to Poland. The father will install the Soviet movie equipment there.
Late: his labor "geography" already encompasses Prague. Tokyo, Osaka and some Afri-
can countries. His sons accompany his to Guinea, Togo and Mali.

Grigoriy Andreyevich is a kind, simple and open man to when people are attracted,
answering friendship with friendship and listening to his words. Once in Mali he
even became an instigator of a unique "subbotnik." more during his free time
Goncharov and his new friends organized immaculate order in the room of the movie
theater where the movie projector was installed. They quickly became accustomed
to Grigoriy Andreyevich and the local residents asked him to repair their watches
and some kinds of household appliances. he repaired them. Unselfishly and with
friendliness.

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mce his oldest son asked Goncharov:

"Tell me frankly: You've been working for 40 years in the same shop and in the
same section and you have been involved in the same thing for 40 years. Tell no,
swear to me, is it not boring? Wouldn't you like to transfer?”

Goncharov shrugged his shoulders, removed his glasses and looked with surprise at
him.

”Now what is this! Transfer. First, I have one love. I love my work, my occupa-
tion and as they say in the song, "I hope that this is mutual.“ work and an occu-
pation love him who is true to it. It then opens for him one secret after another.

If one only looks at it more attentively, it opens to one that which amazes oneself:
of course, how did I not guess this earlier.“

And since all members of his family are avid movie and photographic amateurs, he
explains:

“Let's say that two persons take a photograph of Mednyy vsadnik or some other well-
known site. You look at the photograph of one and you have seen it a thousand times.
But in the photograph of another there is a discovery! It's as if this miracle oc-
curs for the first time before your eyes! This is because the second person looked
for and found an unexpected angle and knew how to see that which all others had
passed by."

Thus it was in the shop of Goncharov himself. a long time ago they had put into
serial production a single movie projection apparatus. It came off the conveyor lot
after lot over many years. And it sewed there was nothing "to take away and to
add" to it. And the comnts of users were the best. No one gave any attention to
the KPT, as this apparatus was called. But Goncharov did. he looked at the ordin-
ary with a fresh eye. And he suddenly saw that the system for switching on the cut-
out arc was insufficiently perfected and convenient. One could get along without
it. One could make it so that the arc itself was switched on.

Of course, this is what they did. The designers agreed inediately. Because Gon-
charov's unexpected suggestion was extremely simple. And the advantage from intro-
ducing it was enormous.

Incidentally, if one calculates the advantages from the ianmersble suggestions of .

Goneharov, they would have long ago been worth 200,000 rubles, not counting those
introductions which were officially not formalized.

The most experienced designers of the fin feel that Grigoriy Andreyevich is their
own colleague. There is reason to talk about him, to consult with him, to think
and debate with him. Yes, yes and to debate since it happens thusly: the old en-
gineer-mstalworkar, usually quiet and ohliging, unexpectedly becomes prickly and
implacable. This is when he is convinced that he is right and that failure to in-
troduce his suggestion nay inflict losses on the firm. Again and again he sets up
an experiment and seeks new, more convincing proof of his position.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Incidentally, most frequently his situations are still without conflict. There

where true talent, invaluable experience and knowledge are found, there is noplace
for conceit .

how long they had racked their brains over a mechanism which was supposed to guar-
antee simultaneous automatic exposure in an installation of 11 projection apparatus

which was ordered for a cinerama in Tokyo. Grigoriy Andreyevich suggested the
solution. '

All these histories of course become worthy of the unwritten family manuscript and
are given to the sons--the heirs. ‘

The heirs. Grigoriy Andreyevich, when they gather together around the table, at-
tempts to talk with them more carefully 'so as not to chatter,‘ although he still
looks at his sons with an evaluating glance and smiles. all of them even in char-

acter are hardly similar to each other, but there is something of their father in
each one.

The oldest, Viktor, has a high forehead with a forelock and has been with the firm
for several years already. Viktor came to zone immediately after the eighth grade,
became a radio installer and learned the fine art of installing the most crucial
assemblies in spectral analysis instruments.

Father and son consulted many times and debated various engineering problems but
not only engineering problems occurring in production. Grigoriy Andreyevich was
glad that his sen accepts everything warmly and close to his heart that concerns
the life of a shop and Grigoriy Andreyevich was glad when once viktor showed his
father a new certificate of a shock worker of communist labor.

The most pleasant for the head of the family was not external indicators, but the
essence of character. He saw that it was easy for the young fellow to both work
and study, completing the 9th, 10th and llth grades in the evenings. But the firm
urgently needed builders for reconstruction of the shops. There were not enough
builders. The young people decided: we will help and we shall work on the con-
struction project. And Viktor was aaong them-~one of the first.

Another time Viktor heard friction in the shop. Grigoriy Andreyevich was planning
to step in but his son sharply stopped him:

“I will do it myself."

More than anything in life he generally likes independence and self-reliance as
incidentally does everyone in the family. Like Gennadiy. Many saw in him the fu-
ture of a musician from his childhood. Grigoriy Andreyevich bought a piano for his
son and the young fellow had absolute pitch and could listen for hours, enchanted,
to a melody that he liked.

But the son selected his father's path. He entered the shop where his father works.
He became a worker.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And music? No, he did not forget it. True, not so much time remains for it: work,
studies at the technical school in the evenings, but still the hours which he can
devote to Tschaikovsky and Chopin are doubly precious.

His father patiently taught his son to think about any, even a seemingly simple
operation so that each action was justified and previously calculated. And if it
was complicated he said: “Do not hurry. Think about it. If something does not
work then think about it again. I will say nothing. You will achieve it with your
own mind and you will remember it more strongly. To think is the main thing in any
occupation."

Gennadiy has already attained the third rank of assembler-engineer and his father
has attained sixth rank. This is still a very difficult position to achieve, but
Grigoriy Andreyevich has no doubt that Gennadiy will reach it successfully. Al-
though the road is steep, but if.it was laid by the father, the son will travel
more easily along it.

The third son, the youngest, also plans to travel in his father's path. And it is
not only in the fact that Sergey is studying in the technical school at the firm
but perhaps even more important is the fact of how he listens and instills in him-
self what his father, mother and two older brothers say at home about the enter-
prise. And they always talk about this since their common work is at the firm--
the main and inseparable part of their life.

The Generous Life of Valentin Petukhov

Our first meeting with Valentin Yakovlevich Petukhov occurred in the shop where
modern videotape recorders are developed for television studios. Hundreds of peo-
ple in snow white smacks were working behind long tables in an enormous light hall
similar to a scientific laboratory. Among them I sought out Petukhov, a solid,
wideshouldered man with thin and soft features of a dark face.

He looked somewhat like a kindly schoolteacher and this was unexpected for me since
I already knew that Petukhov served in the paratroopers during the war years, per-
ticipated in the liberation of Vienna of fascist occupation troops and was awarded
the Order of Glory, third degree. At that time he had just barely turned 18.

Now he, like everyone here, was sitting in a snow white smock and holding in one
hand a small electric soldering iron and in the other pincers and carefully, like
a surgeon, touched different points of a dark panel on which, unfathomable to the
foreign eye, a labyrinth gradually occurred in the thinnest varicolored wires.

The labyrinth contained nuemrous triodes, diodes and capacitors--the filling for
various types of units which. bein joined with other electronic and optical de-
vices, are transformed into a videotape recorder. This videotape recorder with the
mark Louo then receives a permanent registration in our or foreign studios.

his friends in the shop Vladimir Sutulov, a former Baltic sailor and now an in-
staller, member of the party rayon committee, the oldest worker Tat'yena Nikolayev-

na Ul'yanova and veteran of the firm Ivan Ivanovich Teyganov asked me to write
about Valentin Yakovlevich.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He enumerated tens of names and about each knew what "really should be talked
about.“

"You already know what kind of people these are," says Petukhov, "when I came here:
I was already approaching 25 years. And I had no specialty at all. I worked as a
stevedore for several years after the war. The wages were good but the work was
not very interesting. I decided that I will spit on the wages and become an appren-
tice. And Speranskiy, the then deputy chief of the shop, says to me: 'well, young
fellow, it is already time for you to take on a family so how can I take you on as
an apprentice? And what about it if we innediately give you the fourth rank? You
have a secondary education and you were omnected to engineering in the army. I
will talk to the fellows. One must assist a former man of the front.”

The next day he was already hired on the production line where they at that time
installed the sound amplifying equipment for movie projectors. He tried as well as
he could. he was very excited. It seemed to him that everyone looks reproachtully
at his unskilled hands. But ‘rat’yana Ul'yanova came up to him and at that time she
was still a very young installer.

”Don't be embarrassed, no one can glue it i-ediately. You have already managed so
muchl" she praised him, although a whole pile of parts had accumulated near Petu-
khov and he was unwillingly delaying the remaining ones on the production line.
Tat'yana skillfully assisted him. And not only she, but Sutulov, 'l‘syganov and any-
one that he requested about this and those that even he did not ask.

Petukhov relates many of these stories and finishes them with the words: "You know
that I was always lucky to be among good people.“ more was among these stories
one quite long ago during the blockade. It turned out that he stayed in the be-
sieged city even as a teenager without parents and relatives. He roamed through
the snow-covered streets and fell into the snowdrit'ts. weakened and powerless. And
probably he would never have gotten up it sees Red Army soldier, passing by in a
sleigh, dug him out, brought him to consciousness and took him home.

we not with Petukhov many times. Bis.involuntary "lyrical asides“ helped to under-
stand much in his character, which was kind, gentle and sympathetic.

LOHO had long ago become for Valentin Yakovlovich not only the place where he works
but the main content of his li to. This was a platform for creativity tor which
Petukhov and many others comrades live. He is at the center or the social life of
his shop and his tirm. During 23 years of sork he was elected to the shop connit-
tee, the secretary of the party bureau and a member of the party omittee of the
association. A quiet life is not for him--he is always advocating something, makes
some suggestion, checks and organizes. He also has integrity. But this is the in-
tegrity of a working man and a foreman who loves his work. And if he, Petukhov,
installs a complex model of a videotape recorder, tor example, the Elektron-Z, then
everything should be at the highest level.

It is because of this feature of his character that Petukhov insists on an opera-
tion which is here called “a hairstyle." This Operation is the last before the
new apparatus is sent to its point of destination. Petukhov carries out the final

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the most precise finishing. This always costs him enormous tension. After
all, even the strictest controllers give their approval but Petukhov still has
something to finish. Once one of the foreman could not stand it:

"well, how much can you do. Soon you will begin to sign your name on each
instrument.”

Petukhov shrugged his shoulders:

"Our signatures--nine and yours--already are on each instrument. And the signature

of everyone who works at the firm. This is the same signature, the collective sig-
nature who. "

Petukhov's concern was always businesslike and creative. However. he talked very
temperamentally at the party meeting of the section and the design office. But
this was not simply the fervor of an orator. The very next day he and his comrades
in the brigade began to think about developing a special improved bench so as to
check the correctness of installation of the most complex circuits more rapidly,
more precisely and more reliably. And soon a special board with varicolored signal
lamps appeared in the section. Press a button and the manycolored lights instantly
let one know how one or another circuit is behaving.

Yet another innovation was born here through the joint efforts of the same instal-
lerso-special production boards for so-called tying of the bundles when installing
the videotape recorders. All this facilitated and accelerated labor and improved
the reliability of the most important assemblies and units in the apparatus.

Nevertheless, Petukhov did not parade his participation in innovation and in
creativity. But when he as secretary of the party bureau and later as a member of
the party committee was called upon to "create, seek and test,” no one could re-
proach him: But how are things with yourself?"

The word "study“ is not simply a slogan at LOUD. courses, the evening school, the
technical school and the division of the vus are an entire academic combine to one's
own efforts. Valentin Yakovlevich has already taken knowledge from almost all these
sources. But he also has other sources. Former apprentices. Here he goes into the
design office to the chief engineer Aleksandr Kuzin:

"Sasha.I would like to consult with you on perhaps one question."

Sasha kuzin and 18 more of the same teenagers as he came to Leno from the PTO when
it was just beginning to be organised and they were all taken under the wing of
Valentin Yakovlevich. Petukhov taught them and acted as their mentor. He noted
Sasha Kuzin especially when they were assembling sound recording systems: from
the start the young fellow grasped the situation and exasperated his mentor some-
times with the most unexpected but very lucid and serious questions.

Petukhov also thought at that time: here is someone that will be turned into an
engineer in the future. And he directed the young fellow: study! The years

passed. And Petukbov comes to one of his former apprentices. now the chief engin-
eer of the firm, for advice and consultation.

69

Ffﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂC1AL USE:(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISE ONLY

The breadth of this knowledge and his rich experience also made Petukhov himself a
consultant but frequently an authoritative arbiter in discussions as well. The
version was frequently confirmed which Valentin Yakovlevich had given high marks
to. And then they say at the Ska: “So, Petukhov's version is accepted." Some-
times Petukhov's versions are also accepted far beyond the borders of the country
to where Valentin Yakovlevich travels as a chief assembler and a full representa-
tive of LOHO. Thus it was in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Japan where he together
with a group of other workers assembled the cinerama ordered in Leningrad for movie
theaters.

Can he really forget those restless days and nights in the laboratory, in the ex-
perimental section of the assembly benches alongside developers Kira Nikolayevna
Tsvetkova, Militsa Aleksandrovna Bonn and others. He recalled the first two shy
female students of the institute of movie engineers who were trained in the shop

in the assembly-installation section. They literally did not leave the side of
Valentin Yakovlevich when the first cinerama set was being assembled. Everything
had to be solved for the first time: for example, how to assemble the motor. The
success of synchronous starting of all the systems, including those related to
focussing the image, sound transmission and so on, depended largely on the accuracy

of selection. The experience and knowledge of chief installer Valentin Yakovlevich
Petukhov were natural here.

And all together triumphantly noted the first awards--the bronze medal of VDNKh and
diplomas from the cssa government.

An order from Japan then came in. But it was a new order--this was not a repeat
of the past order. There is the same tradition at LOMO: each new model of an ap-
paratus or device is continuously more improved than its predecessors.

The cinerama for Japan was the most complex unit with the most modern magnetic tape
devices and noise-protective filters controlled from a single console. The new
unit was too sensitive for long voyages and malfunctions appeared during the test
startups. The search and intensive experiments continued during assembly in Japan.

And this was very difficult since the deadline for turning over the apparatus was
determined. '

Petukhov, like his remaining comrades, had reason to become very much agitated;
without stopping assembly, they changed this and corrected that 'on the road.“

The cinerama was turned over to the Japanese within the established deadline. Dur-
ing assembly the Japanese specialists treated Petukhov with special deference. He
inspired in them involuntary respect of his skills, erudition and some special
modesty and kindness. The curious Petukhov asked the Japanese about their life and
told them about his own Seviet country.

When Petukhov returned from his next short assignment abroad to his own shop, he
had the feeling that the separation had continued for entire years.

Once, after a long absence, he noted two young, broad-shouldered youths in the me-
chanical section at the milling machines. Petukhov at first thought,these are
novices and I must become acquainted with them. Later, having looked closely, he
smiled and loudly pronounced: ”You returned!“

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And they both looked toward him
"Valentin Yakovlevichl How are youl"

He was glad to see them like his own sons. These two had come to the shop once

from the P‘l‘U. But their efforts did not flag. Their work in the section was pre-
cise and complex. And they were intimidated by it. And therefore of ccurse their
wages were low. But once confidence in onself is less, the consequence is almost
always being released at one's desire. Petukhov, and not only he, but many other

ooununists of the shop sounded the alarm: we must help the fellows stand on their
feet.

However, some then tried to cool their ardor:

“Is there a reason to fire the crew? They will have to go into the any within 6
months anyway.‘

But Petukhov came to the party meeting:

“He must look ahead and help the fellows to gain confidence and to convince them
that their future is here in the shop. So that they themselves will return to us
to the firm from the army. They must do it themselves."

After the meeting there was a confidential conversation with Anatoliy Babanov and
the best milling machine operators in the shop.

"Fellows, I am hoping for you. This, is my personal request. Take these two still
untried youths and do not let them be separated from our collective.“

Experienced mentors appeared among the fellows. And they tried. Valentin Yakov-
levich was frequently among them and advised:

"Do not atteupt to 'overtake the plan' ismediately. ‘rry to do no more, but do it
better. ‘me speed will take care of itself."

And now they learned and how! They served their tern: in the army, returned to
their own shop and received good wages and study.

And it was that Valentin Yakovlevich, having zealously tried to hold each of then
in the shop, said to one of his apprentices:

“But perhaps it is better for you to leave. You have another calling."

This was Oleg hikhaylov, a 16-year-old youth. He had been hired in the shop on the
request of his mother. He was a student. But Petukhov later took his under his
om wardship. He was not a youth, but quicksilver! And he seemed to be intelli-
gent. But he did not desire to understand the simplest things in assembly. Petu-
khov also frequently noted something else in him: the youth's desire for drawing.
He was always drawing and everywhere. Petukhov saw in his hone the numerous
sketches--landscapea, portraits and genre scenes. He then decided:

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Whether you believe it or not, you have a different path--to the artist's school.‘

This was a long time ago! And now oleg had graduated from a special school and
was a decorator artist of lenfil'm. When Petukhov sees his name on the movie cred-
its he is proud: "My 01¢?!" And as before Oleg regards Petukhov as his teacher.

Landscapes given to him by Oleg hang in Valentin Yakovlevich's new apartment re-
ceived from the firm. Petukhcv and his sons are constant visitors of exhibitions
in the Hermitage and the Russian Museum. And this is an irresistible need and at-
traction toward the beautiful. And therefore it is not accidental that the section
foreman, talking about Valentin Yakovlevich, once said:

'Petukhov knows how to do everything only beautifully. As if her were drawing it.
He is an artist in his own way."

Hence, another of his passions is understandable: flowers. Flowers which he grows
at his dacha at Karel'skaya Peresheyka, an object of his special pride and tender
concerns. His many shop acquaintances also love these flowers. Petukhov's dacha
was obtained ”from the firm" in a special resort zone of the association. He
brings his friends there in his Hoskvich so that each one can fall in love and
share with him the joy of meeting the amazing creations of nature.

The PetukhOVs have three sons. The oldest, Valentin, works in Far Yakutiya, the
youngest, Aleksey is still a student, and the middle one, Andrey, serves in the
Soviet Army. A letter has already come from the unit in which the coemnnder
thanked Valentin Yakovlevich and his wife Nina Vasilevna for their excellent edu-
cation of their son.

Petukhov lives in vyborgskaya Starona on old Vasenko Ulitsa in no way especially
noticeable. But they are frequently on Laboratornaya Ulitsa. Here many people
know Petukhov and especially the workers of the housing offices. He now calls one
with regard to repair of the recreation and reading room, about the library, or
he organizes lectures through the efforts of the residents themselves.

Why is Petukhov here? He is not a deputy nor an inspector of the Department of
Culture. But Valentin Yakovlevich is this type of person: he is always there
where there is the possibility to do something good, interesting and useful.

Petukhov's sons were attracted in childhood, even without his influence, to radio
engineering. But are there really others who are not interested in this? Thus
there may be the opportunity to organize these circles for the young people-~his .
neighbors on the street. And is there not joy in bringing music, the theatre and
creative arts to his many friends?

All this led Petukhov to the party committee of the firm where he was appointed
the chairman of the coordinating council to work with the population.

And he has had many enthusiasts: workers, foreman, engineers and retirees. All
of them are from LDMO. And Valentin Yaklovlevich heads these people.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Optics is Their Family Hatter
An Unexpected Acquaintance

My first acquaintance with the Golovan workers' dynasty occurred by correspondence
and under unexpected circumstances.

They told me at one of the scientific research institutes where problems of genet-
ics were studied what amazing possibilities modern biological science has. me is

it now not capable of establishing, penetrating into the secrets of the living
cell!

They showed me an instruaent toward which they exercised special respect and care,

carefully touching its dull gray body. It is called a fluorescent biological
microscope.

"This is an entire unit filled with the most complex and delicate equipment," con-
tinues my guide. ”All previous biological microscopes regarded as perfected cannot
compare with it. How can they! We can observe a cell only in section. It was
specially processed, frozen and stained. Many, many hours were spent on this. And
we observed it only in the static stateudead and immobile. And at that only visu-
ally by eye. The new microscope has produced a revolution! We see a cell in its
natural state-«dive and in its own light. we see all the changes in its microstruc-
ture. we can make any photograms, use spectral methods of analysis, obtain auto-
matic recording of information and use polarization microscopy. And all this in a
single instrument.“

"Incidentally. they sent a specialist to us at the mac laboratory for these in-
struments so that everything would be debugged, regulated and adjusted locally.

We were amazed by his work hereufast, precise and confident. his name is Golovan'
and he is young, sympathetic and Jolly. And later as it turned out he is not an
engineer nor a technician but “simply“ as he said. an ordinary optical engineer.
And he assembles these unique microscopes in his own experimental section.

The scientist expressed a wish upon parting:

"If you are at LONG talk with Golovan'. he should be an interesting person. And
from all of us give him our respects.”

I decided to fulfill the scientist's wish with pleasure, but it turned out that it
is not as simple to do this for the most unexpected reason. They asked me in the
personnel department of mm:

“Golovan'? Which one? Do you know how many Golovan's we have?“

The young female worker of the department began to enmerate:

"Mikhail Golovan'. that's one. Viktor Golovan' is two, Tamara Golovan' is three

and Nina Golovan' is four. Incidentally. Nina is no longer a Golovan’ but a
Smirnova because she married, but her husband also works here at mm."

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In general an entire dynasty. The girl talked about this dynasty with pride.
“But I need Golovan' the optician,‘ I said more carefully.

"But they are all opticians.”

"All? well, the one of them who is a specialist in microscopes. Fluorescent bio-
logical microscopes.”

”They are all specialists in both fluorescent and ultraviolet and generally in any
microscopes which the LOMO company produces."

There was only one way out: to meet with all the Golovan's. And this is how I
proceeded.

A Matter of heredity

And now almost all the Golovan's were assembled in a large three-room apartment on
vyborgskaya Storona at the youngest of the brothers'--Viktor Georgiyevich, as it
turned out the very one to which the scientist sent his best regards.

Unlike Viktor, quiet and thorough, Mikhail is warm and fiery. Both look much

younger than their age and something boyish and mischievous remained in them. They

both suddenly began to quarrel, recalling yesterday's fishing trip to Shchuch'ye

02ero, now "seizing" on the character and "intelligence" of pigeons. They have
been attracted by pigeons since childhood.

In general they are very fond of living nature and therefore the rooms have been
filled with aquariums with electric lighting, with fantastic grottoes among the
algae, among which swim odd, exotic fishes. And their home is also full of flowers.
Flowers are also a "weakness" of the Golovan's: They have transformed their plot
in the collective garden of the firm into a living, fragrant and beautiful carpet.
And of course everything that they do, they do "scientifically.” Much special
literature has been read and assimilated both about raising aquarium fish and about
raising flowers.

They do everything scientifically-~this has become a habit related to their work at
the optical firm. It isn't enough to have "golden hands" here, one must also have
theoretical knowledge.

viktcr Georgiyevich is an optical engineer in the experimental section. Mikhail
Seorgjyevich has the same position in the Laboratory of aicroscopy of the Central
Design Office, the wife of Viktor, Tamar Pstrovna is a designer and the husband of
xina Golovan', Vladimir Smirnov, is a designer.

Microscopy is really a family occupation of this dynasty. Those who develop micro-
scopes at LOMO are permanently connected to such scientific and scientific research
institutions as the Institute of Psychology, the Military Medical Academy, the
Institute of High Molecular Compounds, the Institute of Physiology and the Botan-
ical Institute. And each institute has its own special requirements on an

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

instrument and its own special tasks and goals which its developers must take into
account. Therefore. one can see at the assembly table in the shops a venerable
scientist-designer and optical engineer discussing problems related to the devel-
opment of the next experimental model of a future instrument.

They are all Golovan's with secondary and specialized education, not counting the
innunerable courses for raising qualifications which they have taken.

Mikhail adds:

"we at who are all 'permanent students' and study there never ends for anyone.
You study-and everyone here, regardless of whether you are a worker as viktor and
I are or designers like Tamara and Velodya are. It is impossible otherwise. One

must maintain the mark. The mark of the firm. Yes, and speaking frankly, the mark
of a dynasty.”

The mark of the Golovan' dynasty is thought of highly at the firm. Lona veterans

say that this is a family of specialists, public-spirited persons and good succes-
sors to working family traditions that have been given to optical production for
more than 150 years.

Roots and Branches

The present Golovan's are a branch of the root which was begun here by the heredi-
tary St. Petersburg worker Georgiy Metrofanovich Golovan'. He began: already be-
ing married. he became an apprentice automatic lathe operator and gained the occu-
pation of machine tool operator. He was one of the shock workers of the First
Five-Year Plan. He finished the technical school and headed the optical shop of
the plant. During world War TI he was evacuated together with the enterprise to
distant cask, where he was elected the plant party organizer.

The present Golovan's were still young boys during the difficult military evauca-
tion. They recall those rare hours when their father was able to be at home. They
looked at him as at a wizard who could create anasing things “from nothing.“ For

example, he could make a stool, table or even a cabinet from smingly unnecessary
slabs.

They then worked together: wooden skates with metal runners, skiis and genes. And
all this was made with their own hands. with their own hands! “at joy it was for
the young Golovan's to give a game made with their own hands to one of the comrades
and to hear their approval:

"Well, how about that! You really did it yourself?"

The father said:

"would you like to make an even more valuable gift for your friends? Then teach

them so that they can make the same thing themselves. hands are not only for
holding a spoon but a banner as well. Right?“

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately, this happy time of being alongside his father did not happen very
frequently. He taught day and night at the plant and everyone was working for the
front: mother, Valentina Hikhaylovna, a seamstress by profession and grandmother.

The grandmother, Yekaterina Mikhaylovna Golovan', was an old Bolshevik. Despite
her advanced age, she took cares on herself during that difficult time to assit
the tens of Leningrad opticians evacuated from the besieged city, bought provisions
for them in the surrounding villages and patiently and persistently helpd her small
wards to find their parents.

Thus lived the Golovan' family, with an open heart. There were no strangers for
them. You would come and there would be enough warmth for everyone. The family
became an orphan after the war--Georgiy Hetrofanovich perished. There remained a
sick mother and three children--Mikhail, Nina and viktor. In memory of their
father they preserved the Order of the Red Banner of Labor, the Order Badge of
honor and the Medal for Labor valor.

And there was yet another award which was always kept in view as during their
father's lifetime. A small, simple school microscope enscribed with their father's
name given by the collective of the enterpriseo-a memorial gift to Georgiy Metro—
fanovich, shock worker of the First Five-Year Plan and enthusiast for development
of Soviet optics. how many times their father‘s hands carefully and gently touched
the black burnished body. what pleasure it was for the children to place their eye
to the microscope eyepiece and then to tell their friends about the fantastic
"secrets” that they had seen.

Georgiy Metrofanovich's friends from the optical shop helped the young fellows to
accomplish their father's dream for them--to become real opticians.

Nina, who had already successfully completed the 10th grade, had already been ap-
pointed as a laboratory worker. The well-known optical engineer Afanasy Petrovich
Terekhov took on Mikhail as an apprentice. And viktor--he was only 13 years old
at that time. Special permission of the trade-union obkom was required for Viktor
to be hired at the plant as an apprentice.

Teachers and Students

The teaching of the brothers proceeded very rapidly. First, their father had in-
stilled in them since childhood the thirst for skills and the joy of creativity
even in the simplest work. Second, the occupation of optician was always the most
significant and interesting in his eyes and his sons looked at everzthing through
their father's eyes. Third, hikhail, who was two years older than Viktor, managed
to learn something in the Pioneer House as a schoolboy. learned the skills of mill-
ing and lathe operation and could himself turn a fine part. Viktor learned every-
thing from his older brother.

The main thing was that from the first steps the working youth of the brothers was
surrounded by the kindness of Georgiy Metrofanovich's friends--Galakhov, Terekhov
and many others who remembered his sincere generosity. Afansiy Petrovich Terekhov
seemed strict and closed to Mikhail. At first he even felt some fear of him. And
why not feel fear! From the first days Terekhov gave him unexpectedly difficult
assignments.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He had to learn to think for himself. Mikhail understood very quickly how right
his mentor was, who only from the side could seem to be "a dried-up man" and who
in fact from the first steps tried to teach the novice the most important thing in
his occupation which was always related to a persistent independent search and
solution of many difficult problems in assembly, installation and adjustment of
optical instruments.

It is unimportant that you made an error. It is important that you thought, Tere-
khov loved to repeat and added: "You know. they say among the people, he who knows
little makes no errors but that who is confident and knows everything does make
errors. And then he began to patiently explain what the error was.”

Mikhail was transferred long ago to another section and if there was a need for it
he went to Afanasiy Petrovich long after for advice. And even being an Optical
engineer of sixth rank and working in the research laboratory on experimental
models of the latest microscopes or rather on mockups of these models, he mentally
consulted with ‘nerekhov. And it was as if he heard again as in his youth: "Now
you think about itl You think about it againl' And it turned out that this advice
was constantly effective: to think and learn in one's own experience and in the
experience of one's colleagues.

His father's friends were worried about selecting the future occupation of the
13-year-old viktor. Petr Harkovich 'h/chin and Pavel' Nikolayevich Pavlov-adjust-
ers of automatic machinesutried to get him into the automatic machine shop.

Lathe operator Nikolay Vasil'yevich Xuznetsov and old optical engineer Peodor
Aleksandrovich Galakhov tried to get him to their shop in the assembly and exper-
imental section. They argued where it would be better for the young fellow and
where it would be most interesting.

Viktor decide? himself:
"I want to work with Misha. With my brother."

He then began learning the skills of a comparatively young engineer--Ruf Ivanovich
Kolosov, with whom he quickly became friends.

Everyone tried in his own way to teach the lively restless youth in the occupation
of Optician. In order to learn all its fine points, constant attention, the capa-
bility of careful accumulation of skills and of scrupulous analysis of one's own
successes and failures were required. Only then could one gain the real attraction
of an occupation.

would Viktor become such a one?

Like a sponge he soaked up everything that Galakhov and Kolosov said and showed to
him. And he learned their working procedures and secrets of his future occupation.
The yOung Golovan' changed before their very eyes. The boyish fidgetyness disap-
peared and he became reserved and close-mouthed. And the single thing with which
he exasperated both his mentors and the designers. developers and investigators who
came to the shop ms his endless questions.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Viktor worked with ecstasy. No one seemingly noticed when this young fellow con-
trived to learn everything. It was suddenly discovered that he could work on the
milling machine and it was not known when he had learned the fine points of lathe
arts. Kolosov "suddenly" discovered this in him. And Kolosov gradually began to
trus: Viktor with assembly not only of small assemblies, but the most complex ad-
justing instrunents. including special micromevie units, microhardness measuring
instrumnts with runote control and finally models of biological microscopes.

Young Veterans
Kolosov looked at he charge of whom he was truly proud.

"Now here is a real Golcvan'," he began to repeat, "he knows how to maintain the
family honor. You only have to tr e: him and he will fulfill it."

"Do you think you are not getting too carried away?" Georgiy Viktorovich Orlov,
the most "nagging” foreman from the centre; service, tried to moderate Kolosov's
enthusiasm. This was the most experienced specialist whose keen, proficient eye

was hardly inferior to the most delicate instruments and standards which he had
used in checking.

"I will answer for the young fellow,“ answered Koloeov.

And the professional skills of the young Golovan' brothers who had given great
hope, received the high marks of specialists.

Moreover, the brothers helped each other and extricated each other. The 20-year-
old Mikhail acquired the highest sixth rank in spite of all the adopted deadlines.
viktor, when he was only 18 years old, had already achieved the fifth rank and
soon, like his brother. achieved the sixth rank of optical engineer.

Fewer and fewer of the veterans--friends of their fathernresained at the enter-
prise. And it soon turned out that the ”veterans“ were now regarded as the Golo-
van' brothers themselves, although they were still of Komsomol age.

'Ihe brothers already enjoyed the reputation of very experienced specialists by the
time that who wn created. They were now requested to train personnel for the ex-
panded production.

Creativity of the Brothers

aikhail was persuaded. A central design office was being organized and a special
research laboratory of microscopy was in it. You will work alongside researchers.
As what? As their first assistant and participant in investigations. You will
develop new circuits and check than on models for them. And of course you will
make these mockups yourself. You are capable of doing this.

Rikhail agreed.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The establishment of the firm opened up new vast opportunities for creativity.
Microscopes with the LONG mark had already been sent to the markets in tens of
countries and the most diverse institutes-4mm medical to metallurgical--sent in
orders for development and creation of ever newer and newer microscopes.

Mikhail occupied a worker's position among a large collective of investigators in
the laboratory. And he worked alongside engineer-specialists Inessa Leonid0vna
Zarubina, Irina Konstantinovna Lapina, Natal'ya unitriyevna Glazunova, Natal‘ya
Sergeyevna Kibitkina and natal'ya Hikhaylovna Gunchenkova, designers Anatoliy
Ivanovich Mamayev and Aleksey Alekseyevich makov, designers and specialists in
optical calculations and among them was doctor of technical sciences Viktor
Alekseyevich Panov.

Mikhail worked alongside each of them or rather together with them. 'lbgether be-
cause an investigator and developer unwillingly seems to think aloud alongside
Mikhail's job side, desiring to hear his opinion continuously.

Mikhail listens attentively and rubs his hand through his tousled hair. Beginning
to develop a new device. he knows already for whom this device is designated. An-
other time a developer of a mockup must literally show "on his fingers” how he
would like it and how he sees the future instruments. New assemblies and parts
are not always manufactured specially for the mockup but old, used parts are used
in most cases. And frequently this mockup looks ridiculous externally. And even
so this is a ”live” instrument. It should indicate what it is capable of, whether
it is true to the idea in the design and whether the calculations were accurate.

And now much depends on the rank and file worker, optical-engineer Mikhail Golovan'.
The mockup was made with skill and knowledge and with a feeling of responsibility
and this is a prototype of a future, but still only an experimental model. The
fate of the instrument is frequently on his conscious: will it be or not. And
there is no lack of consultants in the laboratory and the snuscientists-special-
ists. And what about practical doubts? Mikhail picks up the telephone:

“Hello, Vitya? Could you drop in. We must.."

For a long time vitya was for Mikhail only a younger brother over whom he lorded it
as an older brother protected him and taught him how to think. The younger was now
already a figure among the microscope specialists and he already travelled to
Moscow. Kiev. Tbilisi and other cities as a representative of the firm. He inde-
pendently adjusted special microscope units. The first optical instrument assem-
bled by his hands for investigation in ultraviolet beams was exhibited at the
world exhibition in Brussels. Many other improved models of ultraviolet micro-
scopes which the firm developed with his participation were displayed and received
high marks at the exhibition in Montreal.

There was perhaps not a single model of an instrument into which vik.-or has not
put something of himself: either a correction to the design itself or to the as-
sembly technique or to the method of adjustment that guarantees the greatest ac-
curacy. Viktor, having become a recognized leader among the assemblers in the
optical section and their brigade leader, has also made a name for himself in the
research laboratory to which he of course came not only at the request of his
brother.

79
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Once Viktor together with doctor of technical sciences v. A. Panov was sent from
wno to Stockholm. Here they assembled and demonstrated the latest model of an
ultraviolet microscope. Representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany with
their similar unit also came there. An involuntary comparison was awaited:
whose model is best?

when they unpacked our instrument it seemed that it had been basically damaged

during shipment due to someone's careless. Panov, placing his eye to the eyepiece,
exclaimed:

"Viktor Georgiyevich, look. What is this? There are some shadows in the field
of vision.”

They appealed to the Swedish workshop. Under the vigilant observation of Viktor

and upon his instructions and with his participation, the Swedish workers repaired
the instrument. Viktor did not sleep until almost the following morning.

When Panov again began to check the instrument, he could only say to viktor:

“You are a real wizard. Honestly."

The most prominent specialists compared both instruments over a period of time in
Stockholm. The instrment with the nose mark was rated higher in all parameters.

Viktor was also in mgland, where he went as an exhibit guide to an industrial
exhibition where all firms of the world producing microscopes displayed their
products. That is why when Viktor comes into the laboratory or the design office
he is listened to with the greatest interest. They know that viktor has a precise
and clear eye in precision mechanics.

And now Viktor has come to Hikhail's laboratory. Mikhail shows his brother the
mockup of the new model of the ultraviolet microscope.

It turns out that one of the investigators suggests some new version of the assem-
bly or unit in the instrument. If Mikhail or Viktor says: “No, this will not do.“
they may not waste time in checking. And it really will not do. If they say:
“Yes, this will do," then there is already no doubt that effort. energy and funds
can be expended on final finishing of the device.

And what will Viktor Colovan' now say to his brother?

Viktor does not hurry with the answer. He slowly walks around the mockup, looks at
it, asks Mikhail to show him now one, now another assembly, listens to the explana-
tions of the developer and asks many questions. Viktor understands the entire
crucial nature of what has happened and does not waste words. He is interested

in eliminating possible complications in the design beforehand. After all, he

will be the one who will assemble the first experimental model after the mockup.

He must think. ‘no thinkuin the language of both brothers this means that may
will test all the unknown methods and procedures of precision machining of the

surface and will invent new methods and procedures day after day both during work
and after work. Viktor is especially skillful in this.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example, the surface of the disk had been brought to the ideal. This was only
the beginning. Now a layer of special “sealer“ glue a fraction of a micron thick
had to be applied to the disk somehow ideally. And only then did Viktor answer the
investigators:

“You can produce this instrument. as can cope with it!“

rater, when Viktor Golovan' was accepted into the party, one of the old workers who
had recommended him said:

“viktor Golovan' lives with his work and is anxious about his work and for him it
is everything in the world. Some say that he is not very talkative. They ask
whether he teaches young people? His main educational line is again work. Every
instrument assembled by him teaches people in itself with its high quality. He
increases respect for labor and respect for the working man. An instrument devel-
oped by Golovan' is its primary characteristic. Not only young but experienced
opticians come to him for experience. He is a thorough person in everything."

That was truly said: “He is thorough in everything.“ Viktor Golovan' penetrates
not only to the heart of an instrument but to its economics as well: he calculates
and knows how much a fluorescent microscope will cost the firm. Why it is not less
expensive is also his personal concern. He suggests that some especially labori-
ous processes be made more efficient. The result is 1,500 rubles saved for the
firm. The most complex assembly, accessible only to assemblers of the highest
rank. is located in the three-floor photochamber of an instrument for taking pic-
tures with different degree of lighting. He suggested the technique in which a
number of the most complex operations can be entrusted to young optical engineers.

Generally if one listens what the youngest Golovan' is talking about at party met-
ings, it may sometimes seem that he attracts newer and newer concerns to his shop.
For example, something is not going well with his neighbors and Viktor asks that
these assemblies be transferred to his shop. Not everyone likes this. Sometimes
the rejoinder is thrown at the orator: "You will make a mess of it yourself." And
he as if nothing has happened says: "Of course I will. I would like to do it with

your help. "

"Yourself” is his brigade which includes his old mentor Volosov and his young
friends Valentin Galakhov, Mikhail Shalygin, Pavel Sobkin and others.

Golovan ' s and Smirnov

He was not quite five years old when he was left without his father. His mother,
Yekaterina Dmitriyevna, a trolley conductor, took him with her when there was no
one to leave the young child with. From ring to ring. Thus, the war found him
and his mother in the trolley car. When bombing or artillery bombardment of the
city began. the passengers had to ilmaediately run to shelters. And only the. driver
and conductor had not managed to leave the car when everything thundered around
them from the explosions.

"Mama, what about you?" he asked when an air raid alarm sounded in their path.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yekaterina Dmitriyevna quietly answered:
"I? I am on duty."

Once at night in 1942 when the fascist aircraft were bombing Leningrad especially
heavily, “incendiary" bombs began to patter on the roof of the house on the Okhta
where they lived. A land mine exploded somewhere nearby. Yekaterina Dmitriyevna
immediately went to his bed: where is her son: where is Vblodya? And it turns
out that he is on the roof. He is busily extinguishing the ‘incendiary' bombs
together with the adults. His mother throws up her hands:

"What are you doing?“

He answers her:

”And I am on duty. That's all!"

At 13 Volodya was awarded the medal "For the defense of Leningrad."

Several years later Young Komsomol member Vladimir Smirnov became a radio engineer
on a combat vessel plying the vast reaches of the Baltic.

He entered LOHO after the army. He worked and studied. His bent was radio engin-
eering and he found special happiness in electronics. Because at that time the
very first steps were begun here in the unique "cooperation” of optics and elec-
tronics in an instrument itself. in the future microscope. all this attracted the
young engineer. And he became totally involved in electronics and began to study
all the possible versions of interactions with optics. He was carried away with
his work. A practical knowledge of optics or rather knowledge from the practice
of instrument building. assembly and adjustment of microscopes for which his
"electronics beginnings" were intended, were required.

At this time the young Golovan’s. hereditary Opticians who now as one of the first
had to organize manufacture of the latest special microscopes equipped with dif-
ferent electronic units. needed their "own" consultant.

Thus the acquaintance was made, later a friendship began and later an alliance of
engineer-researcher Vladimir Smirnov began with the working dynasty of Golovan's
(Nina Golovan' became his wife).

Vladimir had only to express an idea (he was always full of new ideas) about im-
proving the noise resistance of a circuit or about a new, more successful in his
view system of selecting the diameters or something else and the Golovan's were
ready to test it and try it.

And their voices were heard more and more frequently at party meetings. They talk
about what is first discussed in the family circle: a modern microscope is a mul-
ticomplex and expensive unit and every customer has his own specific requirements
on it (biologists have some, chemists have others, metallurgists have still other
requirements and so on). So does it always make sense to develop a special device

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for every "one-time” customer from the beginning and to the end? But what about
travelling a different path: develop a generally universal design but provide re-
placeable assemblies and change them depending on the customer's profile and

requirements.

Vladimir, a young communist, often insisted on this idea at the laboratory's party
group and at party meetings in the rsKB. And although this idea hardly belonged
to anyone personally, everyone now supported it both with words and deeds until it
became the rule. And again and again the enthusiast engineers-investigators Maria
Davydova, Natal'ya Gunchenkova, Irina Lapina, Vladimir Smirnov and, of course as
always. alongside them the brothers Golovan'--viktor and Hikhail--assembled them.

This is joint labor and joint creativity and a joint search for new paths in which
both the scientists, engineers and workers of the LOMO firm participate on an equal
basis. This is a continuous search. LOMO specialists only quite recently began,
for example, new serial production of an entire family of biological microscopes,
so-called ”biolams."

Incidentally, development of instruments for investigation of the microscopic world
is one of the most important specializations of the firm during the 10th Five-Year
Plan. A large group of specialists-~scientists, engineers and workers--has been
working on development of new devices that help to penetrate the secrets of the
living cell.

Thus it turned out that all the Golovan's assembled most frequently at viktor
Georgiyavich's. And regardless of what the conversation touched on during the
meeting--about detached duty of one of the family members abroad about tours of
MmhAT in Leningrad or about a new book of fiction which one of them had liked and
which each of them would undoubtedly read, everything still turned to these
“microscopes."

Sometimes Nina sighs:

”Again, again they have started talking about microscopes. As if there was nothing
more interesting in the world. You come and they 'arrange' a production meeting for

you."

And this is true. They all applaud and laugh. Everyone is silent for a few mo-
ments. But Viktor unnoticed looks at the old dull black school instrument on its
base which had been given to his father with his name. And he says to his sister:

"well, Ninochka, what can you do. Microscopes are our family business.”

33

lilRiOFiﬂCJAl.lElE(ﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KOSTYGOV UNIVERSITIES

The role of the foreman in production is important and the responsibility placed
on his shoulders and the responsibility for everything that occurs in his section
and that occurs with those under his werdship is important.

Not everyone can be a foreman and not everyone will take on this difficult matter.

Once in the large shop of astronomical instruments of LOHD I had occasion to make
the acquaintance of the oldest foreman of the mechanical section Sergey hikhaylo-
vich Kbstygov. I did not know at that time what position he occupied and I did
not know that quite recently he was awarded the Order of the October Revolution
for his labor success.

It was one of the last days of the month. Behind the glass partition where the
foremen usually are I saw three. They were gravely talking about something. One
of then was familiar to me: the old milling machine operator, Lona veteran Ivan
Fedorovich Kolesnikov. The second also seemed familiar: the athletic face of a
young man in light coveralls, a foppish array was worn almost on the back of his
head. He had a dark thin face. His eyes looked out seriously and thoughtfully
from under his thick dark eyebrows. I had seen him somewhere. I remembered that
his portrait was placed in the enterprise newspaper. He was the winner of a com-
petition among young lathe operators.

The third one I did not know. Young-looking, wide-shouldered with an energetic
face. he was showing them a drawing spread out on the desk.

"Hell, friends, our neighbors are having no success with this instrument. It's
amazing that there are so many operations in one part! How can we help them? The
technique has hardly been developed and organized. What else can we invent here?
They are asking us for help.“

They were talking about serious difficulties in manufacture of a new, very complex
instrument for spectral analyses in the adjacent shop. Development of this instru-
ment is one of the items of the firm's socialist pledges.

Both workers--the old and the young--were listening attentively. Ivan Fedorovich

slightly pursed his lips, asked something, then added: ”So, so" then, putting the
drawing aside, he said quietly:

84

FOR OFTWCJAI.USE1DNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Sergey Hikhaylovich, I don't yet know exactly but we will solve it. He will take

on the entire world. If it must be done then it must be done! Let us begin right
now on the machine tool."

Kolesnikov left and then the young lathe operator. And the one who they called
Sergey Mikhsylovich remained sitting at the desk. Placing his hands on his cheeks,
he again looked the drawing over. I introduced myself. He extended a wide, strong
hand:

"Kostygov, senior foreman of the mechanical section.” And he follows immediately
with the statement: “You could write about mlesnikov. The old man can literally
do everything at his machine tool. A different, even serious part that you have
'tried‘ thousands of times, but he suddenly looks at it in a new light and you can
be sure that he will turn it more precisely and faster. Volodya Skol‘nov, who
was just here, is the same type of pilot.”

"You have many of these aces here?"

”That's true, but there will be more," he finally answered.

The main thing is that everyone wants to become one. And we will help them."

“We“ is a school of communist labor in the machine section which senior foreman
Kostygov heads. This is his party commission.

To my question whether the post of foreman is to his liking, he answered directly:
"It is hard work, but I like it.”

And he immediately asked me a question:

What topic exactly are you interested in?"

There was nothing for me to do but lay my cards on the table:

"Well, what about the role of foreman."

It is probably very curious to hear about an interesting person from other people.
The oldest milling machine operator of the astronomical shop Ivan redorovich
xolesnikov, who had already reached retirqsent age, had seen in his time many
foreman, first talked briefly about Kostygov:

"A person with his feet on the ground."

he then thought about it and began to talk:

"Yes, the foreman in the section is now everything. men more so a senior foreman.
I have met many: some are fussy and panic. And everyone feels with them that here

is one of the best. Another makes up to everyone and doesn't want to quarrel with
anyone. Even so he is not respected. After all, it is important that workers

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

really feel that the foreman is the chief one in the section. Now regardless of
who you take--the people are educated and each requires respect. And it is simply
that the foremen do not become respected in their position. What kind of produc-
tion commander is he today and what kind of educator is he if he is hardly more
than a senior clerk who opens and closes details."

But Kostygov is different, quite different. He says, “It must be done,“ and you
do it, lay it out and do it. This is how everyone feels both old and young. And
mainly young ones. It is difficult for them to recognize authority. Our section
has gained communist rank. This rank is not given for nothing. Each of the
workers passing through his "universities“ seems to have his head on his shoulders.

A "green" novice quickly becomes an experienced worker. After all you would be in-
terested in Volodya Skol'nov.

Senior Foreman and Novice

It happened this way: one year before the end of world War II Kostygov was called
into the army and Volodya skol'nov had just been born. In 1966 Kostygov was ap-
pointed the senior foreman of the machine section while Volodya. having served in
the Soviet Army, came to Sergey Mikhaylovich that same year to the section as a
lathe operator.

He was literally the first one who met volodya directly in the personnel department
and kindly clapping him on the shoulder like an old acquaintance and welcoming him
to the firm, conducted him across the large, but amazingly clean and green plant
yard to the astronomical shop directly to his future job site.

They talked along the way and before coming to the shop the senior foreman had al-
ready found out that Volodya's father died near Konigsburg in 1945 and that his
mother worked as a grinder at one of the plants. The youth had grown up and had
made something of himself. He had completed the eighth grade. Kostygov then
liked the remark that he made with a guilty smile:

"They always felt that I would become a hooligan. But in the army they appointed
me commander of a division, awarded me the rank of sergeant, even though there were

fellowssore educated than me with secondary and higher education. I had to 'make
a try at it' since they believed in me."

Volodya unwillingly thought how easy it was to talk with almost stranger. It was
as if he was simply and frankly talking with his own father.

Kostygov knew from experience how important it was for a novice on the very first
day and even the very first hour in the shop. Much depends on this, including
rapid acclimitization in the collective. A novice is after all especially impres-
sionable. If the job site is not prepared then someone will he hurt.

Kostygov condicted each new arrival this way. And Volodya Skol'nov as well. His
neighbor in the section was excellent lathe operator Valya Fedoseyev with whom he
quickly became friends. He immediately felt the kind attitude of yet another
machine tool operator--Viktor Gordiyenko, a student at LITMO, and the firm's lead-
ing player on the volleyball team. volodya's replacement was qualified lathe

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operator Vladimir Ivanovich Loginov, although Skol'nov hiuelf was still only of
third rank, which he had acquired even before going into the am. He observed
within the work of such skillful lathe operators as, for example, Nikolay Aleksan-
drovich kozlyakov. Once, having sea-n how Volodya looked at the work of the well-
known lathe operator, Kostygov noted:

”Incidentally, it is difficult to achieve this skill without special knOMledge and
it is siuply impossible to maintain the m mark without it. By the way, we now
have at the firm a first-class academic combine. So that one who plans to remain
here for a long time must study. There is no path to lathe operation or to becom-
ing a foreman to anyone at HOMO without this."

During his first year on the job, Sergey Mikhaylovich sent Volodya to take courses
to raise his qualifications. At the same till: he entered the ninth grade of the

evening school. He then passed on to the 10th, llth and then entered the technical
school.

And during the year of his coming to the firm, a convplex plan for the social devel-
opuent of the collective was adopted as one of the first in Leningrad and the coun-
try. And Volodya onl'nov was one of 5,000 who workers who received an education
provided by the plan in schools of working youth, technical schools and vuzes dur-
ing the Eighth Five-Year Plan. He was one of many young worker-students in Kosty-
gov's section.

of course, Sergey Mikhaylovich also has many concerns about those who study. first,
each student must be arranged on the same shift: one on the morning shift and an-
other on the evening shift. Then additional leaves are also granted to the stu-
dent. Some of them must work during this time.

But these present no difficulties to the students. On the contrary, when meeting
Kostygov, they mdoubtedly ask: 'What success? It is difficult, but I understand."

Sergey Hikhaylovich had already found out about competitions of occupational skills.
And now the ideas caught on: a competition of young machine tool operators must be
organized.

Kostygov invited the most well-known and multiexperienced lathe operators as judges.
who else but them could properly evaluate the skills of the young people!

The day before the competition the senior foreman wished each of them separately
victory.

The young lathe operators had never before worked with such truly combat attitude.
This was the most mmreble and happiest day for Volodya skol'nov. Unexpectedly
for himself he surpassed the very intensive standards almost doubly and the quality
of the parts made by him were recognized as excellent by the thorough ”oldsters."
Kostygov, being happy with his ward, thought: Here is a long-range reserve--knowl-
edge--to become a future reserve! Free orientation in trigonometry, sterometry and
total skills in reading a complex drawing. This is how all this seemed and howl

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

True, there were some misses at that time. Some of the participants of the compe-
tition had rejects. The rejects literally signalled to the young people where the
brakes were hidden which interfere with intensive gaining of productivity without
loss of quality.

Kcstygov together with the shift foreman patiently examines each case of failure.
This is even more important since no one can be accused of negligence or careless-
ness. Everyone tried as best he could in the competition.

But everything did not turn out equally as well for everyone. For different rea-
sOns. significant gaps in theory were found in some and slow response to high-
speed conditions were found in another and a third had not yet learned how to apply
the latest fittings and how to use them. Thus an individual approach was needed
for each one. And the foreman teaches them. Like they teach, for example, in the
school of communist labor. The party and trade-union organizations of the firm
warmly supported the idea of the competition among the young workers and soon ap-
proved competitions even on a wider basis and began to conduct them on the scale of
the association and later on the scale of the ministry. Special conditions were
worked out and a very discernible stimulus was provided. The winner of the coupe-
tition would be advanced to the not: worker's rank ahead of schedule. And here,
moving forward, let us say that fellows from Kostygov's section, including Vladimir
Skol'nov, who is manimously recognized as the best among the young lathe operators,
usually led in the competitions.

‘Do you know what is especially important for me?” says Volodya. “The senior fore-
man is continuously present among those who failed in the competition. He feels for
each one and is concerned about us. And he sweats for thehonor of the section and
for our small collective. Generally you dodt feed our ’senior'with bread only if his
section is first. It is first in everything, even in sports.”

Talking abOut this, Volodya smiles and continues:

"Can even our Kostygov remain on the sideline if it is a matter concerning his sec-
tion? Never. 'Fellows,‘ he says, 'do as you like, but everyone should participate
in sports competitions. I will also come to the stadium"

And he did go. And not only to applaud from the stands. But like everyone in his
athletic suit. Like everyone he ran the hundred meter dash. lbreover, his time
was not bad. This strongly impressed us young people. We had generally become ac-
customed to the fact that the 'old man' was always with us everywhere and he knows
everything about each one and he feels for each one as if he is our own father.”

Vladimir recalled a hardly usual case. A young lathe operator and good machine
tool operator with whom he had participated many times in the competition suddenly
had a case of the blues. Once he can to work happy and later leafed. Once he was
a different person. He did not want to talk with anyone. And a complaint also

came from his family.

The fellows in the section were disturbed and even more so since he had also been
rude to Sergey Mikhaylovich. Many waited for the 'old man" to bring the guilty
party to his senses.

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

however. Kostygov did not hurry to 'bring him out of it.“ He once appealed to
Sko .'nov:

'.'Volodya, you should find out quietly what has disturbed him. He won't say any-

thing. either he's ashamed or afraid. Or he doesn’t trust him. But he is an ar-
rogant fellow. So we have decided to give you a delicate mission with the party

group organization. You are both young. He will be more frank with you. But to
punish a person for a long time the main thing is to find out everything."

And Kostygov foxnd out and helped him.

"The senior foreman said 'it must be done!" This is the formula which determines
the degree of importance of one or another coumission. This formula is the guid-
ing one for most workers.

Velodya recalls how he dreamed about whether they would trust him with such unique
work as Koslyakov was doing. And once he received it. He tried very hard. The
part came out. Volodya decided that from now on he would work together with a
veteran. But he heard something else:

”wait. It is early. You have little experience. We can't risk it here."

He was first hurt but then analyzed it and everything became clear to him. The
machine tool was too valuable and the part was too crucial to take even the slight-
est risk. But even this was not the most important thing: there were so many fine
points in the work that his simple knowledge and sisple skills were clearly inade-
quate to .33 it. For example, he held in his hand a delicate part--if its tempera-
ture increased by only 1-1.5 degree it would no longer be accurate. The lathe op-
erator's hand was supposed to feel the degree of heat more accurately than any
thermometer. This is experience!

And soon he said solemnly to Volodya:

“well your hour has now come. The machine tool has now been freed about which yOu
have been dreaming. Go to it. And don't tremble. The more delicate the work the
more confidently should be the hand and the harder should be the character. Like
that of a surgeon! Is it clear?"

Senior foreman sergey Hikhaylovich Koetygov is a unique director of everything
happening in his section. He seems to direct everything quite unnoticed. And not
only current work directly. People consult with him as to who to advance by the
Komsomol organization of the section. After all, senior foreman Sergey Hikhaleo
vich is a communist and a member of the firm's party committee.

The Komsoml organization elected Volodya Skol'nov. And here Kostygov was the
first adviser and assistant. ”no become a real leader one must first be himself
in front," he says.

Once during a meeting Sergey Hikhaylovich asked:

"I heard that the homeomol generation is organising a movement of innovators in the
section.”

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“Exactly, Sergey Mikhaylovichl "

"This is good. This is at the heart of things! men more so since the collective
of the firm has promised to turn over and introduce no fewer than 14,000 innovator

proposals during the current five-year plan.“ Kostygov smiled knowingly and Velod-
ya already knew that he was already asking: "what about yourself?"

The Komsomol organization made its recomendation but he rejected it as unrealistic.

Kos tygov then said:

"It is sad. After all, you correctly rejected it. You look everything over as you
should. Think about it but calculate. There is something here for your hands.“

And now Vladimir began to check the entire production process of manufacturing the
most laborious parts. He went to the assemblers and consulted with them. he inde-
pendently calculated the laboriousness and consumption of metal with the old ver-
sion of the billet and with the new one which he himself suggested. It turned out
not bad: the labor consunption was cut in half but the saving of special steel was
400 kilograms!

Volodya Skol'nov's method was adopted.

Kostygov congratulated him:

“You now see that you are a real worker. Even though you are of fifth rank, a
real worker begins with a thrifty attitude about the entire production. Then he
becomes a real innovator. So then comrade Komsomol organizer. Yes, incidentally,
and what about your Komsomol generation?”

Volodya laughed:

"I understood you Sergey Hikhaylovich. After I had done it myself they all began
to make suggestions more actively."

After some time Vladimir skol'nov was accepted into the party. The senior foreman
gave a talk at the first meeting:

"Did youknow I myself did not notice how everything occurred. Only it sees-ed that
a green youth had come to the section. And he is already the best lathe operator.
And he is already the best innovator. a restless soul and the inventor of many
worthwhile suggestions. In short, he is a real experienced worker.“

How Kostygov Became a Foreman

Let us return to the story about my first acquaintance with Kostygov.

In a complex situation for himself, the senior foreman asked for advice and assist-

ance not only of the multiexperienced machine tool operator mlesnikov but not
without accident of his young ward Volodya skol'nov as wall.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSE ONLY

The first thing that had to be done was, having solved the next production prob-
lem, to find a method of rapid manufacture of unusually complex and laborious
parts and to help the adjacent shop which could not cope with the manufacture of
these parts. The main rule of the socialist competition is active here.

Second. Kostygov did not doubt that there was someone about the "patriarchs' of
milling machine operators of the shop that Ivan Pedorovich would think of. And

the young lathe operator. the future technician-inventor, sees much with a fresh
eye and utilizes all his acquired knowledge.

Sergey Mikhaylovich's confidence in the success of the unique duo of workers--the
senior milling machine operator holesnikov and the little-experienced, but theo-
retically excellently trained novice lathe operator Skol‘nov--was completely justi-
fied this time as well. After careful “analysis at home," Volodya showed the pos-
sibility and need to use precise casting in manufacture of these parts--this would
immediately reduce all machine-tool operations by 70 percent and would reduce the
laboriousness of them almost by one-half. Ivan Pedorovich, indefatigable in his
inventiveness, of course introduced his own original fitting and changes in the
configuration of sharpening the cutter.

The planned tasks are always constantly fulfilled in Kostygov's section. How? On
what does the personal qualities of the commander of such a comparatively young,
but important section in organization of production as the section depend?

In the first specific case we are talking about senior foreman Sergey Mikhaylovich
Kostygov. What is exceptional and special in him? What made him one of the best
foremen of the firm?

There is nothing special in him and there is nothing exceptional in him. And per-
haps initially he had far fewer formal data to occupy this position than others.

he came to the firm not having a secondary education. At that time he did not have
a single civilian specialty. He was drafted into the army as a youth and he later
reenlisted as a master sergeant. he was immobilized already ”in years,” the father
of a family-~a wife and two children.

of course he wanted more interesting work. But where could he find it at that age?
As a student? They hired him at Leno as a stoker. They warned him on his first
day in the personnel department: "that he must study continuously. This is our
procedure. Look it over and do not forget about this.‘

At that time Kostygov did not give any special significance to these words. as if
they had been dropped randomly. He still did not know that from the first days of
the firm's founding the tradition had been established: cultivate your cadres for
all sections. They felt that it was better if the tone was assigned at the enter-
prise by those who started the roots here and who felt something for the collective.
And the firm began to place bets on the more capable of them.

A year later before finishing the ninth course. Kostygov requests that he be trans-
ferred to another job on the same shift so as to continue his study.

It was hard for the new rigger: to load and carry heavy rolls of copper wire to
the electric motor section. His shoulders and back hurt from such unaccustomed

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

labor. To sit at a desk and to concentrate on what the teacher is explaining
after such work required a very strong effort. But he did not let it show. And
somehow it turned out in the shep: yesterday's master sergeant now gives out good
advice or is now called on to replace one who is out sick. Sergey Kostygov was an
observant person. He watched and he tested. And is there too much bustle in or-
ganizing the work of riggers? He corrected in his own way the path of the carts
with the load and calculated the most feasible time to deliver the wire. Kostygov
was later appointed brigade leader.

A year later the brigade leader of riggers had successfully passed exams for secon-
dary school. They suggested that Sergey Mikhaylovich become the shift foreman of
the revolving section in the astronomical shop.

"Foreman? In the revolving section? I have seen revolving machine tools only from
a distance."

The secretary of the party comittee laughed:

"That's no misfortune. You will master it. The main thing here is that people
come here unwillingly. The firm begins to organize the latest optical instruments
for different sectors of science, engineering and medicine. He must force out our
competitors on the world market. This is not only a question of economics but of
politics and the country's prestige as well. So that you, as a comunist, should
understand that this is a combat and party matter."

And so he appeared in the astronomical shop. A rather modest, strong figure. His
blue eyes look at you softly. openly, but kindly.

The revolving section operators did not imadiately recognize him as chief. Kosty-
gov went up to one young machine tool operator without any tact and said:

"Please learn the occupation of revolver operator. I learned it. You are only
helping and coping. Otherwise how can I supervise you?"

His directness hit the heart of all the workers. They willingly went to meet him.
But all the intricacies of the occupation could not be practically mastered immed-
iately. Obviously, it is important to analyze the essence of the matter. To be a
foreman means first to learn how to organize labor and to manage people. And this
idea of Kostygov was correct. All the machine tool operators in the astronomical
shop were soon joineduthe lathe operators, milling machine operators, metal work-
ers and revolving section workers--into a single machine section. Sergey Mikhaylo-
fich Kostygov was appointed the senior foreman. At that time he had already bril-
liantly defended in the evening division of the institute his diploma, related to
problems of planning and economy of production.

The Section--School of Communist Labor
A worker approaches the senior foreman and says:
"What is happening, Sergey Mikhaylovich? The machine tool is standing idle. There

will be a direct loss to us and to the shop. We and the fellows have already fig-
ured out how to get around this."

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A lathe operator or milling machine operator could earlier come to the senior
foreman with a complaint: when will the machine tool be adjusted and how long can
it stand idle? The worker new inevitably presents the “economic base" and calcu-
lates how long the section, shop and firm will remain idle. his economic accent
in the daily conversations about production matters did not arise suddenly.

Xostygov has propagandized his economic knowledge several years running. He is

the director of the school of commist labor, which has also become a school of
economic knowledge, a school of advanced experience and a school of moral education.
It also has precisely allocated hours for studies. but it is not regulated by any
time framework. Because this is a school of labor. Not only students but the
propagandist himself is educated and grows creatively in it.

It began with the small. seemingly quite insignificant. Machine tool operators
were assembled and it was suggested that they themselves organize in their own sec-
tion. They then tried to convert to self-checking. A worker of the O'l'K was re-
leased but they began to check the parts even more rigidly.

The senior foreman thought about the first results for a long time. It was not
bad. And the matter is not only one of indicators. aere, thought Sergey Hikhaylo-
vich, one must know human psychology. A lathe operator who tidies up in his own
section would not let chips fall where they may and will not let grease or emulsion
drip over the edge.

In his time Kostygov understood very well what "standard-hours” and 'mmenclature"
were, but he also knew something else: all these standard-hours are provided by
specific people about which nothing is said in the smry reports: Ivan Kolesni-
kov, Vladimir skol'nov, Nikolay Nikolayev, Petr Malyy, Valentin Pedoseyev, Boris
Rusak, Nikolay Kokurino-generally tens of the most diverse people both in age and
occupation and with different level of qualifications, but even more important
different in character.

And Kostygov suggested to the shift forum that a daily personal schedule be en-
tered so as to see from it who is working and how they are working. A machine tool
operator comes up, looks and it is clear to him how he worked today and how his
neighbor worked with whom he was competing.

The senior foreman assembles the students of the school of comunist labor. he
has something to say to them.

Here the personal schedule lets one know whether things went well with one young
lathe operator. ﬂow is this so? He is hardly a capable fellow. The worst thing
is heard--he became disillusioned: "Be is bored. You think that it is very impor-
tant to turn bolts and screws?"

And this circumstance also depressed Kostygov. He mderstood that until the fellow
feels interested and respect for his work that no rules will help. How can one

bring him "to the people"? They also talked about this with concern at the studies
in the school of communist labor.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But now some of the workers--students of the school--turned attention toward that

which had hardly attracted anyone. On a tour. How many of them are at LCMOI Peo-
ple from many corners of our country and foreigners.

well. is it really less interesting for one to look at all this who turns. mills
or polishes parts customarily day after day?

They suggested to this same fellow and not only him that he participate in this
tour through his own firm. And many saw their ”nuts and bolts" in a quite differ-
ent light for the first time--as part of a unique technology. They heard how one
of the renowned adjusters at the firm, showing them the operation of the most
complicated optical instrument, said:

"You can't really say what is more important in this instrument--the precision of
the lenses or the quality of an ordinary screw for adjustment. Everyone who has
been lucky enough to put his hands to development of this miracle deserves great
respect.“

Everyone. One of them was also this follow.

And this seemingly was all. Seemingly nothing special occurred but the young
worker for the first time thought seriously about his place in the shop. And he
began to change. For the better!

"Internal reserves," says the senior foreman. ”are in every person. True, it is
not always easy to reach them. The competition is the main assistant in this."

Kostygov loves to work with skilled people. And he tries so that everyone who de—
serves it is singled out with gratitude in orders throughout the shop. He is not
ungenerous in his gratitude.

The senior foreman has a routine exercise in the school of communist labor. The
topic is the culture of labor and the quality of production.

The workers themselves began the class. The one who he had previously asked to
think about these questions: did they feel it was time to start rejecting arti-
cles? what measures did they propose to increase quality? The studies were con-
ducted directly at the machine tool Operators' positions. A lively interested
conversation takes place. After all. these are the managers of the section. All
of them]

But quite recently the experienced teacher and manager Sergey Hikhaylovich Kostygov
was sent to an even more responsible production section-vhe was appointed chief of
the shop.

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC1AL USE ONLY

TEE DIPIDMA 05‘ m 8101’ C313?

The topic of the diploma project of student Alekseyev was called “Improving the
Operation of the Shop by Inproving the Use of Equipment." And the main thing is
that the diploma candidate has himself managed one of the largest shops of none for
many years. This shop is not inferior to other plants in the value of products
produced. It sends parts to numerous shops of the firm. And if something slows
down here, almost the entire association inevitably begins to get a fever.

A new chief. Meeting with him! tried to imagine at what price he managed to raise
the prestige of the shop and I mentally drew a portrait of a thoroughly exhausted
person weighed down by a thousand concerns, with continuous phone calls and urgent
questions. however, the Vladimir Ivanovich Alekseyev with whom I first had occasion
to meet in his large and light office was in no way similar to the portrait that I
had mentally drawn for myself. He quietly and confidently answered phone calls--
there were plenty of them during these days: the routine quarter was ending. 8e
answered with a quiet businesslike manner.

I felt during the first minutes that before me was a skillful organizer who knew
his business. But what the main thing in his skill was I still had to analyze.
after all. one not occupying a position determines the prestige and influence of
the shop chief among his subordinates and among hundreds of workers, foreman and
engineers.

Vladimir Ivanovich answered my question about this:

”One must understand the simplest truth itself: the strength of a chief is in his
subordinates. One must only treat one with justice and skill.”

Vladimir lvanovich grew up at who before becoming chief of the shop, like most
managers of the firm, from its own rank and file workers. he entered conz where

his grandfather and uncle worked at that time, as an apprentice lathe operator in
1944. why did he begin as a lathe operator? lie didn't know anything at all about
this profession but lathe operators were necessary. And in the personnel department
they began to talk to the thin blockade teenager very uniquely: 'A lathe operator
is easy. You turn the handle, switch on the 'self-running' and rest for your health!

95
M OFFICIAL {$80le
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "ease" did not bemuse him. He began to drive a tractor as a student in the
evacuation near vclogda, then he replaced the tractor operator who left for the
front and worked in the field like all the adults. at worked very hard. of
course, it was not easy at the lathe. It was easier but not as complicated. This
he understood immediately as soon as he was given his first seemingly simple oper-

ation. Here is a billet and here is plug. Bore the opening so that one end of
the plug goes into it and the other doesn't.

Vladimir looked at all his voluntary mentors of ace lathe operators with much re-
spect and almost with worship: Petr Smirnov. Petr Saperov, Nikolay krutikov and
others. And within several years Vladimir Ivenovich Alekseyev vase lathe opera-
tor of the highest rank. He completed the technical school. He was assigned the
position of foreman of a large mechanical section.

He studied with different machine tool operators of his own section. Now if a de-
bate arose about introduction of any innovation, not only among the lathe oper-
ators but about the gear-cutters and polishers, his word carried weight and proof.

And as it always happens. what position was he not appointed to. For example. when
he became the senior foreman in assembly of optical instruments. He took up the
study of optics and electronics although there were enough specialists in assembly
even without him. He could not simply do otherwise. The concept "organize' meant
flearn how” for him. And later when the staff and the complexity of the job became
much more complicated and the range of problems expanded sharply. he still remained
true to his initial principle--know, find out and learn how.

The shop received a new imported revolving machine. They installed it and switched
it on. They attached the first billet but the work did not proceed. The friction
clutch went out. They could not understand what was wrong. And even the most ex-
perienced foreman Sergey Nikolayevich Pynin shrugged his shoulders:

"I don't understand. And this is not the reason that it went out."

Of course, they could call the chief engineer to help. The shop chief was not ob-
ligated to adjust and debug machine tools. But he was interested in understanding
and analyzing how to find the reason for the failure. and he finally finds the
error. The machine tool operates.

Alekseyev himself may have forgotten about this long ago, but people remember. And
they talk with pride about their chief: ”Vladimir Ivanovich is always aware of
what is going on."

But not everything went as smoothly for the shop chief. He did not have enough
economic knowledge. How could one manage production and be involved in problems
of cost, profitability and profit without them? This means that one must conduct
one‘s affairs blindly under conditions ofthe new planning and economic incentives
system. And he goes to the institute to study.

In 1967 he graduated from the engineering-economic institute by correspondence, de-
fending his diploma with mark of excellent. I asked Vladimir Ivanovich how and

what interesting he used from the shop work for his diploma work and he impercept-
ibly turns the conversation toward a new channel:

96

FOR 0F?1ClAl.USE10NlN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”well, what is a diploma? If I say frankly that the most interesting thing is
that you don't have to write anything in diploma work. These are people who are
alongside you and on whom everything really depends. And one must find a cannon
language with then and create a friendly, work-capable collective. This is what
is important to me. Then everything is all right: both the ”shift factor" and
the equipment load and all similar indicators. And of course the only authority
of a chief,“ he concluded pensively, " is not to achieve much. What could I have
done alone without the party organization and without the shop coal-mists?"

The life of the new shop manager began with acquaintance with the party organiza-
tion. The party organizer is Ivan Nikolayevich mitriyev. 'l‘he columnists have
elected him as their leader for 13 years running. He is several years older than
Alekseyev. His biography is sisple. Before the war he was a timber cutter. He
was a master sergeant of a machine gun regiment at the front. He served in the
army for 15 years. After demobilization, already being the father of two children,
he entered the shop as an apprentice lathe operator. Yevgeniy Il'ich Senenov

taught him, a communist and former partisan. when we talked he went into the
chief's cabinet and said angrily:

"When will we get order among the casters? What are the technicians thinking
about? A billet is an entire mountain but a mouse should move it. No, I do not I
plan to bury metal any longer. After all, it does not fall from the sky."

No one said anything to the thrifty Semenov: after all, we'll work it out later.
And this “later“ never happened. And Dmitriyev, exchanging two or three words with
Alekseyev, got up imdiately and they went with Sanenov to the senior technician.

"We have found a common language with Dmitriyev and he helps me a lot. For exam-
ple, I began to trace the entire route, beginning with drawings, from billets to
finished parts. And flaws were found in the intrashop planning."

They had to break it steeply but not everyone always liked this and doubts arose.
They soon decided to hold a general meeting and Alekseyev was supposed to give a
report. And now the new chief was hardly tempted--there was no time, and he com-
missioned his deputy to speak to the workers. But it did not turn out. The
party organizer insisted: ”You must meet person to person with people. Otherwise
how can you manage? They have a direct idea about what to think. And what about
you concerning them.”

Alekseyev listened to the talks attentively. Ivan Nikolayevich introduced him to
people in a lower voice. Senior foreman sergey Nikolayevich Prypin. he had re-
tired long ago. He retained in the shop as an adjuster of automatic machines in
order to at the same time teach this occupation to young workers. And now Yakov
Leonovich Parfenow-also an adjuster of automatic mohinesnspecialist of the
highest class and party group organizer, gives a talk. lie was awarded the order
of Lenin. He feels that now some tutors of the young formally relate to their
duties but more than half of the workers in the shop are young people. And that
the new chief should generally take this into account especially.

Semen Kazachkov, a young worker and as Dmitriyev expressed it, "the grandson of
Prypih along the party line,” also said a word. Because Kazachkov had been taught

97

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his occupation and recommended to the party by Parfenov and he had at one time
taught and tutored Prypin and also recommended him at that time to the party.

Senior foreman I. Koltunov and polisher, deputy to the regional Soviet V. Chumakov
demanded that he “take a shorter rein“ with violations of discipline.

Both the complaints and the proposals were valid but the most important thing, Alek-
seyev felt joy: the people in the shop were interested in working better. And
frequently he got the idea he “commanded“ these people~-not the best method of
management. But to consult with them and make a decision is perhaps the truest

and most reliable. Without even talking about the fact that the person with whom
he was consulting grows in his own eyes and is ready to take on his own
responsibility.

As never before, Alekseyev felt the importance and value of the participation of
each one in solving a difficult problem when reconstruction of the production
areas, replacement of obsolescent equipment with new more improved equipment.
shifting of machine tools and so on was begun in the shop, as in all other shops
of the firm.

During the period of reconstruction the shop was given no break but the additional
requirement: do not reduce the output of products. And of course so that this
was not reflected in the quality and in general fulfillment of all socialist
pledges. '

This was a real test for the new shop chief and for the entire collective.

Alekseyev suggested to the party organizer that the communists be assembled and
that he talk frankly with them. But a general open party meeting is better.

The work was organized into three shifts without specific days off under the clat-
ter of jackhanners. With lighting from temporary wiring. Under construction tim-
here. On old machine tools which had been hauled from place to place. On new
machine tools with program control which still had to be assimilated.

And what didn't the working wit suggest! After all they had to temporarily stop
all the milling machines. And what about the footing? This was a long and major
job. The milling machine operators Yuriy Aleksandrovich Metelkin and Gennadiy
Pavlovich Uvarov suggested the way out themselves: install a channel iron girder
and fill it with cement. But what would be suitable for the milling machine op-
earators would not be suitable for especially precise lathes. How could this be?
And lathe operators German Ignat'yevich and Nikolay Makarov suggest their own
solution to the shop chief: what if they install the machine tool directly on the
vibration supports so as not to lose time in filling it with cement. And what
about the vibrations of the machine tool? They also studied this. We will work
at low speeds. True, the third shift will have to work harder. But this is a
temporary phenomenon--reconstruction is under way!

The shop party bureau followed all the proposals smoothly. An amazing atmosphere
of labor enthusiasm and some kind of "unagreed-upon competition“ were organized.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Once Alekseyev suggested to the brigade of polishers-Aleksey Pbmin, Eetr Kuchenov,
Valeriy Shchelokov, Valeriy Lutsenko and teliks Kalashnikow-stay and work on the
evening shift: delivery of the billet in the casting shop was delayed. It turned
out that they had tickets to the theater, a cultural show. They had planned for

a long time to go am to go to a beloved show and they would not manage to see it.
But the brigade leader said decisievly:

”All right. Once is one thing--we will stop on three. 0:: the evening shift.“

They worked sadly. They covered the norms doubly and triply. And in the morning
they came to work again. The shop chief expressed his gratitude to them in an
order.

The shop chief came to all the Komsomol meetings. He noted the capable. promising
youth. The youth had to be taught. They had to be taught beforehand. The con-
cerns were constant. For example, modernization of machine tools. he talked
about this many times with technician Valentina lvanovna Xuznetsova. He talked
with the party organizer and they decided to invite as a consultant the best gear
cutter Ivan Vasil'yevich Bazunov. They created something resembling a complex
brigade. And they achieved and accouplished what they had thought of. The most
complex operations are now considered cooperatively simple and rank and file ma-
chine tool operators now cope successfully with them. And these are mainly young

people.

Success inspired them. And on the advice of the shop chief not one but several of
these complex brigades were formed, the purpose of which was to develop the tech-
nology and accessories so as to utilize the equipment more densely.

The most difficult thing initially was with the new program machine tools. There
were many machine tools but who and how would work on them? Talents began to be
revealed. For example, the shop chief proposed that adjuster Viktor Britov as-
similate this new equipment. Britov was exceptionally capable. He rapidly mas-
tered the machine tool and immediately began to teach others. Poremen, engineers
and technicians now came to him for ”raising their qualifications" in program ma-
chine tools.

The example of Britov attracted other machine tool operators. A competition was
organized among them. Dmitriy Petrovich Petrov competes vigorously with Britov
and they assist each other. Now each one works on two program machine tools si-
multaneously. They teach the otehrs.

It was eight months while reconstruction was under way and the shop fulfilled the
plan, even producing products above the plan. All this was became of maximal:
loading of the equipment. And because of increasing the shift factor.

I should like to add a small afterward to this essay. while this book was being

prepared for press, Vladimir Ivanovich Alekseyev was appointed to the position of
chief technician of the association.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATION O? LABOR A? TE PIN!

As is known, scientific organization of labor arose on the eve of societ power.
Lenin, exposing the notorious "Taylor system" and regarding it as a “refined at-
trocity of bourgeois exploitation,“ saw in it "alulber of the richest scientific
achievements in analysis of mechanical motions during labor. elimination of super-
fluous and inefficient motions, working out the most correct work procedures, in-
troduction of the best accounting and monitoring systems and so on." Lenin
assumed that everything scientific and progressive from this system should be per-
manently used in the interests of the Soviet economy and in the interests of the
workers to increase their standard of living, well-being and level.

The new, socialist contribution also required the highest labor productivity.

And this means the highest organization of it. The party leadership proposed that
model enterprises be developed for this and that socialist management be taught on
their experience. He felt that scientific organization of labor was the most fun-
damental and timely problem of all public life.

At that time the first NOT [Scientific organization of labor) cells were born at
the plants and factories.

"Scientific organization of labor is the most reliable means of increasing its
productivity. Development of a firm itself and development of its most important
trends in the field of specialization and mechanization, improvement of the man-
agement structure and the main thing of course organization of labor” says general
director of trams M. P. Panfilov. "is all related to NOT.”

One of the veterans Miran Pavlovich Sheynin heads the department of scientific
organization of labor and management of the firm. Here in three research labora-
tories of the department work 28 highly qualified specialists: engineers. physi-
ologists. psychologists and musicologists.

what does the NO? service do?
Businesslike Suggestions

The chief of the machine assembly shop was having a meeting. The occasion was
an alarm signal: important parts had not been manufactured by the deadline. To

 

'V. I. Lenin, 'Polnoye sobraniye socheneniye" [Complete works], Vol 36, pp 189-190.

100

FOI:0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

determine what the situation was. the workers of the planning-shipping office were
summoned. Telephone calls were heard from time to time in the office. The shop
chief picks up the telephone and answers briefly and decisively. He then again
returns to the main question.

The meeting ended. Only one worker in the firm'e working smock with a notebook
in her hands remained in the espty office besides the chief. She had not taken
any participation in the proceedings.

"Well, what would you say, Lyuchila Anatol'yevna?" the shop chief asked her. ”was
everything this time according to science or not very much so?“

"I will begin with that which I liked: the speed with which you solve problems.
The clearness of instructions. But now you have determined the cause of the delay
of parts. You have assigned new deadlines orally. No one writes it down. Proto-
col is not maintained and the decision has not been recorded in any documents. And
how will you check it? Does this mean that a check will be made at the next rou-
tine meeting? And then not everyone who was at the meeting has a direct relation-
ship to the matter? Why invite those not related? And one more thing: you were
distracted by telephone conversations and this scattered the attention of those
attending the meeting and distracted them from the main thing. The secretary who
frequently came in with documents for signing also created a distraction. And it
is absolutely impermissible that the meeting participants came and went whenever
they felt like it. And you sat for a very long time with a break of four hours in
overall complexity. And who could decide anything besides the meeting. Let us
look at it together.”

Lyudmila Anatol'yevna Ivanovna is a worker of the department of scientific organi-
zation of labor and the chief of the office. She graduated from the financial-
eoonomic institute and was involved with investigation of organization of labor
and management. And a broad field of activity was offered to her at mm.

The chief of the machine assembly shop had already long ago established contacts
with workers of the NOT department. The senior engineer of this department
Igor' Il'ich Bogushevskiy studied planning, accounting and the work of the auxil-
iary services in the shop. Many iuprovements were made here upon the reconnenda-
tions of Bogushevskiy. Take, for example, the storage room in the section. bogu-
shevskiy suggested that one or another articles not simply begin at piece by piece
but that .sets be collected together for assewly. The storage room managers were
specialised in specific nomenclatures so as to work with knowledge of matters--
rapidly and intelligently.

The shop chief was also able to ascertain how not only a reduction of the amount
of paperwork but generally of the docuent workload helped the shop. Only the
information required at a given moment began to come into him.

He saw how much workers from the NOT service were doing to help the foreman. how
they helped them to correctly distribute their time. how to place people and how

to bring order to the working dayuin short, to create favorable conditions in
the section and to increase labor efficiency.

10].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And there were previously different instructions about the work of the foreman
and shop chiefs. But there were general propositions in them.

And how should one proceed in a specific case? Complete parts were not issued in
time. The person on which they counted did not come to work. The drawings did not
come in on time. The workers of the M department work at different versions of
production decisions for these cases. Of course, the foreman selects the best ones
for himself.

The prestige of the workers of the NOT department slowly increased in the eyes of
the shop chief. And once he said to Lyudmila Anatol'yevna:

"Could not NOT help the fate of the shop chief? It must be admitted that the more
perfected the system of organization of labor in the shop is, the more acutely you
feel your own deficiencies. In any case, the fluctuations bother me. So there is
the suggestion-~come, observe end study. By working day, my office and my desk is

at your disposal. Sit down, spread out all your papers on it and see what is right
and what is wrong."

This is a complex matter. we have become accustomed to the tem ”manager.” But
”business person”? Yes. exactly! We know many managers who are selflessly de-
voted to their business and who know it. They work late. They don't even have any
rest at night. In general these are real enthusiasts ready to pay any price "to
fulfill the plan.“

But enthusiasm alone, even if it is reinforced by knowledge, is not enough. This
is felt especially in such modern production as who where almost every shop can be
compared to an entire enterprise in the volume and complexity of the articles
produced.

It is not so sinple for a capable engineer who knows production to take the helm of
the shop. There are too many concerns: a number of services of the most diverse
designation. engineering and technical personnel, hundreds of workers, the plan,
quality, realization of production, comunication with other shops, wage funds,
everday life and educational work.

Ivanova certainly penetrates the work style of the shop chief. Her papers are or.
the desk. Alas, such a facility cannot be managed without papers and without docu-
ments. In order to manage one must know primarily how much information is needed.
.Nery day. All the time and continuously.

Lyudmila Anatol'yevna begins with how to help bring order to the papers on the
chief's desk. And she writes in her recommendations on the topic: "Bring order
to working with documentation and storage of it. To do this, place the docments
in folders according to the designation of the documents and depending on the fre-
quency that they are consulted; store the folders in vertical position and then it
will be easier to extract what is required. It is best to have the folders of
different colors. For example, a red folder for incoming correspondence not yet
considered. Another, let us say white or blue folder for docunents sent to execu-

tives or for monitoring and a strict reminder. All correspondence must be reviewed
on the day of its arrival.’

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trying to be unnoticed, lvamvne persistently observed the work of the shop chief.
He is now touring the section with notebook in hand. he listens to caplaints and

suggestions. He resolves one thing. making notes on one sheet, on another and
on a third.

And how will he later check mat was done and what was not done? will he leaf
through the entire notebook? will he make notes on the calendar? And if something
is not fulfilled must it be recorded again? Moreover, it is difficult to monitor
the fulfillment of orders.

But what about instead of notebooks he takes a card index? And he makes the same
notes on individual card indexes. Arranged together in the necessary order and by
deadlines for fulfillment, they can always be seen. It makes sense to entrust
monitoring for execution to a special worker--a secretary or to someone else. In-
cidentally, not only the chief needs a secretary but the assistant and reviewer who
knows production and knows how to fulfill important omissions.

Observing how the shop chief conducts his on working day, Ivanova easily estab-
lished that the shop chief essentially has not clear routine. During the entire
day numerous workers of different services drop into his office when they need to
or want to and he receives them at any time. It seems to the shop chief that other-
wise all problems cannot be solved in an operational manner and after all you can't
stop production.

Ndl‘ department worker Ivanova brought these reflections to the shop chief for a
frank conversation.

The shop chief had something to think about. He answered frankness with frankness.

Lyudmi la Anatol'yevna step by step followed the shop manager's working day. She
then wrote down her own observations, conclusions and outlines of futher recounen-
dations. This is the well-reasoned advice of an expert with respect to the chief
of a given, specific shop, with regard to its characteristic features and specifics
and with respect to the personality of a manager with quite specific features of
character, virtues and deficiencies, habits and tendencies, views and temperament.

she observed how the character and habits of the manager are reflected in prepara-
tion of decisions.

And among the notes to be remembered appears this one: "OoQile a routine of the
working day for the shop chief and for the work of all shop subdivisions, having
provided tine for work with correspondence, holding meetings, receiving workers of
the shop subdivisions on production problems and also on personal matters. Develop
a sample plan for the work of the shop chief for the next month, providing in it
consideration of questions of a future nature:

a) on questions of a future nature that require preparatory work for deci-
sion-making and turning over the appropriate tasks to executors (preparation of
drafts of decisions): monitor the execution of assignments:

b) familiarize the shop chief with the literature (a list of books is
needed) on organization of nanegement and so on."

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These and many other recauendations of the NM department worker helped to deter-
mine the new work style of the ehop chief and manager.

I am writing to You

I was interested in the office:

"How many letters does the firm receive per year?“

"Almst 100,000 letter-telegraph dispatches."

"That means how many answers must be sent?‘

"That goes without saying. And we also write letters to many addressr : ourselves.“
"And is there also interfirm correspondence?"

"And how! They write from the administration to production and from the production
to administration. mgineers, designers, shop and department chiefs and planners
write. There are reports, requests, official reports, lists and technical doorman-
tation. There are approximately 200,000 internal dispatches annually."

How many office workers are needed in the apparatus and how many postal workers
and messengers are required! The post office of an entire city must cope with the
same thing.

The flow of docments will increase. This is inevitable: the range of problems
and tasks which muo solves will expand and the range of contacts, including for-
eign contacts, will increase.

But how will one cope with this flow? will the business production staff be in-
creased continuously? No. "He must continue to work for further iuprovement and
reducing the cost of the aduinistrative-manegement apparatus,” so it is said about
this in the proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress. They forced the W0 managers
to rethink things with new acuteness and effort. The movement of docuents must
be ordered. Documents are the basis on which everything is constructed: planning.
regulation, coordination and checking of execution.

Organised production begins with clearly compiled documents.

And the following problem was formulated and posed to the NOT service: to reduce
labor and time expenditures in fulfilling work on compilation of documents and on
their reception. recording, accounting and distribution among executors and
delivery.

This problem is not solved immediately. There are no ready models. One must think.
Raise Yefimovna Polina--a worker in the firm office--thought about this. The prob-
lem also touched her personally. The flow of docmnts was flooding the office.
Documents frequently duplicated each other. Orders came in every day which should
have been delivered immediately to their destination. But many addressses are

104

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

several kilometers from each other. And Raise Yefimovna quite frequently had to
expend not only much time on dispersion of papers and not only to analyse the es-
sence of different documents but she also had to deliver than herself to the ad-
dressees, perforaing the duties of a messenger. Sometimes the messengers becue
the authors of the dispatches themselves-designers, technicians. planners and
workers of the accounting office.

Raisa Yefinovna Feline. being a correspondence student, attempted to look at her
occupation creatively. Like everyone in the firm. problas of efficiency and im-
provement of management disturbed her. The serious. weighty suggestions of Polina.
related to improving the office service. interested the department of scientific
organization of labor end management where Polina is new the senior engineer of
one of the laboratories.

Hany of her suggestions. realized together with those of other specialists of this
laboratory, helped to solve urgent problems.

I am now having a conversation about this with hiss Yefimovna. And she talks
about what their small laboratory has already been able to do.

“First about the letters. It was first necessary to sharply reduce the simplify
the number of letters because this in itself is a very laborious process. we quel-
ified the correswndenceand worked out standard texts concerning formulation of
agreements, supply. technical information, exchange of experience, adoption of or-
ders and so on. The texts and copies were printed in the firm's printing plant.
The issue "Collection of Standard ‘nexts for brternal correspondence" was used by
them for convenience. A fourth of all the letters now sent from W0 is printed
on the firm's forms.”

"And do you have many specimens of these letters?"
"About 100."
”But how is data changed in these standard letters?‘

"For the convenience of the typists who type only the variable data, copies of the
letters are placed under the originals. which together with the originals are bound
together into blocks.“

As a result the time expenditures on correspmdence were reduced by a factor of

more than 3.5 after standardization. And the firm not only made up the expenditures
on paper and printing expenses, but also saved 10,000 rubles on this. All external
correspondence was centralized and any letter is dispatched only through a cosmon
department.

And if, for example. the addresses must be written on the envelope. Will this be
a trifle? But still it takes one and a half to two minutes. And several tens of
letters are sent out per day. This adds up to hours taken from the business produc-

tion workers. needed for more important matters. And we introduced envelopes with
so-called open window on which an address does not have to be written since it is
visible on the letter through the transparent insert.

105

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"This is concerning external correspondence. But an enormous circulation of dif-
ferent docuaentation also goes on inside the firm?“

"Yes. I-Nen more so since enterprises with their own systems and forms of plan-
ning, accounting and report writing have been included in the association. We be-
gan here with standardization of documents. All their standards were grouped by
principle of identical and similar designation into classes and groups. Having
studied than it was decided: 300 forms of different documentation can be replaced
without any loss whatever. And standardization of docuaents made it possible to
process them by using computer equipment."

"We have talked with you about the innovations in document processing. that about
delivery of then to the addressees? After all, there were several conversations

about the fact that designers, technicians and fomn became messengers for an
hour."

"Oh, this is already ancient history. We have not needed messengers for more than
one office for a long time. Almost all staff messengers have been reduced. A ring
post office replaced them. You can see it in action. The pickup will arrive in
five minutes."

And precisely, within five minutes I went to the main entrance and saw a small pick-
up to which the gates were imidately opened. M girls sat in the cab. We were
soon introduced. These were driver-expediter Nadya sinel'nik and business produc-
tion-sorter Natasha Kurga. They are the entire staff of the ring post office.
Hundreds of thousands of docunents, letters and newspapers pass through their
hands. Several times per day, strictly on schedule, the pickup travels between
all the subdivisions of the firm, distributing business papers which were previous-
ly packed in folders and cases. The driver-messenger'places the correspondence in-
to the post boxes belonging to the shops and departments and removes the outgoing
mail which was also prepared in time for dispatch by the shop and department mail
room workers.

of course, not everything was smooth at first. It turned out that somne delayed
papers and the schedule was not kept. At the suggestion of the girls, the pickup
was re-equipped, special compartments were placed in it in order to more easily
sort packages and special briefcases were prepared to facilitate delivery. Other
innovations were also introduced.

"And can the work of messenger be interesting?"

"And how. But the main thing is how many people we have relieved of superfluous
concerns and how much time we have saved for main work.“

Why Does Petrova Work Better Than Gerasimove?
"Let's look in on the shop of amateur movie and still camera equipment,“ suggested

Vladimir Nikolayevich Mitrofanov, the chief of the NO! office. "We and you will
possibly see something curious."

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I had visited this shop several tines end it was really relarkable, a modern shop
with production and conveyor lines with electronic signalling devices. The shop

was large and well-lighted. There are long spans along which an endless conveyor
belt slowly moves.

There are well-lighted benches along the conveyor. at which a feaale worker site.
Each one asseubles small parts into assemblies from which an objective for the
popular Sasha-8 camera. which is in great demand, is finished on the conveyor line.

"hook at these two female workers." said Mitroi'anov, pointing to the aseenblers
working alongside each other, "Petrova and Gerasinova. These are the best assen-
blers on the operation 'assembly of the shutter base.’ But the operation of one
of them is more rapid and that of the other is slower. Although both women have
identical tins of service and experience. They have the identical rank. And gen-
erally there is nothing different about then. And both have the great desire to
work as good as possible. In short, if there was a difference in physical data--

in acuteness of vision, let us say, then everything would be sisple and clear for
the "or service."

“Our task is to study and disseminate leading experience. And if it is accurate
to develop a method of this study and dissemination. Observe for a little while
how they work," suggested Mitrofanov.

"Observe closely. I think that you will hardly notice a difference. And this is
perhaps inpossible even for a person with a practiced eye.‘

"Let us say so. However, is the difference so great that it can be determined?“

"The difference is really small externally, counting in seconds and fractions of a
second on each individual components of the operation. And there are a lot of
then. And the operations are mass types. leperceptible seconds saved by each as-
sembler per shift is already an additional lot of cameras per day.“

“And does this not bring some concern about the intensity of labor to the physical
fatigue of workers?"

"Possibly at first glance. but here is something curious: a careful examination
showed that the worker who produces more products usually gets tired less.”

"Beginning the investigations, we had to are ourselves with a special camera and
chronometer and make a series of continuous sequential photographs. As a result
something like a file was obtained. taken by the frame photography method. One
of these films could be called, for example, a 'shutter' operation and one could
see how worker Gerasinova or Petrova installs the liners and axles in the base of
the shutter. Soon such was discovered. Both unique planning of the jobsite near
the conveyor itself and the posture of the worker and the sequence of one or an-
other movements.“

“It seems to be a trifle how one holds ones hands during work. Petrova rests her
elbows on the table and her novenents are absolutely precise. The punch grasped
by two fingers is inserted in the opening under way. A short stroke with the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hamer and it is riveted. Gerasimova seems to have her elbows suspended and the
punch "fumbles" into the opening until it falls into it. Seconds are lost. The
muscles are tensed for a longer time. Fatigue begins sooner and work proceeds more
slowly. Many fine points were also determined due to which it is harder or easier
to work. Gerasimova also revealed her virtues. she was skilled in installing the
shutter base into the attachment with both hands simultaneously. This is easier
and faster. The experience of the best workerswceresimova and Petrova--were
studied and synthesized as a result. A special instruction chart was worked out
by means of which the most efficient methods of work of those young female workers
who had only taken on this occupation could be taught more easily, more rapidly and
mainly more clearly.“

Mitrofanov showed me one of these instruction charts for the movie equipment assem-
blers. This is only a few pages. But a brief, clear description of all operations
is contained in them. And there are tens of expressive photographs that illustrate
them sequentially by items. The workers are taught from these charts in the
schools of advanced experience. Labor productivity in them was increased by an

average of 4.5 percent coupared to those who had mastered their occupation in their
time by the ordinary method.

The NOT department conducts principle investigations, works out recesmendations and
methods which become a compulsory guide for the shop workers of the association.
For example, a special method was developed. It was intended for the "or engineers
in shops and for workers of production-engineering training, consultants of the
schools of advanced experience, technicians and production innovators.

The method contains four sections. Selection of operations for study, selection of
procedures and methods of labor, compilation of a draft to describe these proce-
dures and methods. And the instruction chart itself which was already discussed.

merything is significant here and everything is designed with regard to the effi-
ciency of expended efforts and means. For example, the investigator should bear in
mind that an operation selected for study should be mass or standard type for one
or another shop, no fewer than three workers should be engaged in it simultaneously,
the productivity of the operation is not less than three minutes and it is not less
than 5-10 days during a month i! manual labor comprises no less than half the oper-
ational time. This is especially iuportant now when the association has converted
to new wage conditions and to new rates.

From the most modest calculations, an additional reserve of labor productivity in
mass production alone comprises approximately 6-7 percent annually due to introduc-
tion of advanced experience.

The NOT service, being involved with study and introduction of advanced experience,
is investigators working hand in hand with innovator workers. They study with them
and enrich their experience with the fruits of scientific investigations.

It seems at First Glance

The reader has already probably noted: when we are talking about NOT one fre—
quently hears the phrase: “At first glance.” This is no accident. Because NOT
is always discovering something unexpected. But only at first glance.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But in fact, can labor productivity be increased if a worker takes frequent breaks
during a shift? If she has more breaks? Do not hurry with your answer. Psycho-
physiologiccs, who carefully study the problem of labor on a conveyor and on a
production line where fatigue is caused not only by the physical load but by monot-
ony and boredom, did not find it imediately.

What can be done so that the same Gerasimova and Petrova and many tens of their
friends working on the conveyor line become less tired and feel stronger and bet-
ter and are highly productive during their work? what work and rest conditions
would be most desirable and beneficial to them?

And the psychophysiologists visit the conveyors again and again. They stand by
the conveyor belts and the production lines from the first minute of the working
day to the last minute. The pointers of the chronometers flash, the shutters of
cameras are heard audibly, graphs are compiled, the slightest changes in the well-
being of the workers are recorded and the data are processed statistically.

Analyzing them, the psychophysiologists proceeded from a conclusion already made
repeatedly in the experiment: husan efficiency is very variable over the course
of the day. It is the highest 2 or 3 hours after the beginning of work. It then
usually dropped. Something similar happens after the lunch break. Moreover, the
fatigue accumulated during the first half of the day makes itself felt during the
second half. And therefore, the highest level of labor productivity during the

second half of the day is most frequently lower than that during the first half.

As a result the NOT service makes the recommendation: give the first five~minute
break about 1 hour 40 minutes after the beginning of work. Give a second 10 min-
ute break (physical exercise) 3 hours 15 minutes after the beginning of the shift.
And again give a five-minute rest 1 hour 30 minutes after the lunch break.

The recommendation of nor was first introduced on the camera assembly line. More-
over, the speed of the conveyor was changed in the photo shop upon the advice of
the psychophysiologists. It was changed so that the greatest speed was mainly
during the first half of the working day and the slowest speed was during the
first and last hour of work. And another recomendation was to alternate the
workers in the operations every month or two.

What did this yield? The new work and rest conditions, changing the rhythm of the
conveyor and alternating workers in operations sharply improved their well~being
and attitude of the workers and labor productivity increased. And it was calcu-
lated that these innovations on the conveyor alone produce 10,000 rubles saving
annually.

The psychophysiologists of the N0? service, to whose activity many initially were
unsure of, became very popular people in the association. Their participation and
assistance was requested by many shops. Now the most efficient work and rest modes,
developed on the basis of psychophysiological investigations, have now been intro-
duced at more than 1,500 jobsites.

So as you can see, that which seems unexpected and paradoxical at first glance
suddenly opens up new opportunities so as to achieve the best results with the
least expenditures.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "Moonlight Waltz" and Labor Productivity

You of course had occasion to observe how at times a person whistles quietly to
himself on the job. he whistles in time to his motions. And obviously his work
comes out better from this unique accanpaniment.

And now soldiers are marching and behind them are tens of kilometers of road. Pa-
tigue has overtaken them. But suddenly an orchestra is heard in front and their
legs seem to I'walk by themselves” in tune to the cheerful rhythmic marching music.
And the fatigue literally disappears! Psychologists and physiologists have long
explained this secret of the effect of music on man: sound is related to the sen-
sation of motion. Rhythmic music evokes and maintains stable motor and mental
activity. It relieves nervous tension. It is capable of stimulating the physio-
logical processes of the organism. And at the same time it is capable of making
them both optimum and economical. And it creates the necessary mood.

And if this is so, then is it possible not to consciously use music, so to say,
for purely practical goals-~to facilitate one's labor and at the same time to make
this labor more productive?

Thus was born the idea of functional music. lama before this term itself became
widespread, the first step had been taken at IOHO: before the beginning of the
shift when human flows headed across the thresholds to the shops, they were accom-
panied by cheerful, joyful music coming from loudspeakers.

But it was not so simple to utilize functional music in the shops. Many of the
most diverse problems had to be studied and solved. Could it be used everywhere?
And where is it primarily necessary? And in what doses? And during what hours of
the working shift? And there were as many questions about the nature of the music
itself, about the genres, orchestration and rhythm! And about selection of

programs!

And a series of experiments was begun by physiologists on one of the large mass
production sections for which monotonous labor is especially typical. Careful ob-
servations and investigations were conducted day after day. And it was precisely
established: how and when fatigue of the central nervous system, the cardiovascu-
lar system and the muscular system begins and develops during work. Having deter-
mined the hours of the greatest fatigue during the shift, it was possible to com-
pile a schedule of music transmissions.

And not only a schedule.

And what about the musical programs? "he and how would they begin to be selected?
It was necessary to consult with the most qualified consultants in the field of
music. And the department of scientific organization of labor appealed to the
Leningrad Conservatory for assistance.

Not only specialists in the field of optics or electronics, but well-known musicol-
ogists first appeared as consultants in the shops of the firm.

110

FOR 0F11CLQLI£SE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The musicologists and psychologists selected the first repertoire. There were 30
programs per month. loudspeakers were installed at that time in the section. The
wires from them extended into the shop assembly for connection to a tape recorder.

Bach loudspeaker has a switch. If you want to listen, if you don't want to, you
switch it off.

When everything was ready, the consultants from the conservatory gave lectures in
the shop about how music can always have a favorable effect on man and of course
during work. They were convinced not to switch than off.

And it was true. when the music transmissions began no one switched it off initial-
ly. Eccerpts from classical operas and jazz rhythms were heard.

But there were soon surprises. It turned out that music has far from an identical
favorable effect on everyone. Labor productivity decreased for some and some ir-
ritably switched off the loudspeaker.

It turned out that the music initially distracts the attention of some people from
their work. And after all it should, like the wind pushing a sail, be “unnoticed“
but pushing forward with force.

And again there were psychological investigations but now based on primary experi-
ence. Practice showed that the greatest effect is gained from music simple in or-
chestration, primarily cheerful music. Works performed on the piano and on wind
and electronic musical instrments were best received on the job.

And again there was a surprise: at the end of the shift they "started” a cheerful,

fast melody by an instrunent ensemble. It turned out that cheerful rhythms had no
benefit at the end of the shift.

why? The psychologist, physiologist and physician talked to the workers for a long
time. They concluded that by the end of the work day the human organism experiences
a definite revitalization together with the onset of fatigue. Calming. quiet and
slow melodies rather than cheerful rhythms are required at the end of the shift.

As soon as it became clear that functional music is a valuable matter and enjoys
very real benefit, the firm created a special studio from which they began to con-
duct transmissions of functional music to many shops. A record library numbering
more than 5,000 works recorded on tape was created. Incidentally, such an exten-
sive musical stock was sinply necessary since first experience showed that even
the most beloved melodies interfere if they are repeated too frequently.

As you can see, the concern of the nor department was supplanted with regard to
introduction of this innovation. And there was soon a need for the post of "engin-
eer-musicologist,’ unusual for the firm, who would select musical programs on the
recommendation of psychologists and physiologists. These duties were entrusted to
a worker of HOP-an engineer having a musical and engineering education, Geliy
Pedorovich Sukhanov.

Sukhanov is an enthusiast of this new post and works with animation. He unwilling-
ly made a very remarkable observation. Be, a proponent of functional music. most

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liked to meet well-organized and established work in the leading shops. There
where the musical rhythm could be ”hand in hand” with production rhythm.

But in other shops he was first cautious and uncertain about introduction of func-
tional music, especially in those where presses roar and conveyors rumble. If a
loudspeaker is switched on here on jobsites, as in the photographic shop, only
more noise will actually be heard from the music.

men he got the idea of using antibackgrounds. mial earphones were given to

workers engaged at the presses. They protect them from external noise and make it
possible for them to hear the music.

As the first, carefully studied experiment showed, the workers' attention was not
distracted and not dispersed. 0n the contrary, the music, freeing the person from
stress caused by the noise, permits better concentration.

And statistics proves this: both injuries and turnover of personnel in the tool
and die and other noisy shops were reduced over a period of six months after intro-
duction of functional music. And they were soon interested in the automatic ma-
chine shop: ‘And is it not possible for us to use music? And there is such a
noise from the automatic machines.”

The question was more than appropriate. The noise level in the automatic machine
shop was really high. But how could it help if a worker servicing several machine
tools on the same line was in constant motion? He could not drag a cord plugged
into the loudspeaker system behind him. But there was a way out. There is a small
transistor radio in the tap pocket of the ordinary working jacket. And the ear
phones were connected to it.

Do people like to work to the accompaniment of music?

A questionnaire poll was conducted. Seventy-nine percent of those questioned noted:
music reduces fatigue and increases efficiency. Ninety-three percent added to this:
it improves the mood and provides good exercise.

In places where functional music has been introduced, labor productivity was in-
creased by three percent. Work quality was improved. And this was no surprise.
Good music has an aesthetic effect on man and forces him to be exact toward his
labor, to learn more acutely and to more clearly perceive the beautiful.

Moreover, they also call the studio during rest breaks and request: "I would like
to hear the moonlight Haltz' of Dunayevskiy again." Or: “And could you play
Oginskiy’s Polonaise?”

”I Stay Because I Want 'no"

Young optical grinder Boris N., having gone to the personnel department to formu-

late his release at his own desire. was ashamed that he wanted to be released so
fussily and again dropped into the M department.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Regardless, Boris had to submit. 8e filled out a thorough questionnaire in the
mm department: why did he want to leave and with when and with what was he dis-
satisfied. Perhaps the working conditions were unsuitable? Or the work was un-

It turned out strangely: a person had to fill out a detailed questionnaire upon
leaving a job rather than upon entering it.

Another conversation was held after the questionnaire was filled out. And it

turned out that the grinder wrote the statuent: "I request to main at my mm
wish.“

This was several years ago.

I am in the sociological laboratory. My coapany is one of its workers, the senior
seciologist-engineer.

A question. What is your laboratory involved in?

The answer. We develop problems related to plans of the socioeconomic development
of the firm. One of the social problems is personnel turnover. The scientific
workers of the Leningrad Financial-Economic Institute helped us here. he first
phase is usually study of statistical data. (he very significant circumstance

was determined. During the years when the investigation was conducted (1968-1969).
more than half of those leaving were young people. And we have half of all workers
at the firm that are up to 30 years old. The laboratory conducted a survey of one~
third of the young workers. Thousands of filled-out questionnaires were processed
by a special program on a computer. We received extensive information. For exam-
ple. one-third of those questioned, in answer to the question whether they were
satisfied with the attitudes of the administration, answered "No.“ It was obvious
that almost all the unsatisfied workers were from the procurenent and finishing
shops. A rather typical attitude toward young workers was determined for a nunber
of shop managers: the young are inexperienced and this means that it is risky to
trust him with a good machine tool and tools and we will give him a poor machine
tool and we will give him materials last in line. We brought the attention of the
managers of the firm to this. Recommendations were worked out-~how to proceed so
that the novices worked better. The administration established a strict proce-
dure: now all novices are provided with good equipment and a standard set of all
necessary tools from the first day on the job and are supplied accurately with
materials and parts. it is a simple pattern: the more trust in the young worker,
the higher his responsibility is. Piecework for beginning workers was also re-
stricted at our recomendation. Within one or two years the statistics showed that
turnover in the procurement and finishing shops had been cut in half.

A question. But this was probably only me of the reasons causing the turnover?

Answer. of course. A young person who links his fate to the firm should be con-
fident that he will acquire a firm material base here. After all, he will acquire
family in the future. This means that he must cam good wages. that is, work well,

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and conditions must be created for him to raise his qualifications. But since
the shop chiefs and foreman were given our reccmendation as a duty to eliminate
the reasons interfering with young peq>1e working well and earning good wages,
there became fewer and fewer young men and women who felt that they were temporary
at the firm.

It is not simple to find all this out. Here is an example. A young machine tool
worker handed in his intention of leaving. The foreman, without thinking, signed
it. When this case was analyzed, the foreman said:

"And why should I bother with him? He spends half his time smoking or strolls
around the shop."

But the machine tool operator gives these explanations:

"Yes, it happens that I wander around the shop because the foreman gives me an as-
signment for a day or for a week. But if he would give me an assignment inmediate-
ly for a month, I would have no idle time."

These cases prompted the engineer-investigators of the new service to become in-
volved in development of important probleas. The first was to improve interahop
planning and the second was how to eliminate an unconcerned attitude of other ad-
ministrators to the requests of workers about leaving the firm. Each application
should be considered with maximum attention. Why does a person leave? Is there
really a telling reason for this? Perhaps it is easy to correct? Perhaps the ap-
plication to leave was written in anger due to a minor affront?

Question. And how was a way out found?

Answer. Public personnel offices were created in the shops. This same public
committee then began to operate on the scale of the firm. The comittee included
workers and representatives of the administration. 'me comittee tries to de-
termine the reasons for leaving and takes all possible measures to create normal
working conditions for the worker.

The following statement has recently been printed on the official forms of appli-
cations to leave:

"Comradesl Before making a decision to leave the shop, carefully think about the
reasons that caused this and try to correct them with our help.‘.

"If you have still decided to leave, indicate the reasons that interfere with your
continuing to work in the shOp."

I had occasion to visit one of the meetings of the public counittee for personnel
of the firm. The committee meets twice a week with the participation of the as-
sistant general director of the firm for personnel. The materials of the shop
office are carefully studied here and their work is analyzed and generalized. And
here I met grinder Boris who was discussed at the beginning of this chapter. For
about an hour and a half he patiently explained his complaints. 'l‘hey summoned the
foreman of the section in .which Boris worked. And the conflict was resolved.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The public coundttee for personnel gradually expanded the range of its activity.
It participates in the reception of workers to the firm an maintains contact with
young workers who have gone into the army. And many of then usually return to
their own collectives after demobilization.

I continue my interview.

Question. I have heard quite often recently in your firm: ”Potential turnover.”
what does this mean?

Answer. You see the idea of leaving the enterprise at one's own desire does not
appear immediately. A person accumulates affronts, dissatisfaction with his occu-
pation is aggravated and a conflict with a brigade leader or foreman increases.
Frequently, as you and I have already seen, the conflict can be resolved in the
end. And the public cotmnittee for personnel in the shops and the public committee
created at our recoumendation rendered great assistance here. But all this forced
us to think about something else. would it not be possible to provide beforehand
for possible conflicts and to prevent their becoming an application of leaving
through one's own wish?

There are many psychological fine points here which one does not innediately catch
and one does not immediately read.

Question. who helps you to analyze these fine points?

Answer. We have in the laboratory specialists-~psychologists and physiologists--
working with us sociologists. Their assistance is invaluable. we developed to-
gether the method and system of questionnaires which are conducted once every 6
months with the participation of the public offices of personnel in the shops. He
managed to determine possible, but almost undetectable conflict situations.

For example, the youngest workers in one of the shops, it is true, expressed in am-
biguous form dissatisfaction with their job. The foreman was frankly amazed at
this. Both their work records were excellent and the working conditions were fine
--this was a shop that had been reconstructed.

The psychologists managed to determine the reasons for the dissatisfaction of the
young people. It turns out that in manufacturing parts, they have a vague idea of
the final product of their labor and their work no longer had any attraction for
them.

An excursion to the neighboring shops was organized for them and they were shown
the instruments for which they made parts. Their attitude toward work changed ap-
preciable. They felt that they were creators of the latest modern apparatus which
are used on all continents and in all corners of the world.

Question. Apparently there is an especially jealous attitude to supporting the
labor of young people? What do your psychologists say about this?

Answer. Yes, there is rich material to study this material at the firm. A young
man or young woman, coming to us from the Pm, usually has a secondary education.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (\NLY

Many continued to study, combining it with work. And naturally, raising their
oum educational level, young people gravitate toward interesting work. They are

no longer content with simple operations that require only the met elementary
skills and mechanical execution.

Question. How do they at the firm attempt to eliminate these contradictions?

Answer. This is not a simple question. A high level of technology is always re-
lated to mechanization and automation, that is, to simlification of manual oper-
ations. But on the other hand, the need for people with broad technological view
increases and adept tuners and adjusters are required. A new technology is born
that requires various types of knowledge from a worker, especially in optics.

Young people can rapidly acquire several occupations and easily switch to new oper-
at ions. The advice of psychologists was used in practice in a mamber of shops when
new models of instruments were developed there and complex technology was esployed.
The education of a worker becomes an additional reserve for labor productivity.

Question. Especially a lot has been said recently about the significance of the
microclimate in the production collective, that is, about the effect of personal
attitudes toward the results of labor. that can be done here and what are your
psychologists doing?

Answer. We compared two seemingly absolutely similar brigades of opticians.
Everything was identical in than: the nmber of people, their qualifications and
they perfoer the same work on the same equipment. But a small difference was
found in the results. One of the brigades regularly distinguished itself with high
labor productivity (7-10 percent higher than that of its neighbors) and with a
minimum percentage of rejection. what is wrong? A different microclimate. The
first brigade was a united, friendly collective. There were tense relations and
frequent conflicts in the other brigade. A lot of time was lost here on resolving
relations.

Question. Perhaps the second brigade was unlucky and incompatible people were as-
sembled there accidentally?

Answer. Of course it happens this way. Incidentally, our psychologists concluded
that it is very important in making up brigades to take into account the psycholog-
icai compatibility of people, the range of their cannon interests, their needs,
life situations, principles and sympathies. without this there cannot be a real
brigade in the sense which we have become accustomed to understanding this. But
what is especially important is the personality of the manager and brigade leader.

The brigade leader is appointed by the administration. A very important circum-
stance was determined when studying this problem. There are usually two leaders
in a brigade if the appointment of the manager is unsuccessful. One is the offi-
cial appointed leader and the other is the unofficial leader. However, the unof-
fjcial leader enjoys the greatest influence in view of his businesslike and per-
sonal qualities. And this in itself frequently causes an acute situation in a

small collective. It is this very situation that developed in the second brigade
of opticians under discussion. The brigade leader was soon replaced there at the
recommendation of psychologists and everything changed. '

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question. This means that it is not so sispleto be a brigade leader?

Answer. In any case, it is much more complicated than people think. In forming
production brigades, managers frequently underestimate the opinion of psychologists.
And some aspects of creating these groups resain outside the field of vision of the
managers. For example, should there be a man or woman as a brigade leader? It
would seen that a competent man as head of a female brigade is a proper appointment.
But if you question a female brigade of painters (the brigade leader is a sale) it
turned out that this was not so. half the brigade expressed dissatisfaction with
the brigade leader. He was unable to understand the needs and interests of the
female workers. Horeover, he was much younger than the where of the brigade.

You cannot decide to talk with such a brigade leader about everything bothers you.
And without this how then can he be the head?

Upon our recosmendation a female brigade leader was appointed and the psychological
climate in the brigade improved a lot.

Question. Obviously, the difference in the age between the brigade members is also
important?

Answer. Undoubtedly. Study of this problee revealed some fine points which must
be taken into account in forming a brigade. An old worker, for example, is espe-
cially sensitive to the slightest deficiencies of working conditions in the shop,
but is less perceptive to any rough points in relations with the administration.
His life and production experience, his high occupational skills and his knowledge
of his prestige in the collective evokes a feeling of the incouparable strength of
his position. And on the other hand, a young worker responds especially notional-
ly to each word of the chief. as has his own requirements related to the prospects
for growth and raising of rank.

Thus complex psychological problems frequently arise which are inevitably solved by
the brigade leaders, forenen and shop chiefs. Brigades and sections must be formed
so that people of different ages can supple-ant each other harmoniously, combining
the experience of a veteran with the energy and knowledge of young people. ‘no
validly evaluate a person, his character and his possibilities, one just learn how
to distinguish the psychological fine points which others try to brush away. But
a production organizer of any rank is unthinkable today without this.

we are making the first attempts. Our psychologists and sociologists are working
out recosnendations based on specific study of one or another brigades and sec-
tions. Special topical seminars, lecture cycles and conversations with the par-
ticipation of our sociologists and psychologists are conducted after this. later-
cises are conducted with the brigade leaders, foreeen and senior foreman on topics
related to problems of the person in the collective and management of the
collective.

Our firm is a collective of cusunist labor. This places special responsibilities
on us. we have to become our own type of laboratory where clearly new relations

in the labor collective are forced.

117

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Electronic Assistants

The telephone rings :

"They are calling from the supply department. no so kind and prepare data in
which articles steel pipe is now used at the firm and in what quantities and of
what diameter. And how many of them are needed during the first quarter of next
year. And we also need data on.”

The request was listened to carefully and written down.
"arerything is clear. You will receive all the data in a few minutes."

"All the data within a few minutes?" But who can know about this and ruember how
to answer suddenly to an unexpected question? These very pipes are used in the
most diverse shops and for the most diverse instalments, of which a countless num-
ber is produced. Yes, of course the data which they request can be assembled. But
the shops must be questioned and one must dig into an enormous card file and make
complex calculations. This is generally a week or week and a half of work for an
entire group of qualified people.

But the supply workers receive the answer iamediately. Without any wires. And
within several minutes. The operator enters the assignment in a machine and the
machine prints out an exhaustive answer. Its magnetic memory is unlimited.

And there is no need for card files. There is no need to load down planners and
economists with boxes of desks full of swollen folders with very extensive informa-
tion. Ninety-five percent of the entire information service has subscribed to the
computer center, which has become the nucleus of a future hsvnautmated control
system.

The computer center is the same age as the firm and was born together with it. And
they could not get along without it. At one time a "low-power" machine calculating
station was located here. The firm was immediately able to acquire entire computer
complexes. One of the enthusiasts of creating the firm--its first director for
production and economics Ivan Ivanovich Vasil'yev--headed a group which from the
very beginning “taught" the computer not only to serve the engineers and designers
in their creativity, but of also assisting all the services in their extremely
complicated work of management. In the complex plan for the socioeconomic develop-
ment of the firm for the 10th Five-Year Plan, it was immediately provided to devel-
op an automated production management system on the basis of a computer center.

In the lighted rooms of the cosputer center people converse silently with machines
in the language of algorithms. To each question they receive exhaustive, precise
answers, advice, instructions and warnings from their interlocutors.

The chief of the computer center of who candidate of economic sciences Yakov
Iosifovich Pivovarov relates beforehand the following story:

"The well-known academician Trapesnihcv somehow calculated that the entire adult
population of the USSR would be required by 1980 to work in the sphere of managing
our production."

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It would be required if there were no computers among the other means of
mechanization.

It sounds fantastic. But let us take the 'very smallest.” Approximately 250 mil-
lion parts are manufactured annually in the shops of the m firm. Several dif-
ferent operations are required for manufacture of each of them. This means that
we have already calculated new millions. And not for the sake of counting. One
must determine precisely how much and what materials are required, the priority

of their manufacture by deadlines, the priority of lending them for assembly, one
must calculate the need for materials and equipment, the number of workers, the
cost of expenditures and so on and so on.

And now imagine what staff should be made up of engineers, technicians, normalizers,
economists and other specialists for calculating these data (among others) if they
are armed only with an ordinary slide rule and an adding machine. And how much
time they would spend on this. If you calculate, continued Pivovarov, such a param-
eter as the equipment load. One leningrad economist, having studied our production,
determined how many equipment load versions can be under the simplest condition.

But 40 parts must be machined on at least 15 machine tools. Do you know how many?
Ten to the 28th power! And we have thousands of them of the most diverse designa-
tion from which the best and most profitable version must be selected. And all

this concerns in the given case only one problem: efficient loading of equipment
at the firm.

But let us take an even smaller scale, continued the chief of the computer center,
a shop or even a section for which a foreman is responsible. Investigators have
established that the foreman should operate with information 3.6-fold greater than
that which he can perceive in such a complex production enterprise as ours.

Computers have now freed the foreman of needless concerns. He first receives a
form on which everything is scheduled and everything is taken into account from the
computer center for each day.

And the machine takes on the ”technical“ functions in almost each management link.
The machine memory provides unanimity in planning, control, accounting and analysis
of the activity of each subdivision and of the entire firm as a whole. The computer
helps to select the optimum version when solving any creative problem, regardless

of what it concernsnequipmsnt, technology or finances.

Yakov Iosifovich leads me to a wall consisting of files.

"Information from the shops, departments and design offices,“ he explains, “is
gathered in them. A half million bits of information in the form of alphanumeric
characters on the most diverse problems comes to us here every month. 111a 'elec-
tronic brain' inediately processes it.”

"Undoubtedly there is no amount of people who could calculate 'nanually' and could
"overtake” the computer. But from the viewpoint, for exasple, of selecting the
optima versions."

Pivovarov laughed :

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”I see that you also must overcome the 'psychological barrier' of mistrust of the
computer, which we have already encountered ourselves. I can cite an example,
having already become a reader. mice we checked an experiment with dispersion of
equipment. A group of the most experienced engineers and computers solved the
problem. The engineers proposed an excellent, well-thought-out version. But when
they found out that their assignment was duplicated by a computer, they were hurt.
Some of then began to speak ironically. Well, we already see what the computer
has 'thought up.'" And intentionally! When they compared the two versions it
turned out that the machine, free of traditions and templates, had proposed a new,
unexpected version. They checked its version and it turned out that, because of
it, the path of the parts between two machine tools is reduced by a factor of 1.5
compared to the version proposed by the most experienced specialists. The computer
does not make the slightest deviation from established order. mos a foreman tried
to 'go around the instruction' of the machine and violated the priority of the op-
eration in processing and began to do operation '2' instead of the last operation
'3.‘ But the machine knows that operation '3' is the final one. If it is ful-

filled that means that the part is finished. And it imdiately sent a new as-
signment to the section."

Managment using computers does not tolerate the slightest violations of production
discipline. It in itself is a powerful stimulus to increasing production skills.

We are walking through the rooms past many computer, keypunch-calculating and
special production recording devices. This engineering complex--the electronic

caring and design calculations. 'mus accuulated experience made it possible to

convert from solution of special problems to development of a complex automated
management system.

Under new conditions of economic planning and incentives, the firm receives from
the ministry and main administration only the basic nomenclature rather than a fin-
ished plan. The firm itself determines the ranaining extensive nanenclature of
articles on the basis of what brings in the greatest advantage and highest profit.

And to produce what is most advantageous and what is most profitable is indicated
to the firm by an electronic economist. Because of the computer, the nuanber of

in the planning departments were reduced by 58 persons and those in bookkeeng and
finance departments were reduced by 73 persons.

But this does not mean that the computer generally forces a person out of here.
The main thing is that the machine releases the valuable time of a person from
:verything that can distract him from direct creativity.

'.OM0? with a telephone call. Yes, yes. He is interested in which latest informa-
:ion innovations have come in in that field of engineering in which he is involved.
\nd he immediately receives an exhaustive answer previously recorded on tape--the
:omputer memory.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If a designer needs systematized information on a strictly specific problem in a
narrowly specialized field, the computer helps him to find a couplets list of the
literature with which he must become familiar. The books are recorded in its
memory.

The creators of future instruments can determine beforehand the optimum capabilities
of one or another designs by means of a coaputer.

But this is only the beginning. We will soon be able to plan precisely and before-
hand by periods each phase of birth of each new instrument, frou the very initial

stage, from the designer's thought, frm the initial sketch to a detail plan. from
the first drawings to a mockup and from a mockup to an experimental model and put-
ting into serial production. And a strict schedule of preparing the production for
each element of the design will be catpiled beforehand. The A50 only needs before-
hand a general annotation for the future instmment. Designers, technicians, in-

vestigators and testers will know precisely beforehand when and by which calendar
deadline they should begin or end.

"I am confident," states Yakov Iosifovich, “that this will be a weighty contribu-
tion to the success of Leningrad firms: to reduce the deadlines for development
and introduction of new equipment into production and to raise product quality.
And this is the main thing today.“

Prom a modernized nighttable to an automated production management system and from
the attitude of an individual worker to problems of a mist attitude toward

labor in an entire multiperson collective--this is the range of problems of the
NOT service at the firm.

121

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOCAL POINT OF WIS? EDUCATION

'lhere is a building on the territory of LOMO which in no way reminds one of a pro-
duction site. Moreover, it is here that you can meet any workers of the firm--
workers, engineers, scientists and young workers only beginning their working life
and gray-haired veterans who have given tens of years to production.

And each one comes here with his own concerns and suggestions, with his questions
and thoughts and comes for advice and assistance.

The pulse of the social life of the association beats continuously here. In this
building is concentrated a unique staff of all the social organizations of the firm
engaged in communist education of workers: the party committee, trade-union cell-
mittee, monol connittee and editorial office of the weekly WA PROGRESSA.

“There were many significant changes in the work of the party, trade-union and
Komsomol organizations with creation of the firm and with introduction of the new
form of production management," says secretary of the m party comittee Anatoliy
Ivanovich Kirsanov.

Creation of a large production association opens up new and very favorable oppor-
tunities for ideological and political work among the collective and permits dis-
semination of leading experience on a wider basis, faster and with greater effect.
And it operates more confidently, clearly and more goal-oriented, solving the most
important problems. We have many hundreds of comunists in the party organization
--a real guard which is capable of anything. he mm party committee, according
to the bylaws of the CPSU, enjoyed the rights of a regional party ccunittee. It
has 55 persons in its expanded comosition. Current affairs are solved by the of-
fice of the party committee.

who is included in the party connittee? Hell, primarily these are 30 of the lead-
ing, most active workers from the different shops, leading specialists and managers
of the min subdivisions and representatives of all large party organizations of
the association. All this makes it possible for this party comittee to more uni-
versally and more deeply analyze the firm's activity and to consider in detail and
with total competency the questions brought up for discussion. After all, the
members of this expanded party comittee are closely related directly in their
work section with the primary party organization and know and judge the situation
by the tacts of life itself which they encounter in the daily work rather than
from summaries.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And of course the members of the party omittee can under these conditions inform
comunists and all workers of the firm more operationally and more fully about the
decisions and decrees of the party omittee. thomughly explaining them at party
and workers' meetings. And this is important. After all it is one thing to read
some decree to people and quite another if the person who participated in its de~
velopment, discussion and adoption himself talks about it himself and answers
questions which may arise convincingly and exhaustively. This also increases the
personal responsibility of each member of the party coauittee and more fully de-
termines its role as a collective body of the party management.

A real opportunity appeared under the new conditions to devote attention to better
thought-out, scientific approach to party work and to substantiation of the effi-
ciency and results of any measure which we plan to implement. One of the condi-
tions of this scientific approach was development of a future plan of party work
for the long term. These plans are closely tied to plans of the socioeconomic de-
velopment of the firm for each five-year plan.

This plan was developed at the initiative and with the participation of the party
coamittee for the 10th Five-Year Plan--a five-year plan of efficiency and quality.
as the 25th Party Congress and General Secretary of the CPSU central Connittee
Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev defined it. of course this definition became our main ref-
erence point in all work of the party organization and for all its sections-~from
the party committee to party groups.

The materials of the congress are being universally studied at L040 after the 25th
CPSU Congress and moreover in all exercises which propagandists are conducting and
they talk in all schools of communist labor and at all party and workers' meetings
in detail about the role of our firm in fulfillment of the tasks posed at the 25th
CPSU Congress. After all, one of the features of 11340 is that its production is
required by practically all sectors of the national economy. The success of other
fields of science and technology largely depends on the quality of instruments
made here.

The party counittee organized special theoretical and methodical seminars for
propagandists and political information specialists and prepared for them reference
materials which would help them more clearly, more specifically and more convinc-
ingly talk to the students, which is now required of workers of each subdivision of
the firm.

The work of the cosmittees of the party constittee in monitoring the economic activ-
ity of the adninistration, in development of technical progress and in economic and
social development became more animated after the 25th CPSU Congress.

The cosmittees render invaluable assistance to the party committee in solving the
most fundamental problems related to the role of communists in reconstruction and
in mechanization and automation of production processes.

The two party committee proceeds on the basis that success in fulfilling the de-
cisions of the 25th CPSU Congress depends primarily on the skill of comunists who
head political and organizing work directly in the shops, in the production sec-
tions, in departments and laboratories. from shop party organizations and from each
communist separately.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Discussion of the materials of the 25th congress at the firm aroused each communist
seemingly to again ask himself: have I done everything so as to justify the high

rank of fighter of Lenin's party in full measure? Here are several interviews at
the jobsites.

Optician, supervisor of the brigade imsni 25th CPSU Congress, K. Yakovlev is
speaking:

"The workers of our brigade, like all Soviet people, received the Annual Report of
the CPSU Central Committee to the 25th Party Congress with enormous interest and
warm approval."

"When you read between the lines of this most important document, you think about
its propositions and conclusions and gain a feeling of deep gratitude to our party,
which purposefully and sequentially leads our country along the peth indicated by
Lenin.

we answer a worker about the concern of the party and government: work with doubled
energy. we have the conditions for this. Even more progressive machine tools are
now being developed for opticians and diamond tools will be introduced for the first
time in fine polishing operations. This will permit a significant increase of labor
productivity during the 10th Five-Year Plan and will improve product quality.

Our opticians have converted to the brigade method of work. There were 42 brigades
in 1976 and each worked on a single detail. Five of them were young brigades
headed by a brigade leader-mentor. This is also new since it appeared quite re-
cently in the practice of our shop.

Our brigade stood a shock watch during the work of the 25th Party Congress. we

cover our shift assignments daily and the quality of work is good. But it will be
even better!“ ’

Senior foreman communist v. Spitsinx

"Our mechanical section coped successfully with their pledges taken in honor of
the 25th Party Congress."

”The section was the victor from the results of the 25th lO-day labor watch and it
was awarded a certificate and the challenge red banner.”

“The brigade of boring lathe operators, which is headed by young Komsomol Vladimir
Romanyuta, also won first place. And he himself raised his own rank to third rank
during this time."

”It is not easy to head a young workers' collective. There is little experience
among the young machine tool operators and it happens that some of them violate
labor discipline and it is hard to make demands on young people, they do not al-
ways understand you at first and try to do something on their own. New here I ap-
peal to the party groups and to communists for assistance."

124

FOR OFFICIAL.USE1DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1 never weaken contact with than. I rely on the party group both in organising
and in educational work. For example, here is how we together control rejects.‘

"someone conceals a sin and one of the young people spoils a part or turns in sev-
eral flawed parts. A signal come from the on: and I as the direct representative
go to one of the columnists, most frequently to party group organizer Nikolay
Semenovich Matyukha. help so and so, I say, to turn the fellow onto the correct
path."

”And this was not inunediately in my practice that they refused this request to me,
saying that they were busy or that were some more important reasons. Without any
superfluous words. that same Nikolay Sensnovich switches off his machine tool, for
example, and heads to the jobsite of the guilty party. I look from the side and
there is a serious conversation under way: the reason for the rejects have been
found and Nikolay Semenovich shows how to correct it and then sees whether every-
thing is okay. Training, both occupational and purely human, for a young person
provided a clear lesson in mutual help."

"My proposals always find support among connunists and the section has become the
leader probably due to our cooperation."

Milling machine operator Yu. Vasil'yev, an innovator, mentor and member of the
party committee of the association:

"The word 'quality' is now in the ears of everyone but I also think that the strug-
gle for labor quality begins with education of the working conscience of the young
worker who of course desires to master his skills. One is inseparable from the
other. "

"And when you think about the thousands of young workers who will determine the
appearance of the firm at the end of the 10th Five-Year Plan, you understand what
responsibility has now been laid on us, the veterans. That is why both the party
organization and the trade-union canittee devote ever more attention to develop-
ment of apprenticeship and to the remarkable, most noble movement which was born
in Leningrad.”

There are now 800 mentors at 1040. The party and trade-union organizations have
selected the most experienced workers from an enormous mnber of the best-womun-
ist and non-party, ready to share selflessly and unsparingly their skills with
young people and mainly to educate in their wards working pride and a feeling of
high moral responsibility for their labor and for all their behavior."

"Seminars of mentors are held at the firm, they visit special lectures and exchange
experience.”

"The party cdunittee and the trade-mien conittee is always seeking newer, more
flexible and more effective forms of tutorship."

"And if the labor discipline was recently inproved among young workers and if most
of our wards won the right to enter the Manuel and becone worthy menbers of the
LOMO collective, then undoubtedly this is due to the important labor of the tutors."

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"And if a tutor was skillful in teaching his ward to love his occupation, to re-
spect labor and to value working friendship, then let he himself teach his comrade
to follow the same principles--principles which the party organization of the firm
teaches in the mo collective and which find their fullest and clearest embodi-
ment in the daily life and work of the comuniste of the association.”

"The right hand of the party conuittee is the trade-union committee. The trade-
union organization combines thousands of workers, scientists, engineers and salar-
ied employees at the W0 firm. working under the supervision of the party constit-
tee and in close contact with it, it widely recruits all workers of the firm to
participate in production managuaent and to participate in the mass competition to
fulfill the five-year plans ahead of schedule and for high product quality."

"Much has been done among the shop comsdttees the permanently acting production
meetings, the advice of innovators, VOIR and other creative organizations which the
trade-union cosmittee of the firm supervises, to develop an effective mass competi-
tion. The Leno collective was one of the first to support the patriotic call of
the workers of the Association Kirovskiy Zavod, who came out with the initiative

to fulfill each production five-day task within four days. The trade-union organ-
izations of the shops helped each of the participants of this competition to work
out his own plan-pledge and the cauplex plan for increasing labor productivity at
each jobsite. Being true to the slogan 'Complete a five-day task within four days'
makes it possible to regularly evaluate the personal contribution of the competi-
tors to the success of the collective.“

"The trade-union organization of the firm warmly supported and disseminated the
call of the Moscow workers 'Give a worker's guarantee to each article.‘ And to do
this, they organized even more widely the competitions that have become traditional
for the firm and which provide for awarding the honorary ranks: 'Best worker of
the shop (association) in occupation,’ 'Best young worker’ and so on.”

"These are those who are irreproachable on the job and in everyday life and these
are those who showed the highest labor productivity and achieved the highest re-
sults in occupational skills, in innovation and in economizing of metals and raw

material. These are those who transferred the 'secrets' of their success to the
greatest number of their own comrades in their occupation."

Competitions by occupations have become a powerful stimulus for the movement for
communist labor in which the absolute majority of nose workers participates."

"'Prom high work quality of each one to high labor efficiency of the collective' is
the main direction in the activity of all public organizations of the firm.‘

126

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

room COMWNIS‘PS

A conversation broke out in the party committee: with what and when does education
of a young columnist begin? From that memorable moment when he is handed his party
card? From that party meeting at which he excitedly hears the words: 'I request
that so and so by accepted'?’ Or perhaps, even earlier?

"of course it is much earlier,“ so says secretary of the party organization of the
mac firm.

“It is much earlier," he repeats with confidence. "It should begin from the very
day when the young man or woman first crosses the threshold of the enterprise. Of
couse not all of then will become party members in the future. It is felt that

this is very important: so that they feel a moral atmosphere such as an 'ideologi-
cal' climate where their dream to become a party fighter is born of itself from the
first minute that they are among a new collective of workers.‘

When you become more familiar with the multifaceted life of the W0 firm, you be-
gin to understand: this is not only a creative laboratory of new progressive forms
of production organization and management. This is a unique laboratory of cou'mun-
ist education whose activity is closely tied to the concern of the party mittee
about supplementing the party ranks and with education and with ideological tesper-
ing of young comunists.

Incidentally, an average of 150 workers become party members here in the multi-
thousand collective of the firm. You become acquainted with them and you see that
these are actually the best young workers and young foremen, the young engineers
and designers--the future of the firm.

Recently the party coauittee secretary in a solemn occasion handed a party card to
one of them-“young lathe operator of the astronomical shop Nikolay Nikolayev.

And now I am in the astronomical shop where specialists of the highest class, high-
est not only in level of qualifications but in the degree of the responsibility
with which a person relates to a matter, develop the most complex optical instru-
ments. It is a complex task to name the best one among them. And even so they
name Nikolayev immediately.

When the work was ended we became acquainted. And Nikolay Nikolayev almost modest-
ly talks about himself.

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”I came to the shop as an apprentice lathe operator. I now understand how much
concern the older comradesumunists and non-party workers-~showed me until I
learned to gain the fine points of the occupation and how they helped me to better
understand myself. They helped me with other than speeches and exhortations. I
saw how, for example, communists Aleksandr Pedomv, Konstantin xharlamov and Viktor
Smirnov worked. They were the first ones to be interested in me: how I live, who
my friends are and what I am interested in. And they seemingly by chance opened up
to me newer and newer 'lathe' secrets. I myself did not notice how I gradually
gained my occupation and I lost the skill of wandering around the shop and start-
ing any kind of conversations with my section neighbors. It was very good that
from the first days such people respected in the shop by all considered me one of
their own and I frequently repeated to myself what I heard from them: 'This is a
matter, first of all that for which you are responsible.‘ I tried to do as they
did. Moreover, I was even amazed why they treated me so well and so attentively
even like my father since I had hardly managed to deserve this. Or perhaps I was
simply lucky to be among good people. But later I learned and understood something
else. Whether I was lucky or not, a tradition was established in the shop which
communists kindly maintain--to give their experience to each novice. This meant
not only to teach him their skills but to give him a true party look at everything
which he encounters in life. The senior foreman convinced me to graduate from the
evening school. I later entered the correspondence division of the institute. It
was difficult and I almost dropped my studies, but my neighbors in the section,
camunists, did not give up and helped to create conditions for normal study."

And could Nikolayev not feel sympathy toward these people who had been so concerned
about him? Could he not desire to be something like them himself?

Once, when an urgent but ”unsuitable“ order came into the section, Nikolay willing-
ly took it on himself. He knew how the communists of the shop would act in similar
cases. He took it On and completed it 1.5 times faster than expected. Soon, he,

a distinguished worker and young Ransomol, was elected to the Yomsomol organization
of the shop and later to the shop committee.

Listening to the story about Nikolay Nikolayev, I unwillingly recall the words of
the party conunittee secretary that the education of a young communist begins long
before he enters the party.

And now Nikolay Nikolayev is a young communist. He touches with pride his inner
pocket of his jacket where his candidate's card is kept. His dream has come true.
But Nikolay understands that everything is only beginning. They will new approach
him with a new measuring rod and with new demands and a different demand is now on
him.

He will soon undergo self analysis before comunistsz how is he justifying the
trust of the collective.

And in fact how? He now looked at himself with different eyes. He approached
himself with a different measuring rod. He had now received the assignment of
machining a large lot of parts. Having thought it over he decided that all these
parts can be converted to casting. It turns out faster and less expensively and
both metal can be saved and the machine tool can be freed for more necessary

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations. He consulted with his comrades and they agreed, but warned him: but
don't be stopped by trouble.‘ After all, the entire technique has been set up,
inscribed and it is not easy to change it. And true he will not get by without
having trouble. He then proceeded es the party conscience had guided him.

People now looked at him in a different light and trusted him more and placed
greater hopes on him. And now Nikolayev together with experienced lathe operators
Smirnov and Pedorov suggest high-speed clamping accessories which would permit the
machine tool operator to work easily and quickly. They tested it on Nikolay's ma-
chine tool and the result was excellent. But again there is a problem: there are
18 lathe brigades in the shop. And all of then need these accessories. The com-
munists proposed that they be manufactured through the efforts of the collective
itself. And they were manufactured!

There is also the expression: ”It was not noticed how a person grew."
Everything is excellently noted in the tuna party organization.

when the deadline approached, Nikolayev was unanimously accepted from among the
candidates to membership in the party. And after several months the party bureau
recommended Nikolayev as a candidate for the party group organizationof the sec-
tion. And they were not wrong. Nikolay Nikolayev is now one of the best fighters
of the party group organizations, he enjoys prestige and has initiative and is
demanding. Everyone in his section shares this opinion.

There is a small grinding shop at {ONO located on the side of the large shops.
Various special resins are made here for gluing glass and metal and grinding-
polishing micropowders are manufactured for machining optical surfaces. Once the
young Nina Kupriyanova--a resin worker--geve a talk at a routine political meeting
in the workshop that was devoted to coummnist morality. her first specialty--ma-
chine tool operator--was cleaner and easier. But they needed someone more as a
resin worker in the small workshop and Nina decided to master this difficult occu-
pation as well. which she has not left up to this day. Nina was very adept in her
studies, referring to many works of artistic literature. And her female friends in
the shop--students of the circle--talked about her selflessness in work and her
responsiveness. The strict controller of OTK Yelena Pedorovna Knyazeva said: “If
everyone always worked like she does, there would be no need to be concerned about
quality." A propagandist told about this in the shop party bureau.

The communists of the section and among them Yelena Pedorovna Knyazeva willingly
gave recommendations to the young worker. And now Nina Kupriyanove is yet another
fighter in the party organization of the firm. She is really a fighter. Modest,
but decisive.

additional grinding materials were needed to machine the mirrors of a large tele-
scope. she convinced everyone to remain after the shift and was the first to take
on a large volume of the work. And for this she gained respect in the shop. It is
no accident that every time when foreman Viktor Vledimirovich xerikov goes on de-
tached duty or goes on leave he leaves the section in the hands of Nine xupriyen-
ova. The foreman is calm. He knows that he can rely on xupriyenove and it makes
no difference that she is the youngest one. They respect her and know that she
will solve all problems with skill, justice and in a party manner.

129

INJR‘OFTWCJAL USEICHﬁlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And there is yet another acquaintance: young engineer-researcher Vyacheslav
Grechkin from the laboratory of electronic components. He gave an excellent ac-
count of himself in difficult and complex investigations related to development of
a luminous flux stabilizer and other optical instrunents.

Several years ago the investigator was a rank and file radio installer and active
trade-union member at muo. Later with a pass of the firm he entered the Leningrad
Institute of Aviation Instrumct Building and returned to the design office as an
engineer. They trusted him with working out one of the problems, very important
for engineering progress in the optical industry. He coped successfully with it
and then gave an interesting report about his research at a conference of young
specialists of the firm. Problems of optics was vyacheslav Grechkin's entire con-
cern. But why then does he devote evenings in the Central lecture Hall and at
seminars in the House of Political Education and which innovations does he con-
stantly seek out at the shops of book stores where they sell political literature?
The fact is that Vyacheslav, having become a commist, performs a very inportant
comission in his design office. He is a political information specialist. At
first Grechkin was uncertain of himself: designers are themselves educated people
and what could he provide new to them? However, now when Vyacheslav Grechkin gives
a talk on political information in the design office during the lunch break in the
recreation and reading room, almost everyone comes there. And it always turns out
that the young designer has the most interesting materials at his disposal regard-
less of what the discussion is about-~about problems of environmental protection or
about the situation in the Near East or about the historical visits of Leonid
Il'ich Brezhnev abroad related to the struggle for peace. Like most other young
communists, Vyacheslav Grechkin is a worthy member of our party and the iaportant
service of the mentor communists of the association are responsible for this.

They are engaged on a planned basis and sequentially at 1040 in supplementing the
party ranks. This is one of the most inportant spheres of party committee activity.
Special seminars of the party group organizations and meetings with party veterans
are devoted to education of young communists. The secretaries of the shop party
organizations specially listen to this problem at meetings of the party committee.
The personal and daily leadership of comunists is very valuable during the entire
period of the candidate period of those whom they have recoumnded. If a candidate
for membership in the CPSU has conmitted some offense, his guarantors are usually
sumned to the bureau. The party counittee has also organized a special school

of party candidates. Besides propagandists, managers of the firm appear at the
sessions and they talk about the primary problems of the association which all par-
ty members and the entire collective of the firm must resolve.

And it is very important that every young comunist be visible in this enormous
party organization. Every novice coming to the firm enters a favorable climate

where the atmosphere itself generates around him the dream to become a communist.
And everything is done here to see that these dreams come true.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A BOOK WHICH HAS A THOLSAND AUTHORS

This is a book of forecasts which I continuously realized. These forecasts are not
from the field of fiction. They were predetermined beforehand, calculated before-
hand and they have a firm foundation that guarantees that everything written down
will be done within the designated deadline. And every person working at Leno, havb
ing looked at this book, can learn what changes will occur at the firm during the
next five-year plan and what he himself can firmly count on, bearing in mind the im-
provement of working conditions, recreation conditions, raising of qualifications,
education, provision with housing, medical assistance, an increase of wages, that
is, how his living conditions will imrove.

This book is the complex plan for the socioeconomic development of mm. It was
worked out by a special committee of leading specialists of the association with
the participation of sociologists and is discussed and adopted by all workers of
the firm-~to coauthors of the plan and its direct executors.

The system of primary measures on mechanization and automation, to increase the
technical level, quality and specialization of production and to improve the man-
agement system is clearly determined in the book. And here, along with other prob-
lems, are invariably everyday social problems.

For exasple, development of new instrusnts has an appreciable effect on the occu-
pational-qualification structure of the wilective and the association needs people
of completely new specialties: engineer-technicians and engineer-investigators to
develop hybrid integrated microcircuits, engineer-designers in fiber optics, opti-
cal asseublers in fiber optics, operators of electronic units for mathematical mod-
elling of new developments. And they have been trained beforehand. It is clear to
everyone that more adjusters with higher and secondary engineering education are
needed directly in the shops in adjustment of instruments and that adjustment of
complex photoelectronic instruments can be carried out by a worker only with a
higher technical education and that the knowledge of qualified workers should ape
preach in their own level the knowledge of diploma specialists.

vigorous scientific and technical progress caused a serious social problem through-
out the world: the need for new measures in the occupational-qualification struc-
ture of labor collectives. It was justly decided that the rapid occupnional
growth of a collective should be the social consequence of technical progress in
the association.

131

FOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In order that each rank and file worker become more qualified, a special academic
combine was created at the firm in complete accord with the plan for social devel-
opment. A total of 5,000 workers and engineering and technical personnel study
annually in an enormous building with an area of 2,000 square meters. Each audi-
torium and each office are supplied with the most modern equipment up to electronic
systems for programmed teaching.

Who studies here and what do they study?

All new workers (except those who have completed the m at the firm) are taught
the theory and practice of any occupation chosen by them. Everything that a lathe
operator or milling machine operator or optical engineer should know, let us say,
in theory is learned in the classes. Ehrerything in practice is learned in special
train ing-production shops .

Courses are taught here to raise the qualifications of even the most experienced
workers, courses of "goal designation": timely training of workers to master the
assembly of instruments which the firm must manufacture in the near future.

Every worker can obtain a secondary, related occupation here. Moreover, the lead-
ing experience of the best production innovators is constantly studied in this
training combine. It is felt that the saving from a planned increase of qualifica-
tions of workers of the firm comprises 112,000 rubles annually. The source of this
income is a rapid increase of labor productivity.

There is a special class of "simulators." The occupational suitability of a person
for one or another specialty which the firm needs is determined here by means of
instruments and tests.

Seminars an. held continuously in the training combine of the firm to raise the
qualifications and creative growth of foreman, engineers, technicians and designers.
Many of them combine production work with scientific activity. The future scien-
tists have the opportunity to pass the candidate minimum in philosophy and a foreign
language in the training combine.

There is a two-shift school of young workers here where they obtain a complete
secondary education. For those who plan to obtain higher education without inter-
ruption from production, a vuz preparatory group has been created. An academic
consultation office has been created for correspondence students. There is a tech-
nical school at the firm where young workers or the children of workers of the as-
sociation also mainly study.

And now among those who develop the latest optical instruments at IOHO are more than
3,000 graduates of the young workers' school and more than a thousand graduates of
the technical school and hundreds of workers who have achieved a higher education.

It became possible to place more than 600 workers who achier a secondary techni-
cal cducation with the assistance of the firm in assenbly, debugging, regulation
and installation of the most complex instruments.

132

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

special groups of engineers in adjustment of electronic and optical systems were
created and work here in six mechanical assembly shops. People with higher edu-
cation were taken to perform the most crucial production operations where diverse
and extensive theoretical training is required.

The complex plane for socioeconomic development stimulate the mutual interests of
the firm and of its collective for the successful results of labor.

This mutual interest was expressed, specifically, in such indisputable facts: la-
bor productivity was doubled during the Ninth Five-Year Plan and almost the entire
growth of product volume (98 percent) was achieved due to this. The wages of
workers increased an average of 27 percent and that of machine tool operators in-
creased by 40 percent. The additional, 13th wage comprised 75 percent of the aver-
age monthly wages. The material incentives fund of the workers more than doubled
during the five-year period.

The firm spends millions of rubles every five-year period on housing construction.
recreation, therapy. education, on construction of health resorts, tourist bases,
sports structures, pioneer cams and kindergardens.

The personal incentives of each worker, employee and engineer in the success of his
own firm increase with each year. The people of who are convinced in their own
experience of the inseparability of the firm's interests and those of each one work-
ing at it.

I have related in this chapter only some of the item of the complex plan for socio-
economic development that have already been implemented.

"The House Where We Live"

Improving the housing conditions of the who workers is one of the most important
directions of the complex plan for the socioeconomic development of the association.

The firm is building an apartment building.

New residents from mm can more and more frequently be found in the most diverse
rayons of the city. And almost entire quarters are populated by workers of the
firm at Vyborskaya Stornoa. who now has more than 100 of their own apartment
buildings. They are comfortable with all the conveniences of modern apartments.
These apartment buildings are carefully appointed and are equipped with mechanized
laundries and service shops have been organized. The firm expended more than 1.5
million rubles during the Ninth Piveoilear Plan on repair and appointment of their
own apartment buildings.

more than half of all the mm workers live in apartment buildings belonging to
the association. Moreover, the firm now participates in participatory construction
of a nunbi-r of apartment buildings which the city is undertaking. It appropriates
hundreds of thousands of rubles for this construction from the social development
fund. And this means that tens of families of many workers and exployees of the
association will receive new apartments.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet Another Facet

Yes, the complex plan of the firm is multifaceted. But there is a human being be-
hind every line of it. A human personality with his own secular demands, passions,
attractions and interests. Yes, it is really a human personality. They are per-
sistently and uniformly concerned here about the harmonious development of each
worker, about his ideological and general cultural outlook and about acquiring the
treasure of all social riches which literature, music, movies and generally any
artistic creativity can provide for man.

Let us take a look at the House of Culture Progress, which is not really a house
but a combine of culture. It immediately combines three enormous clubs, recon-
structed and equipped on a modern basis, which is required for any type of recrea-
tion which one prefers.

M peoples' universities regularly work here with ll faculties in different fields
of knowledge, 14 clubs "for interests"--amateur music, movie excursions, tourism,
collecting, photography and so on.

More than half of the workers at who are actively involved in 52 artistic
collectives!

The library has 150,000 volunes. Select any book--classics, Russian and foreign,
any works of Soviet literature and all journals--literary, social-political and
engineering.

It is calculated that more than 300,000 persons visit the House of Culture during
a year. They come because they are interested! I frequently met workers and en-
gineers here whom I had met at the firm, gathering material for this book. I saw
some at concerts of the wind ensemble preparing a new program. I met others in the
vocal class and still others in the choreography studio. I saw how the instrument
ensemble attentively studied new works. I observed how assemblers of movie cameras,
tool and die workers and operators of the computer center carefully work out each
step in the school of ballroom dancing. Moreover, 1.0140 can be rightfully proud of
its ensemble Kristen, that has become popular far beyond the firm. Kristall
propagandizes modern ballroom dances and helps young workers to gain a deeper feel-
ing for music and to develop good taste.

Incidentally, the young people devote special attention here: colorful occasions
of young wives and holidays for young parents are arranged here. A young family
club has been created. The members of this club meet with teachers, physicians,
sociologists and other specialists for frank discussions and consultations on
questions concerning them.

Those who come here with children need have no concern with who- they leave them.
A special room has been especially allocated for young people where the children
can play at any games. Experienced teachers arrange jolly amusements, theatrical
meetings with heroes of fables and show than animated films.

Incidentally, no one is left without attention here. Old female workers can com-
fortably sit in the company of their spouses at their knitting and can listen to

134

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

music or can improve their dressmaking. Veterans of World War 11 give reminiscen-
ces to young workers. Heroes of Labor meet with their own young shift. Frequent
and desired guests of this House of Culture are well-known Soviet writers, compos-
ers, artists and painters. 'l'hey acquaint the opticians with their on new works
and make creative plans for the future.

Meetings with interesting people whom workers of mo love so are not only meetings
with well-known guests but with their own ”firm" workers. Is it not interesting to
meet, let us say, with metalworker Boris Nikolayevich Anisimow-a foreman in manu-
facture of mockups of new movie cameras and simultaneously a painter-landscapiat
and portraitist and participant of many ezdxibitions? Or to hear the amazing story
and see the films taken by underwater swiming amateur in the depths of the sea,
optical engineer Aleksandr Mikhaylov, or to visit an evening of poetry arranged by
worker-poets from the lithography association of the firm?

There are 1,500 athletes involved in 22 sports sections at m. Among them are
178 masters of sport and thousands of ranked athletes. A total of 30 masters of
sport of the USSR, 4 candidates for master and 50 athletes of first rank were edu-
cated in one section of track athletics alone. Many of the students of the sports
sections are participants and winners at the All-Union Spartikads and in the Olmic
Games. The supervisor of the school of higher sports skills at the firm is V. I.
Alekseyev--a multiple champion of the USSR in track and his students have estab-
lished 39 world records. Highly qualified specialists conduct exercises with ama-
teur athletes. Among them are lo meritorious trainers of the USSR and RSPSR.

Prom year to year the firm allocates tens of thousands of rubles to development of
physical culture and sport in their own collective. mm workers have at their
disposal an excellent stadiun with total complex of sports equipment and stands for
spectators, a rowing and bicycling-skiing base and a shooting range. Construction
of an enormous new sports complex with central sports club, two soccer training
fields, a swimming pool and other structures has begun.

This is only one line from the plan for socioeconomic development!
The Lunch Table of the Firm

"How did they feed you today?" A machine tool operator or optical engineer, having
returned to his jobsite after the lunch break, frequently hears this question.

Both his foreman and shop chief and the general director himself if he is nearby
asks him about this. Not to mention the managers of the party or trade-union
organization. '

A good lunch is important. If one wishes, this is most of all an additional re-
serve of labor productivity. After all, this additional reserve is not only in
new equipment or in innovative experience. It is also born at the lunch table and
in the workers' dining hall.

Therefore, the firm considers all dining halls in the association, whether they
are formally subordinate to it or not, as one of the most important subdivisions

in the plant.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This vital (in the literal sense) question has arisen repeatedly at meetings of
the most active party members of the firm and at trade-union conferences. Thus in
time was born the idea of creating a public catering combine that combined all the
various dining halls. And this made it possible to mechanize the work processes
in preparation of food, to inprove its quality and to see that each one could each
lunch with pleasure and rapidly. Of course it is easy to say "rapidly.“ The com-
bine had to prepare tens of thousands of dishes daily.

The firm took on itself expenditures on mechanization and similar conversions. i And
allocations from the profits for construction and reconstruction of the dining
halls are also provided in the cosplex plan for socioeconomic development of mm.

Everything changed within one year alone. The large dining halls, beautifully
draped windows, restful painting Ofthe walls and the soft color of the fluorescent
lights. Canfortable furniture and clean, fresh air.

The partitions everywhere are made of glass panels in the kitchens, bakery and in
the pantries, the walls are panelled and ceramic tile is on the floor. Bestful and
convenient cloakrooms have been equipped for the service personnel.

And the main thing is that equipment that facilitates the work of the ooks has
been installed at each step. Snack bars supplied with modern equipment appeared in
the shops. And in each of them one could obtain steaks, fish, shashliks, hot tea,
coffee, fresh milk, cream, kafir, fruit juices, eggs and pastries.

A new, beautiful building appeared on the territory of the enterprise. This is the
culinary store constructed by the firm which also operates as an ordinary cafeteria.
One can drop in here for a slice of bread and butter, can eat hot sausages, can pur-
chase a cup of coffee or cocoa with a pastry, pie or puff-pastry. And after the
shift the women, so as not to lose time after the work day standing in lines in
stores, can purchase semi-finished products here.

when sumer begins and the bushes begin to bloom in the plant yard, an open-air
cafe begins to operate in the shadow of young trees. One can have a good meal
here and at the same time can watch the performance of participants of artistic
endeavors, listen to a short lecture or learn interesting news.

The combine now has at its disposal a first-class factory kitchen, confectionery,
family of dining halls and excellent snack bars in each shop.

And the time when a machine tool operator or metalworker, sensing the approach of
lunchtime looked anxiously at his watch, has been forgotten at the firm. And an-
other time, switching off his machine tool "ahead of schedule,” he hurried to get
into line into the dining hall. Everyone now has lunch as they wish and what they
want. There is also time to breathe in the fresh air on a garden bench, to look
through a fresh journal or to listen to the radio.

If a diet has been prescribed, don't worry. Diet nutrition organization is the
subject of the most careful concern at the firm. There is now a special dining
hall for 640 persons here. And there are special diet tables in all the other

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dining halls of the combine. Any worker of the fire, it he has a doctor's pre-
scription, is fully provided with the necessary treatnent and dietetic nourish-ent.

Incidentally, hundreds of people receive dietetic nourish-ant at a discount here
and many receive it absolutely free due to social insurance.

The physicians of the who polyclinic felt that, due to therapeutic murishnent,
the periods of loss of capacity due to illnesses related to the digestive organs
were reduced by one-third.

Yes. of course, it is not a simle and easy task to feed many thousands of people
well and with taste who are engaged in two shifts in the shops of the enterprise
and even more so the young people relaxing in Pioneer cups, plust the many decha
dwellers in Tarasovo village and other places.

And outside the city in ‘l'arasovo village. the 1.0010 21!! has yet another unique
”enterprise." It is both pastures, orchards and potato fields and berry planta-
tions. herds of cattle, hundreds of swine feeding and an enomous poultry house
can be seen here. The auxiliary fern. like everything related to the first. is
well-appointed, mechanized and supplied with modern equipment.

Its own auxiliary farm. well~set-up and profitable, is a guarantee of the highest
quality of products to the fir-'s dining table.

Good health to You!

These words are from the letter of Anna Vlasovna 9., a worker in the optical shop.
to the W0 hospital.

She fell ill suddenly and they took her directly from hose to the hospital. Not
to the regular city hospital but to her own “firm“ hospital on Clmgunnaya Ulitsa.
Anna Vlasovna's condition was serious. Moreover, it was critical. A coupler oper-
ation related to trepanation of the skull was required. mly the nest neurosur-
geons could save the female worker. And only in a clinic supplied with the most
modern medical equipment.

And all this was in "its own“ hospital attached to the first.

A complicated operation was immediately carried out on Anna Vlasovna. ‘l‘hey cared
for the female worker carefully after the operation until she was coupletely on her
feet. And now she is again working as before in the optical shop.

Here is a note from her book of reminiscences and wishes:

'"rhey performed an operation on us which they could not do at the institute on
Bronnitskaya Ulitsa. I an now walking around at home like a healthy person. My
respects to you! A. Pikovskaya."

"I am happy that s. zlotnikov performed the operation on as. All the patients ad-
mire your great skills, enormous love of labor and kindness. P. Korehagin, 81
years old.‘

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'l'ou cannot even imagine how I am happy that we have such a sanitary unit. They
could never help me in any sanitorium as they do here, especially the manganese
and carbon baths. Foundry worker Ivanenko."

Letters, letters and enthusiastic reviews. From those who have been saved, from
those extracted from severe circumstances and from those to whom health, vitality
and joy of life has been returned.

Valentina Georgiyevna Terent'yeva, the chief physician of the medical-sanitation
service of m, pridefully shows off her "facilities." 'No polyclinics, four ex-
cellently organized health stations and a hospital. And the laboratories--a clin-
ical, biological, microbiological, functional diagnostics, physical therapy depart-
ment with large, excellently appointed offices for light and electronic therapy,
mud baths for taking paraffin baths and pools in which patients with especially
severe forms of radiculitis are treated. We visited with her in the pulmonological
office, in the physical culture treatment office and in the dental and otorhenolog-
ical office.

The real palace of health preservation is the new, main building of the LOMO hos-
pital. constructed quite recently. From afar an enormous white building surrounded
by a chorus of trees is visible. The wide reflecting windows flash in the sun like
gold. The large rooms, laboratories, operating and recovery rooms and the comfort-
able wards impress one with their cleanliness and breathe with an air of quiet.
There are 200 beds in the new building. New wards have been openedunerve, oto-
rhenological and special surgical wards.

In one year alone the firm spent more than 100,000 rubles to acquire the latest
medical equipment--Soviet and imported. There are also instruments in this hospital
which are being used for the first time in medical practice and incidentally devel-
oped here at the firm.

I met not only ”their own" staff specialists in this hospital but also professors
of the First Medical Institute and the Military Medical Academy. They see patients
here, perform operations, are involved in scientific research, improve the method
of operation on the chest and abdominal organs, use the latest methods of rehabil-
itation and carry out qualified postoperative observation. They help the hospital
medical workers to master modern operations on the vessels of the lungs.

The medical workers have at their disposal excellent equipment, modern wards, in-
cluding rehabilitation wards with the latest electronic apparatus, an endoscope
office with the most modern instruments for Optical diagnosis.

Emerything advanced and new is being introduced in the treatment center of the
firm, like at the firm itself, and neither effort nor funds are spared on this.

The concern about the health of workers is an inseparable part of the extensive
program for economic and social development of the collective.

”The Resort Shop"

"I don't need to go to the Crimea or to the Caucasus. I would like to go to
Ta rasovo . "

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One can frequently hear these words now in the trade-union coalittee of 1010.

what kind of place is this to which many, very many workers, engineers and euploy-
ees of the Leningrad Optical-Mechanical Association are ready to pass up the golden
beaches of the Black Sea and the mountain air of the Caucasus? This place is on
the Karelia peninsula.

Perhaps, the definition “corner” is not quite accurate for such a large, well-
appointed recreation zone. Everything in the center of this forest village is
like that in a real city: a post office, house of Culture and dispensary. Every-

thing is also in modern style. There is also a department store with reflective
show windows and neon signs.

And around it are located many comfortable cottages painted in the most diverse
colors in groves of lilacs, in the gold of cactus plants and in the floating fires
of peonies. Entire families relax at these dachas, constructed by the firm for its
workers. The inhabitants of each cottage have at their disposal furniture and
everything required. Here nearby, a special store sells a large quantity of semi-
finished products of meat, vegetables and dairy products.

And if you don't want to cook at home, you can enjoy an excellent cafe. This is a
beautiful and comfortable structure. It is an airy, brightly painted room, ap-
pointed with light, plastic-covered tables and chairs. There is everything here
for a good mood. And it becomes even better when the steaming dishes, shashliks
and armatic meals appear on the tables.

I met in this cafe with the Mikhaylov family, two workers, with whom I had come
in the firs.‘s bus. They invited me to their table. Cool dry wine and fruits ap-
peared. Pavel Yevseyevich, an old milling machine operator, sharing a bottle of
cynandal on the occasion of "a successful move to new quarters,“ said:

"There is relaxation and there is relaxation. And when I come here with my wife
then let my Anna Hatveyevna be freed from the kitchen. But I am uncomfortable
here. We work identically: I at a machine tool and Anna Matveyevna on the con-
veyor. And should she work here as well-«no. It's true, during this season we
wanted to cook ourselves and my wife is the foreman on this account. But we came
here once or twice simply out of curiosity. We liked it. We had breakfast, lunch
and dinner in any form. If you want dairy products or if you went meat dishes they
are here. The diet is whatever you require. There are salads and desserts of
whatever you like. And if you love Caucasian dishes, then of course you can find
them here. There is enough and it is tasty. So we decided to take our meals here.“

It was easy for Mikhaylov to convince me to do this. Especially after I had myself
”tested" the breakfast, lunch and dinner here. The cafe's popularity was not born
of itself.

First, the very best products from their own auxiliary farm are served here. Sec-
ond, the most experienced and most inventive cooks are sent to this cafe from the

food combine during the vacation season. And third, who has outfitted the kitchen
unit of the cafe with the most modern culinary equipment.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Coming out of this cafe, one can go into the cafe-ice cream pavilion if one
desires.

Generally there is a place to eat and a place to satisfy one's sweet tooth. On

this day at Tarasovo I also met another acquaintance--assembler of optical equip-
ment Sergey Vladimirovich Smirnov. He had gone to the lake with his wife and two
children. The parents were holding fishing rods in their hand and the children
were holding a pail for the forthcoming catch. The Smirnovs had arranged themselves
in a special pension together with their children, not interfering with anyone.
Forty families take their vacation simultaneously in this pension.

"This is so comfortable,” says Smirnov, "comfortable and quiet. The children are
with you where you can see them and when can you be with them at other times? So
that you can be free of any 'current' concerns.“

"But do they not get bored with you here?"

"what do you mean! There is everything here for the young people--a sports area,
swings, any type of attractions, soccer, volleyball, competitions, excursions and
special daily movies. But now we are going together to the lake with our fishing
rods.“

We walked along a forest road and then through a flowering meadow, again through
the forest and suddenly in front flashed far-off, blinking in the sun with gold
lights, a cool and large mountain lake which had attracted almost the entire "pop-
ulation" of the village on this hot day. Hundreds of vacationers, especially young
ones, were sunbathing on the beach, swimming in the lake and playing ball. The
beach at Tarasovo has been equipped as lovingly and carefully as those of the best
resorts: comfortable dressing cubicles, sun-protective umbrellas and lounge chairs.

After some time I again saw them with their fishing rods in a boat, far beyond the
buoys surrounding the safety zone for swiseung.

They were not alone on the lake. The firm has constructed a boating station at
Tarasovo and any person can if he desires take the oars and travel around the
picturesque lake or simply fish a little bit, dropping his anchor in a beloved spot.

It would take more than a day to cover every corner here. There are approximately
100 new country cottages here. Some are in the deep forest, others are somewhere
on the slope of a hill and still others are in a grove near the brook. Everywhere
there is space, freedom, quiet and calmness.

out if you go a kilometer or two in the other direction, you can unexpectedly hear
a guitar from far off. Happy melodies are replaced by sad ones, sad ones by happy
ones or suddenly you hear popular singing among several voices. There is a tent
village in the space among the forest trees. This is the firm's young people's
camp. Athletes and tourists travel here in entire companies. Attractive walks
along short and long paths and among forests, lakes and waterfalls begin here.

140

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

Not far from the tent village is an entire sports complex: tennis players battle
on an excellent court and teams formed from the vacationers compete on the volley-
ball and basketball courts. The endless battles of skittles players proceed on a

specially equipped area .

Young sisters Anna and Lidiya Poyarkova are workers from the tool and die shop.

"I and Anna," says Lidiya, “spend almost all our days off here at the two-day vaca-
tion base if only we can receive passes.”

And she added 2

“You can judge yourself what can be better, especially here, in suuer on a day
off, you have no concerns about eating and you are ready for anything. And of
course it attracts you. You can go to dances in the evening--there are dance areas
in the open air here. There is a brass band here. And if the weather is bad you
can go to the library or to the movies. And what a movie theater there is in the
club! And the films such as Nevskiy are first rate. Or you can go to a concert.
Or to an amateur evening. You are not bored here. You return to the shop and it's
as if you have been born again--you are fresh and the work is incomparably easier.
In general, Tarasovo is Tarasovol"

And everyone when I met here talked with enthusiasm about their ”own" Tarasovo.
Quite recently here at the firm's resort the new and without any exaggeration the
most excellent pension Dubki became operational here. Its construction, like de-
velopment of the entire "resort shop," was also provided in the plan for socio-
economic development of mm for the Ninth Five-Year Plan. And as stipulated, the
firm did not spare expenditures. And the hundreds of thousands of rubles which it
selflessly allocated from its own profits to create Dubki were worth it. I am now
convinced of this myself.

It is enormous with magical outlines of the banks of ponds. Along the shore
stretched a long, light and very unique three—story building with wide entrances.
The tall and luxuriant crowns of the young oaks and poplars, birches and maples
surrounded it in a green ring. You have only to open the doors of the wide en-
trance and you unmediately enter an atmosphere of the most complete comfort, beauty,
elegance and quiet. The interiors of the chess hall, dining hall, guest rooms, li-
braries and dance floors have been done with such fine artistic taste and skill.
But the main thing is that the residential apartments, each of which is designed
for two vacationers, are good and comfortable. The comfortable and beautiful
furniture, mirrors, soft rugs and flowers. One can, having freely arranged one-
self in a canfortable and soft chair turn on the stereophonic receiver and listen
to music. 0: one can see a television set in this oonfortable and beautiful room
or one can refresh oneself with a stnwer in the evening before going to bed or in
the morning after an exercise. Everything has been carefully provided here--from
soft slippers near the doors of your roan to fresh flowers on the table. If you
wish to play chess you can always find a partner and “defender" in the chess pavil-
ion. If you with to compete at billiards then do so, a billiards pavilion has been
constructed alongside the pension.

141

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

And if the evening is a little warm and you are tired of walking and do not wish
to sit in your room, you don't have to. Lights flesh in the evening on the green
stage and there will undoubtedly be something there interesting for you: a meeting
with a writer, a concert or simply happy, amusing games at which one can relax.

Everything is harmonious at Dubki, where approximately 2,000 persons now take their
vacation every year, and everything has been combined successfully--both restful
nature and the skills of the builders and artists and the caring hands of the
managers.

Moreover, the first good traditions have already arisen at Dubki: the birthdays

of the vacationers who come for a vacation in the pension are recognized collective-
ly and solemnly and with happy arrangement. 0n the day when I had occasion to visit
the dining hall there, they were congratulating four workers of the firm at lunch on
their birthdays. They were seated at the same table and the chief cook set a large,
steaming holiday pie, baked with his own hands, in their honor on a large tray to
general applause.

The day that I spent at Tarasovo will be long remembered. I recall not only the
magical--beauti£ul places and the excellent structures, but also the smell emblem

which you always see on the facades of the dachas, stores, cafe and pensions--
everywhere. This is the LOMO emblem. The firm's mark.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[NO DURING THE 10TH FIVE-YEAR PLAN

1.080 has confidently stepped across the threshold of the 10th rive-Year Plan, rais-
ing itself to a new level, having fulfilled all tasks of the Ninth Five-Year Plan
ahead of schedule and having provided the country nany million rubles' worth of
products about the plan.

Behind is one of the most important phases of technical development: 13 of the
largest shops were reconstructed during the past five-year plan and approximately
1,000 of the latest highly productive machine tools were installed. The wages of
workers, engineers and enployees were increased by an average of 17 percent. 'meir
material incentives in the total success of the firm was increased.

The volume of industrial production during the past five-year plan increased by
79 percent and primarily due to an increase of labor productivity. A total of 360
completely new types of instruments meeting all modern requirements was deve10ped
and manufactured. The output of consmer goods, including novie cameras, novie
projectors and still cameras, was aleost doubled.

The collective of the firm produced additional products with more than one million
rubles during the days of the watch prior to the Party Congress alone.

And of course. the warm, hearty congratulations of General Secretary of the CPSU
leonid Il'ich Brezhnev was the very highest snark of the association's labor and of
all the collectives and organizations that participated in creation and introduc-
tion of the world's largest astronomical telescope with main mirror six meters in
diameter.

mm entered the 10th Five-Year Plan with this ”baggage," full of resolve to ful-

fill it ahead of schedule. In their letter on the eve of the 25th CPSU Congress,

the Leningrad opticisns wrote to the General Secretary of the CPS!) Central Omit-
Camittee:

“Having entered a new phase in the struggle i'or further production efficiency and
quality of labor at each jobsite in the name of the most rapid increase of the
economy and standard of living, we Leningrad Opticians have adopted increased so-
cialist pledges and counterplans for 1976 and have concentrated our efforts in
providing the highest growth rates of labor productivity. improvement of produc-
tion and nanageeent and in a continuous rise of the technical level of products
produced and of the economy both large and snail.“

143

me OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

now will this be implemented in practice? this is discussed in the second inter
view with the general director of the firm, Hero of Socialist Labor, winner of the
State Prize, delegate to the 25th CPSU Congress Mikhail Panfilovich Panfilov:

“The main thing for us today is to solve the tasks posed by the 25th CPSU Congress.
The collective of our association is faced with making a contribution to solution
of the problem of raising the technical level and of increasing the output of in-
strunents of various designation."

"During the new five-year plan we should provide a further increase in the volume
of productiOn by no less than 65 percent, mainly due to an increase of labor pro~
ductivity. The output of articles, most inportant for the national economy and
science--spectra1 measuring instrments and microscopes-~will be more than doubled.“

As one of the main tasks, the 25th Congress posed an increase of output of consumer
goods with a simultaneous improvement of its quality and variety. Therefore, we
must develop the production of consumer goods at accelerated rates.

The most important direction of our work during the Ninth Five-Year Plan will be
to increase the technical level and quality of products produced. ﬁbre than 300
nomenclatures of experimental models and new unique instruments should be manu-
factured during the five-year plan and more than 120 articles should be put into
serial production.

We plan to increase 2.5-fold the specific weight of products of the highest cate-
gory of quality, to present 57 articles for the emblem of quality and to achieve

a situation so that our instruments meet these requirements from the first phases
of development. It is not sufficient today to pose the task of achieving the level
of the leading foreign firms. We can and should develop our own, Soviet level and
produce articles of the highest world class.“

"The opticians generally have the broadest prospects for development," continues
Mikhail Panfilovich. "And this is natural because both today and in the future
scientific and technical progress is impossible in any field without it. Take,

for example, the prospects for development of measuring instruments. I think that
within several years almost all our measuring instruments will operate jointly with
computers of'various designation that provide rapid receipt of information and also
high-speed data processing."

"The use of computers to process information permits not only a significant in-
crease of the labor productivity of the investigator but also replacement of sub-
jcctive analyses of investigators with more precise and stricter analyses.”

"We have already put into serial production new spectrophotometers for express
analysis of alloys in metallurgical production that provide acceleratior of the
processes and increase the quality of metals, new quantometers to analyze impuri-
ties in motor oil that permit elimination of premature wear of them and make it
possible to extend the operating cycles between repairs.”

”The saving from using the new spectral instruments in the metallurgical and chem-
ical industry alone and in transport comprises tens of millions of rubles."

144

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”Because of extensive unification and standardization.- new families of biological,
fluorescent and polarization microscopes are being developed and put into produc-
tion. New equipment has now been developed and already put into serial production
to illminate television centers that transmit color pictures.“

“We feel another direction of our work is very important--to develop microscopes
that provide live investigation of biological objects. we plan in the future to
produce microscope-photometers which will permit our scientists to rapidly obtain
information about the structural and different physicochsmical properties of liv-
ing cells.“

”The future of the firm is also related to the output of the latest spectral in-
struments used in the most diverse fields or scientific research and production:
our spectral instruments used in the chemical and metallurgical industry for ex-
press analysis will multiply their functions and will not only be used as automatic
analyzers but will also be able to control the most complex production processes."

“Incidentally, medicine is now very interested in using our instrunents to deter-
mine the content of rare-earth metals in the blood. This will permit much more
refined diagnosis of one or another diseases and determination of the absolutely
precise dosage of medicines."

"Much could be said about those telescopes, still and movie cameras and equipment
for movies and television which we now produce and which we will produce in the
future. But if I talk about everything you would need too many new pages.”

"After all, the specifics of our plant itself forces us all the time to seemingly
feel the pulse of technical progress and all the time to look constantly ahead so
as not to lag behind the requirements of time by one iota.”

"General Secretary of the CPsu Central Comittee L. I. Brezhnev named the 10th
Five-Year Plan one of quality. And this means that we should struggle with still
greater efforts to produce an excellent product, to win the personal mark for even
more of our workers and to increase responsibility of each one for the quality of
the articles produced. moreover, we are planning to present 57 new instruments for
the certificate of emblem of quality. But by 1980 we must bring the weight of this
production up to 34 percent, in other words, to considerably exceed the indicators
which we achieved during the Ninth Five-Year Plan. Moreover, I would like to note
that each of us should strive to fulfill the task to increase the guaranteed ser-
vice life of a considerable number of instmnts approximately l.5-fold."

“Further expansion of production capacities will also be continued. Primarily,

the builders will erect a new optical building and by the end of the five-year plan
we should put into operation yet another building of 80,000 square meters. We will
continue reconstruction and specialization of production. A number of new mechan-
ized shops, warehouses and highly mechanized sections will be opened and additional
automatic and conveyor lines will be introduced. And new highly productive equip-
ment, including industrial robots, will be installed to carry out further mechan-
ization of the shops.“

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“The primary task is to increase production efficiency. 'me increasing role of
capital investments in technical re-equipping and reconstruction; of existing pro-
duction is being provided for this purpose in the basic directions for development
of the national econany."

“The problem of increasing the output of products with each ruble of basic funds
is being placed on this basis.”

“We also plan during the 10th Five-Year Plan to increase the volume of production.
mainly due to further reconstruction and technical re-equipping of the shops and
sections. For example, it is planned in our five-year plan of socioeconomic devel-
opment to mechanize an additional five shops and ll sections in a complex manner.
The number of machine tools with program control will be doubled.‘

The struggle for production efficiency and quality is unthinkable without continu-
ous improvement of personnel. And the firm has constructed a new training center--
a multistoried building supplied with all modern teaching hardware, especially to
train and retrain their own persmnel.‘

"A total of 2,000 young men and women of 11 occupations will be trained in this
center in only one P'ru. Besides the occupations, each student of the Pro will re-
ceive a dile of graduation from secondary school. They will all link their fu-
ture to the firm."

"Generally, everything is going according to plan and according to the plan for
socioeconomic development of the firm for the 10th Five-Year Plan. Much has been
provided according to this plan to further improve working conditions, everyday
life and recreation of the workers."

"As you can see, new horizons are being opened to the firm during the 10th Five-
Year Plan and we are confident that we shall fulfill everything planned by the
25th Party Congress!"

- END -
COPYRIGHT: Lenizdat, 1076
(3521
(rm: 8044/1676

146

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY