APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000200100014-3

FIND . 0F RI.
8‘?
7 JUL? 1980 V. F. FEDOROV
China Report

RED FLAG

No. 9. 1 May 1980

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material encloaed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recomended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be. cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Goverment Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office. Hashington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, (bio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
Coureurs

Shining Pearls on the Great Earth (inside front cover)

(Hoodcut Group of Water Conservancy and Electric
Power Construction)......t................................

Outstanding Leader in the Chinese Worker Hove-ent--In
Memory of Comrade Shaoqi (pp 2-7)
(Ni Zhifu, Kang Yonghe. Gu Dachun)........................

Study Comrade Shaoqi's Theory on Party Building (pp 8-13)
(Pens Ding)...............................................

The Historical Road of the May 6th Movement and the
Chinese Intellectuals (pp 14-21)

(Xiong Pu)................................................

Find Our Own Road to Agricultural Modernization in Light
of China's Actual Conditions (pp 22-26)
(Chin Lisheng)............................................

Take Comprehensive Measures To Solve the Problem of
Urban Housing (pp 27-28)

(Hang Changsheng).........................................

Gross Industrial Output Value and Net Output Value
(pp 29-30. 35)

(Zhang Yinghua)...........................................
Seriously Study the World Economy and Promote China' a

Four Hodernizations (pp 31-35)
(Qian Junrui).............................................

- a - [III
The Socialist Cause Cannot Succeed without Unity of
Hill and Iron Discipline (pp 36-61)

(Dai Yun)....................................................

The Spirit of Building Bnterpriaeu A-id Hardahipa
Must Be Carried Forward in the Modernization Effort
(pp 42-66, 7)
(Hang Chonglun)..............................................

How To Understand 'Truthful Hritin¢'—«0n the Deaarcation
Line Between Revolutionary Realiaa and Naturaliou
(pp b5—k8)
(Lu cviﬂhln).u....n........u.oou..............u.n.-..oo

0n Solving the Problem of Urban ﬂouaing (inside back cover)

(L1 Y1n8)u...........u....u-..onu..................uoo.

The Internationale Will Be the Human Race (outaide back
cover)
(Shen Rongnan)...............................................
SHINTNG PEARLS ON THE GREAT EARTH

Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 inside front cover

[Woodcut by the Woodcut Group of Water Conservancy and Electric Power
Construction]
OUTSTANDING mm or m cmrss Home Momma—m most or cement
sumo:

Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9. 1 May 80 pp 2-7

[Article by hi Zhifu [0262 1807 6395], Ksng Yonghe [1660 3057 0735] and
Cu Dechun [7357 1129 2797]]

[Text] Comrade Lin Shaoqi was a long-tested proletarian revolutionary
and great Hertist-Leninist, as well as an outstanding leader of the
Chinese workers movement. In his revolutionary practice over half a
century he showed constant concern for the development of the Chinese
workers eovement, made great contributions to the liberation cause of
the Chinese working class and the Chinese people and performed inortal
feats. For this reason he was deep.‘.y loved by the whole party and the
people of the whole country, especially the mases of workers and trade
union cadres. Here we would like to look back on Comrade Shaoqi's
brilliant achievements in leading and expanding the Chinese workers move-
ment to show how dearly we cherish our nemory of him.

An Organizer and Leader of the Workers Movement in the Early Days

Conrade Shaoqi displayed his courage. insight and ability as an organizer
and leader of the workers love-en: and unifested his revolutionary spirit
in heroically fighting for the emancipation of the working class when he
first took part in the workers move-ant in 1922. In early September 1922
Comrade Shaoqi was sent to Anyuan by the party coemittee of llunan and
Comrade Mao Zedong to join Comrade Li Line in leading the Anyuan workers'
strike. At that tine Colrede Lisan was threatened by the enemy and was
often unable to conduct activities in person. Thus, Comrade Shaoqi
became the plenipotentisry representative of the Anyuan workers Club
whose duty was to direct the club's activities and to aske contacts and
negotiate with various quarters. Be enlisted the initiative of all
strikers and organized picket and scout groups to keep a close watch on
the eneey and to maintain discipline and public order. He made good use
of the workers' "legitimate" rights and the enemy's internal contradic-
tions. tried to win as much public smathy as possible and succeeded in
isolating the railroad authorities to the maxi-um He even went alone to
the enemy's curfew conand to conduct negotiations. When the enemy
threatened to "execute" him on :hc spot, he did not show the slightest
fear and boldly upheld justice. Hith the correct leadership of Conrades
Shaoqi. Lisan and others, more than 10.000 strikers united as one and
waged a well-organized and well-disciplined struggle. 0n the fifth day
of the strike the capitalists had no alternative but to sign a 13-point

agreesent with the Workers Club and consent to most of the den-ands put
forward by the workers. Thus, a quick victory was won in this strike.

The victory in the Anyuan general strike gave inpetus to the development
of the workers moveaent in Hunan and llubei. In December 1922 the workers
of the Hanyang iron and steel plant. the Daye iron line and the Pingxiang
coal mine jointly organized the Hanyang-Daye-Pingxiang Trade Union Council.
In September 1923 Comrade Shaoqi succeeded Comrade Lisan as director gen-
eral of the Anyuan Uorkers Club and chair-an of the Henyang-Daye-
Pingxiang Trade Union Council. In March 1925, as representative of the
Hanyang-Deye-Pingxisng Trade Union Council, Comrade Shaoqi went to
Guangzhou to prepare for the convocation of the Second National Labor
Congress. At this congress he was elected vice chairman of the All-China
Federation of Trade Unions. After the “30 Hay mssacre“ he went to
Shanghai to set up the office of the All~China Federation of Trade Unions
and was later concurrently appointed director of the General Affairs
Secrion of the Shanghai Trade Union Council. Together with Comrade Li
Lisa-i and Gsu Hus. he led several hundred thousand Shanghai workers in
staging a mamnoth strike against imperialism which brought about a nation-
wide revolutionary struggle against imperialism. Comrade Shaoqi played
an inortant part in organizing and leading this strike. According to a
news dispatch of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions at the end of
1925. Comrade Shaoqi "forgot food and sleep as he went around caspaigning
for the cause of national salvation and calling on the people to give all-
out support to the strikers. His patriotic spirit has won him the admira—
tion of the whole country.“ (“Documents on the History of Trade Unions in
China," Vol 1, p 156)

After the Shanghai anti-imperialist strike, Conrade Shaoqi broke down
from constant overwork and had to go back to “man to recuperate. There
he was arrested by warlord Zheo Hengti. The All-China Federation of
Trade Unions and unions throughout the country lodged protests, pledged
their support for Conrade Shaoqi and tried by every possible means to
secure his release. Deterred by the strength of the masses, Zhao Hengti
could not but set Conrade Shaoqi free. Comrade Shaoqi went to Guangzhou
on 19 February 1926 after he was released. On la March the All-Chins
Federation of Trade Unions held a big rally to welcome him. At the rally
Comrade Deng Zhongxia, a member of the federation's Executive Comittee,
highly praised Comrade Shaoqi for the spirit he displayed in opposing
inperialism and the warlords, pointing out that he was a aoat courageous
fighter of the working class. While in Guangzhou Comrade Shaoqi took
charge of the work of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions on behalf
of Conrade Lin Wen-in, the federation's secretary general, who had been
ill for sonths. Together with Comrade Deng zhongxia and others, he also
led the workers' anti-imperialist strike in Guangzhou and Xisnggeng.
supported the revolutionary neaeures of the Guangdong government and
nude preparations for the Northern predition.

After the Northern Expeditionary Arsy occupied Wuhan in the winter of
1926, Conrade Shaoqi returned to Huhan to tasks preparations to love the
faderation's office to the north. At the sane tine he also took part in
the work of leading the workers nave-est in wuhan. Under his leadership
the workers carried out a nuber of economic and political struggles.
Particularly worth mentioning was the great victory won by the Wuhan
workers under his leadership in seizing the British Concession. This
entered a shining page in the history of the Chinese workers movennt.

Since Conrade Shaoqi first becene invo' ed with the workers love-ant, he
always stressed the need to incorporate the goal of seizing political
power and realizing socialise in econonic struggles. After the victory
of the Anyuan strike he pointed out that this victory only prepared "the
groundoork for the workers liberation novensnt" and that it was neces-
sary to proceed fron this basis to make the workers understand the present
and future sin and ssthod of their struggle, unite as one and fora a
nighty coﬁst force. In May 1926 Conrado Shaoqi delivered a report, "The
Developnent of the Chinese workers Hove-ant Over the Past Year. ' to the
Third National Labor Congress on behalf of the federation. Applying the
Marxist nethod of class analysis, he profoundly analyzed various classes
in (minese society at that tine. Be unequivocally pointed out:
"lnperialisn and the warlords at hone will always be enemies of the
leases. In other words, they are the targets of the national revolution.‘
"The Chinese bourgeoisie is also oppressed by the iqerialists and war-
lords. It is possible that they any take part in the national revolution,
but their participation is, after all, conciliatory and not thorough-
going." "At a certain time, that is, when the conflict between the
bourgeoisie and iqerislisn is lost acute, our working class should
cooperate with the bourgeoisie and jointly oppose inperialisn so as to
enhance the strength of the snti-isperialist novel-eat." "China's petty
bourgeoisie. snall nsrchants and students play an inortant part in the
national revolution"; therefore, "the working class should earnestly
unite with then and form a united front." "The peasants constitute an
inportant force in the national revolution; they are the natural allies
of the working class. The Chinese working class should earnestly guide
and support the peasants in carrying out the Chinese revolution."
("Doctnaents of Various National Labor Congresses of China," Workers Press.
1977, pp 59-60) This report by Conrade Shaoqi, together with treatises
on "The Basic Organisation of Trades," "Trade Union Congresses" and
"Economic Problem of Trade Unions" smiled and written by hits while in
h'uhsn, Laid the theoretical foundation and set the organizational prin-
ciples for the Chinese workers move-ant and gave a forceful push to the
victorious development of the cause of liberation of the working class.
As Comrade Deng Zhongxia pointed out, the Chinese workers movement had two
shortcomings in the early days: The first was that, generally speaking,
the local trade unions "did not have a lower but only a higher organiza-
tion." lhe second was that. generally speaking, comrades engaged in the
workers movement "had not tried to expand the ranks of the party within
the trade unions." (Deng Zhongxia, "A Brief History of the Chinese Trade
Union Movement," September 1949 edition, pp 66, 57) It was precisely in
these two respects that Comrade Shaoqi had scored outstanding achieve-
ments from the start. After the Anyuan general strike. the Anyuan Workers
Club under his leadership elected representatives of 10 workers, repre-
sentatives of 100 and a chief representative with 10—man groups as basic
units. established and strengthened workers congresses and working organs
at all levels and properly organized the club's more than 13,000 members.
The club also strengthened education among the workers. The number of
continuation schools for workers increased from 1 before the strike to 7,
with a regular attendance of more than 2,000 people. Comrade Shaoqi also
paid great attention to expanding the ranks of the party. By May 1925
the party organization in Anyuan had expanded into one with 15 branches,
and the number of party members had increased from a mere dozen before the
strike to over 300, accounting for about one-third the total nunber of
party meters in the entire country. It was precisely because the Anyuan
Workers Club had strengthened the primary organizations of trade unions
and its own party organization that it could continue in existence after
the "7 February massacre," when the workers novemnt was at a low ebb.
Anyuan'a experience had strongly influenced the development of the work-
ers movement in other localities.

A Champion of the Correct Line in Conducting the Workers Movement in the
White Areas

After the failure of the 1927 revolution. the revolutionary situation was
at a low ebb throughout the country. The Chinese Commist Party led the
people in persisting in the national democratic revolution, staged armed
insurrections of workers and peasants and ewarked step by step on the
road pioneered by Comrade Mao Zedong of establishing bases in the rural
areas, carrying out the agrarian revolutionary war, encircling the cities
from the countryside and eventually seizing the cities. From this time
to the liberation of the whole country, the Chinese workers movement in
the bases and in the enemy-controlled areas (White areas) proceeded hand
in hand. Comrade Shaoqi played an important historical role in leading
the workers movement in the bases and in the White areas, especially the
latter.

Due to the fact that the "left" opportunist line had gained a predominant
position in the party Central Committee on three separate occasions, the
party also made mistakes of "left" adventurisn and closed-doorisn in its
work in the White areas. "any party comrades, especially those working
at the grassroots level, tried to resist these "leftist" mistakes in the
party's work in the White areas. Comrade Shaoqi was the one who put up
the strongest resistance and advanced a series of correct proposals. In
1928 he presented his correct views on the relationship between open and
secret work, the tactics of leading mass struggles and other problem.

he also published in BOLSHEVIK, the official paper of the party Central
Comittee, an article entitled "Changes in Slogans" which criticized the
erroneous practice of putting forward too many unduly high-sounding and
ultraleftist slogans and forcing the assess to fight for them regardless
of actual conditions. In 1930 he went to Hoscow to attend the fifth
congress of the Red Workers International and was elected a member of

its Executive Bureau. He then stayed in Moscow to serve in the Workers
International. During his stay he had a few heated discussions with
certain leading persons of the Red Workers International on the question
of how to handle scab unions. In the fall of 1931 he returned to Shanghai
and becane minister of labor of the party Central Comittee’and party and
Gil. secretary of the All-China Federation of Trade Unions. In these lead-
ing posts he exerted trasendoua efforts to put an end to the grave situa-
tion in which the workers novelaent in the White areas had suffered
repeated defeats. In less than 6 months he successively published
"Strike Tactics." "Criticizing the Tactics of Withdraving From Sca‘o Unions,"
"A Summary of the Workers Move-ant in 1931" and a nuﬂuer of other articles
and reports. In these works he correctly sized up the situation of mass
struggle and put forward policies and tactics for bringing about a change
in mass work in the White areas. However, his correct views not only were
not accepted but were criticized and attacked by the "leftist" leaders and
even slandered as "left opportuniam."

Comrade Shaoqi did not begin to make an effort to thoroughly criticize
the "leftist" errors in the conduct of work in the White areas and bring
about a radical change in the passive state of affairs in our party's
work in this regard until after he arrived in Tianjin in 1936 and took
charge of the work of the CCP Central Couittee's Northern Bureau. At
that tine the party's Zunyi meeting had already put an end to the domina-
tion of the "leftist" line and had established Comrade Mao Zedong's
leadership in the whole party. The CCP Politburo had also held a neeting
at Wayaobao, Shaamd, and had decided on the tactics of forming an anti-
Japanese national united front. These provided the prerequisites for
bringing about a fundamental change in our party's work in the White
areas. To inplenent the party's policy of forming an anti-Japanese
national united front and to mobilize and organise the people of various
strata in the Kuomintang-controlled areas for the great war of resistance
against Japan and the war of national liberation. Conrade Shsoqi. as soon
as he arrived in Tianjin, led the party organizations at every level in
waging a struggle to oppose closed-doorism and adventuriss and in
earnestly correcting "leftist" n‘lxtakes. He wrote more than 10 articles
on the party's work in the White areas in a little sore than a year.
Among the important works were "Eliminating the Remants of the Lisan
Line——Closed-Doorism and Adventurisn" and "An Outline of the Work of
Conducting the Workers Movement in the White Areas," written in April
1936; “A better to the Central Committee Concerning Work in the White
Areas in the Past," written in March 1937; and a report entitled "0n the
work of the Party and the Masses in the White Areas," delivered at the
conference on the work of the party in the white areas which was held in
May of the same year. In those works Comrade Shsoqi applied the universal
truth of Herxlsm-Leninisn to sum up the historical experience of our work
in the White areas. to systematically expose and criticize the "leftist"
mistakes in this work and the damage they had done, and to correctly

solve the question of policy and tactics concerning this work.

Comrade Sheoqi clearly pointed out the mistakes of the advocates of
"left" adventurism and closed-doorism. He said: first, they failed to
recognize that after our defeat in the 1927 revolution our work in the
White areas should have been aainly to adopt a policy of retreat and
defense. win over the masses. build up a strong revolutionary force and
prepare to fight a decisive battle against the enemy. They were usually
instient and oblivious to the consequences and effects. They would
pitch the only ounce of strength they had against the enemy when the
situation and conditions were unfavorable to us. In the end they always
found theuelves defeated and their only ounce of strength and careful
foundation of work ruined. Second. they did not know how to mobilize the
masses to wage struggle by putting forward slogans, demands and form of
struggle acceptable to the masses according to the circumstances and
conditions at a given time and place and the degree of consciousness of
the masses. They also did not know how to gradually carry nass struggle
to a higher stage in keeping with changes in the conditions of struggle,
or to call a tenporary halt to the fighting "before going too far" and
to prepare for the next round of fighting at a higher stage and on a
larger scale. They always put forward slogans. desands and forms of
struggle which were still foreign and unacceptable to the assess and
forced the masses to accept them and to wage struggle. Moreover, they
nechanically demanded that we hold out to the last in every struggle and
refused to call a tenporsry halt when conditions grew unfavorable to our
struggle. Because of then, we often met with defeat in our mass struggle,
and our party and nasses had to suffer. Third, they did not know how to
make use of the contradictions within the ranks of the enemy and to form
a tenorary alliance with those people in the enemy camp who could
cooperate with us or whc were not yet our principal enemy in order to
fight our principal enemy. They often considered themselves the most
revolutionary and thoroughgoing and refused to concede to or compromise
with our possible allies. They wanted to topple all enemies, but in
fact they toppled no one. They only succeeded in pushing those who
could still cooperate with us over to the enemy camp and strengthened
the enemy's forces against us. Fourth, they did not understand the
relationship between open and secret work and refused to make use of
various open and legitinate channels to conduct mass work. Instead,
they regarded all public gray organizations among the worker masses as
Red unions and asked the party's secret organizations to carry out work
which could be carried out in the open. As a result. the party's mass
work was confined to secret groups within the Red unions. and the party
organizations were unable to strictly guard their secrets and were con-
stantly sabotaged by the enemy. [t was precisely due to the correctness
of Comrade Shaoql's principles end tactics concerning work in the Hhite
areas that the workers aovement and other branches of work in the White
areas could embark on the road of healthy development.

An Outstanding leader of the workers Movement in New China

As a party and state leader and honorary chairman of the All—China Fed-
station of Trade Unions, Comrade Shaoqi showed great concern for the
development of the workers movement in new Chins after the founding of
the PRC.

0n the eve of nationwide liberation and in the early days of the People's
Republic, Comrade Shaoqi repeatedly expounded the need to change the
policy of the workers movement after the seizure of political power by
the proletariat. At the Sixth National Labor Congress, held in the
spring of 1968 at Xibaipo, he and Comrades Zhou Enlai, Zhu be and others
told the deputies that the present workers movement had its new condi—
tions and new problems. The guiding principles for the workers movement
in the liberated areas were as Chairman Mao had instructed: To promote
production, promote economic prosperity, take into account both public
and private interests and benefit both labor and capital. Based on

these instructions and on the general historical mission then confronting
the working class, that is. to topple Chiang Kai-shek and establish the
new China, the Sixth National Labor Congress decided on a policy which
ewhasized production. After the victory in the Beiping—‘l‘ianjin campaign.
Comrade Shaoqi personally talked to the workers, staff members, cadres
and capitalists in Tianjin, Tangshsn and Beiping and repeatedly expounded
the spirit of the second plenum of the Seventh CCP Central Committee. In
view of the "leftist" tendencies found in the takeover of some cities at
that time, he also stressed the utmost importance of quickly restoring
and developing production, pointing out that this was the fundamental
link of all work in the cities. Using very simple terms, he explained
the general line for urban work as follows: To wholeheartedly rely on
the working class, unite with other working masses, win over the intel-
lectuals and try as far as possible to win over to our side those members
of the national bourgeoisie and their representative figures who can
cooperate with us, or to let them remain neutral, so that we can wage a
resolute struggle against the imperialists, the Kuomintang and bureaucrat-
capitalists and step by step triumh over these enemies. After the
country entered the period of planned economic construction, Comrade
Shaoqi further pointed out in the party Central Committee's congratula-
tory message to the Seventh National Trade Union Congress that the policy
and task of the workers movement in the socialist period "is to indus-
trielize our country and gradually make the transition to a socialist
society." "The victorious cowletion of this historical task will enable
our country and people to grow rich and strong. This depends especially
on the better organized and more conscious struggle of the Chinese working
class." ("important Documents of the Seventh National Congress of Trade
Unions in China," Workers Press, 1953 edition, p 15)

In 1956 our workers movement and trade union work again faced a new his-
torical taming point when a decisive victory was won in the socialist
transformation of the ownership of the means of production. At this
crucial juncture Comrade Shauqi pointed out in the party Central Oom-
Inittee's congratulatory message to the National Congress of Advanced
Producers the orientation we should follow in our workers movement and
trade union work. In this congratulatory message he profoundly explained
from a theoretical angle the far-reaching significance of the national
movement of advanced producers launched at that time. lie pointed out:
The history of human society is, in the final analysis, a history of
production, a history about producers. Advanced producers are the
harbingers of progress in the economic life of mankind: they are also the
harbingers of progress in the history of human society. The struggle
waged by millions and millions of workers under the guidance of advanced
producers ‘cr the purpose of eliminating backwardness is a kind of driving
force which propels the socialist society forward. Comrade Shaoqi“ con-
gratulatory message armed the minds of the masses of advanced producers.
labor models and union workers and had a far-reaching influence on the
workers movement.

Comrade Shaoqi paid great attention to the democratic management of
enterprises. lle repeatrdly pointed out that to develop production and
run enterprises well it was necessary to let the workers and staff us-
bers take part in the management of enterprises and to fully arouse
their enthusiasm. In his address to the North China workers Congress
held in May 1969 he pointed out: All factories and railroads must
organize factory management committees and actively grasp democratic
masgement. He also said: workers congresses are trade union con-
gresses; therefore, they are also organizations of trade unions. based
on the spirit of Comrade Sheoqi's speech and the resolution of the Sixth
National Labor Congress. the North China Workers Congress drew up a work-
ing ordinance on setting up factory management committees and workers
congresses. This ordinance, which was later promulgated by the North
China People‘s Government, was used by various provinces and municipali-
ties to bring about democratic management in factories. It also played
an iwortant role in transforming bureaucrat-capitalist enterprises.

in Decanter 1957 Comrade Shaoqi attended the Eighth National Congress of
Trade Unions and delivered a congratulatory speech on behalf of the party
Central Committee. in view of the problems which then existed in the
democratic management of enterprises. he emphatically pointed out: Under
the present circumstances it is necessary to broaden democratic life
within the enterprises. The system of holding workers congresses under
the leadership of party coumittees which had just been put into effect
was an effective means of widening the scope of democratic management in
enterprises. This kind of extensive democracy, which is aimed at better
management. not only will not hamper the centralization of leadership in
enterprise administration but will strengthen leadership.

9
The socialist system not only must guarantee that the worker masses can
play their role as masters of their own affairs but met gradually
improve their livelihood on the basis of developing production. Comrade
Shaoqi repeatedly dwelled on the importance of this issue in many of his
speeches. In his report to the eighth national party congress, he pointed
out: Many problem which confront the workers and euployees cannot be
solved quickly until we make greater advances in socialist construction.
We must work hard. He should not concentrate on individual and inediate
interests at the expense of national, long-term interests. 0n the other
hand, it is wrong to place one-sided stress on the national, long-term
interests and neglect the individual and immediate interests of the
workers and elployees. Some problems relating to the livelihood of work-
ers and employees at present must and can be solved. They remain unsolved
only because leaders of enterprises, trade union organizations and the
departments concerned have not rude serious efforts to solve them. we
must resolutely oppose such a bureaucratic attitude of indifference to
the welfare of the masses. In the spring of 1957 Comrade Shaoqi per-
sonally conducted an investigation and study among the workers, students
and c..dres in cities along the Beijing-Guangzhou railroad on the basis of
Comrade Mao Zedong's work "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among
the People." he urged the trade union organizations to maintain closer
ties with the workers and employees, to reflect the views and demands of
the masses and to truly play their role as a medium of closer comica-
tion between the party and the worker masses.

Comrade Shaoqi always paid great attention to educating the workers and
employees in communist doctrine. In a directive concerning work in
Beiping issued shortly after nationwide liberation, he listed workers
education as one of the three imortant tasks of trade unions and called
attention to the need to conduct widespread education in Marxism among
the working class. He pointed out: Only when the workers movement is
combined with Marxism, as Lenin taught, can it become a revolutionary
workers movement. In subsequent years he repeatedly dwelled on the
iaportance of raising the cultural and technical levels of workers and
euployees and urged the trade unions to energetically develop workers
sparetime education and to train millions and millions of working class
intellectuals to meet the needs of the technical revolution.

Comrade Shaoqi made outstanding contributions to the workers movement of
new China. He contained Harrism—beninism-Hao Zedong Thought with the
actual conditions of the Chinese workers movement, provided answers for
many pressing problems in the workers movement, charted a Marxist line
for new China's workers movement and trade union work and gave the masses
of union workers a powerful weapon. The policy of "doing mass work on
production, daily life and education, with emphasis on production" which
the masses of trade union workers have always adhered to in conducting
the workers movement since the founding of the People's Republic is the
epitome of the writings of Comrade Shaoqi, the works of Mao Zedong, Zhou
Enlai. Zhu be and other proletarian revolutionaries of the older

10
generation and the practice of the workers movement. It was precisely

under the guidance of this policy that the trade unions in our country
could conduct was work among the workers in different ways and play an

iwortant role in promoting the developnnt of socialist revolution and
construction. Today we find Comrade Shsoqi's writings on the workers
movement and trade union work particularly warm and close to us when we
reatudy them on our march toward the four nodernizationa. Ilia last words
for the Chinese workers movement and trade union work will certainly con-
tinue to inspire us to make new contributions to the attainment of the
great goal of the four modernization.

C50: 10006

11
STUDY CONRADE SHAOQI'S THROW 0N PARTY BUILDING
Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 8-13
[Article by Pong Ding [7458 1353]]

[Text] Comrade Liu Shaoqi was one of our party's able leaders. For a
long time during the reign of White terror he worked in the Kuomintang-
held areas and founded and developed the party's underground organiza-
tions in extremely adverse circumstances. After the 10-year civil war,
together with Comrades Mao Zedong, Zhu De. Zhou Enlai and others, he led
our party to great victories in the war of resistance against Japan and
the war of liberation. After liberation, as one of the principal lead-
ers of our state, Comrade Shaoqi made great contributions to our socialist
revolution and construction.

One of Comrade Shaoqi's traits was that he would work wherever the party
needed him and wherever there were difficulties. He did so while in the
white areas and later in the liberated areas. In 1961, when the
Kuomintang flagrantly instigated the Hannah incident, launched surprise
attacks on the New 6th Army and seriously threatened our efforts to
fight the Japanese invaders in Central Quins, Comrade Shaoqi was sent by
the CCP Central Connittee from the Jiangbei col-and post to Yancheng to

i-ediately rebuild the New 6th Army and its headquarters. Under the
alias of "ﬂu Pu,“ Comrade Shaoqi assumed the posts of secretary of the

CCPCC Central China Bureau and political cos-iasar of the New 6th Army,
with Chen Yi as the acting army couander.

During his stay with the New lath Army. which lasted more than a year.
Comrade Shaoqi, working with Comrade Chen Y1 and others, did his utnost
to unfold party and political work, offset the losses the party had
suffered in the Hannan incident and promote the speedy development of
our revolutionary forces. Comrade Shaoqi not only did a great deal of
work to establish our bases behind the enemy lines and consolidate our
political power, but also paid special attention to party building under
busy battle conditions. During this period Conrade Shaoqi delivered
sane iwortant reports, the majority of which were given to students of
the party school attached to the CCPOC Central China Bureau. These

12
reports included: "0n Communists' Self-Cultivation in Discipline and
Sense of Organization," "Why Do People Make Histakes?," "The Class Nature
of Men," "On inner-Party Struggle" and "Democratic Spirit and Bureau-
cratism." Some of these reports were later polished and published;
others were circulated widely as documents for study within the party.
The ideas concerning party building expressed in these reports and in
another entitled "ﬂow To Be a Good Communist," which had been presented
previously, played a tremendous role in and were of far-reaching sig-
nificance to the work to foster the fine work style of our party members
during the new democratic revolution. Because of their theoretical and
organizational significance and the impetus they gave to our work in
improving party building, these reports laid a solid foundation for the
building of a Marxist political party. Reviewing Comrade Shaoqi's con-
tributions to the theoretical work of our party, we are now more aware
of the great practical significance of his reports.

To Be a Good Communist He Hust Conscientiously Reform Our World Outlook

In two of the reports—-"The Class Nature of Men" and "why Do People Make
Mistskes?"~-Comrade Shaoqi emphatically analyzed the relations between
human thinking and the modes of social production, as well as the ques—
tions of human nature and party spirit.

He began by discussing how man came into being. He explained that human
beings evolved from the anthropoid ape and were a product of historical
development. He had our past, present and future. From the time when
recorded history began to exist to the present, only several hundred
thousand years or several million years had elapsed. It was not true
that human beings would always remain the same, without changes. In the
early stage of human development men only had the same instincts as
animals-they protected themselves, had appetites and procreated off-
spring. The most remarkable feature that distinguished human beings
from animals was their social nature. Human beings are able to think,
have a sense of purpose in their actions and display a high degree of
initiative.

Comrade Shaoqi pointed out that due to the different modes of production
there were five different kinds of society in human history. According
to their fundamental nature, they could also be divided into two social
formations, namely, private ownership and public ownership. They had
led to two different social ideologies. The common feature of all
exploitera had been that they sought personal happiness at the expense
of other people. The "nobleness," "greatness" and "respectability" of
all exploiters was based on .he sacrifice of the happiness of all man-
kind, or the great majority of mankind, to the enjoyment of privileges

by an individual or a handful of individuals. He noted that no exploiter
cared how wretched and humiliating a life all mankind or the great

majority was leading. By contrast, the proletariat and communists
wished to "share happiness with others." abolish privileges for a handful

l3
and ultimately liberate theuelves after liberating the greatest majority
of laboring people and all mankind. This was the foundation of comwnist
ethics and of the nobleness, greatness and respectability of columnists,
he said.

During the formation and development of the proletariat as a class its
characteristics also underwent a period of formation and development.
However, its characteristics are not insutsble. During the period of
socialist transformation and the transition from socialism to conunism
the proletariat continuously transforns its nature and characteristics.
while it continuously transform society and the nature of mankind. By
the time cosmmniat society is realized, people's class nature and the
class distinctions among then still have been abolished. This is the
entire process of the transforI-tion of human nature.

As for co-unists, they must not only possess the characteristics of the
proletariat but also acquire the party spirit of the proletariat. Party
spirit is the highest and most concentrated form of class character.
There is the party spirit of the bourgeoisie and that of the proletariat.
The party spirit of the commute is the highest and most concentrated
expression of the interests of the proletariat. Actions taken by con-
munists to foster party spirit and cultivate themselves in this spirit
mean the transformation of their own nature.

In the present stage of socialism the party spirit of the coammniets
finds its expression in upholding the socialist road, the dictatorship
of the proletariat, the leadership of the party and Haraism—Leninism-
Mao Zedong Thought, in strictly abiding by the guiding principles for
inner~party life and in safeguarding the unity and solidarity of the
party and striving for the realization of the four modernization and
conunisn. If cos-mists today fail to neasure up to these requirements
and do not treat this as their supreme obligation, and if they are
interested only in better living and pleasure seeking, such commists
are in fact given to low taste and are incompatible with the mission
entrusted to us by the times.

To be a good communist one must first of all make conscientious efforts
to acquire the proletarian world outlook. This was the first thing
Comrade Shaoqi stressed in his theories on party building.

Liberate the Mind and Adopt the Correct Stand

Comrade Sbsoqi treated the question "th Do People Make Mistakes?“ as a
special topic because he wanted to make a dialectical materialist analysis
of this question, which revolutionaries frequently can across, and to
offer his answer. Hhat is the most inortsnt thing in the life of a
proletarian revolutionary or cos-mist? It is understanding and trans-
forming the objective vorld. Questions concerning the objective situa-
tion, the enemy's relative strength and our on, politics, economy,

16
culture, the status quo and how our policies are being received by the
population can come up at any moment in our revolutionary practice.

He are constantly put to the test by practice as to whether our under-
standing of such questions is correct, whether our analyses are accurate
and whether our line, principles and policies are appropriate. We win
when we are right and suffer setbacks when we mke mistakes. Therefore,
both individuals and organizations must avoid making mistakes in work to
the best. of their ability, try to make as few mistakes as possible and
strive to discover mistakes and correct them in time.

Comrade Shaoqi proceeded from the standpoint of dialectical materialism
and through analysis explained why people cannot avoid making mistakes.
He said that this was because of the contradictions between subjective
thinking and objective reality. even though subjective thinking some-
times overtakes objective reality. Comrade Shaoqi then offered a

thorough analysis of the first situation-when subjective thinking lags
behind.

Comrade Shaoqi observed that subjective thinking and objective reality
as a pair of contradictions were always in a process of development in
which they opposed each other and were interconnected with each other.
When people's understanding was out of line with objective laws that
governed objective things. the actions of people would deviate from

the correct direction and their progress would be haapered. At that
time people should sumarize their experiences from practice. determine
the source of the difficulties they encounter. explore the correct way
to make their subjective thinking tally with objective reality and con-
tinue to make progress in the correct direction. The scientific meaning
of the term "enancipate the mind" is to make such subjective thinking
coincide with the objective laws governing things. By ideological
ossification or semioasification we mean that people's thinking lags
behind the development of objective things, erroneous estimates are made
and erroneous actions are taken. Therefore. to continually overcome the
contradictions between subjective thinking and objective reality it is
necessary to continually emancipate the mind and study new problem.
People's thinking has always moved in endless cycles which often began
with the eaancipation of the mind, went through the stage of ossification
or semioasification and again reached the stage of emancipation of the
mind, he continued. However. such cycles did not mean siwle repetitions
but meant aoving forward in a spiral. In this sense, he explained, the

emancipation of the mind could not be achieved once and for all but was
an endless endeavor.

In his report Comrade Shaeqi also pointed out the reasons that people
make avoidable mistakes: One was that there were mistakes in people's
ways of thinking, and another was the wrong stands people adopted.

The analysis made by Comrade Shaoqi still has great practical signifi-
cance today. It is inspiring because it tells us that we must try our

15
best to avoid making mistakes and do a good job in grasping the dialecti-
cal materialist way of thinking and that there is no end to the emanci-
pation of the mind. that science transcends all boundaries and creation
knows no forbidden zones. Nevertheless. in trying to understand things
we must still uphold the proletarlan stand. Only when we uphold the
socialist orientation and proceed from the fundamental interests of the
proletariat and the broad masses of the people will we be able to build
China into a modern. powerful country according to the principle of more,
faster, better and more economical results. When we say that there
shOuld be no forbidden zones we must not do away with our political stand
as well. However, we cannot say that upholding the stand of the prole-
tariat means setting up forbidden zones.

There Should Be Both Democracy and Centralism, Both Freedom and Discipline

In the two reports he delivered at the party school attached to the
Central China Bureau, namely, "0n Communists' Self-Cultivation in
Discipline and Sense of Organization" and “Democratic Spirit and Bureau-
cratism." Comrade Shaoqi emphatically expounded the relations between
democracy and centralism. between freedom and discipline, and so on. and
he stressed the importance of doing a good job in handling such rela-
tions. From this we can see that such problems concerning party building
existed and continue to exist during the democratic revolution period

and in the socialist revolution period. It is imperative to help people
who entertain erroneous ideas in different forms during different periods.
to correct such ideas and to make party organizations healthier and
stronger.

Comrade Shaoqi first of all analysed the different origins of bourgeois
and proletarian democracy and their different nature. He pointed out
that the bourgeoisie talked about equality and human rights in many
places, but they allowed an absolutely unequal economic status to exist.
He said that a state society was established on its economic structure.
The economic foundation of a society included the modes of production of
material wealth. productive forces and relations of production. Economic
inequality could lead to inequality in other aspects, he said. The so-
called equality before the law was actually aimed merely at protecting
the bourgeoisie's freedom and rights to exploit the laboring people.

He explained that this had been the actual ingredients of bourgeois
democracy. Prolatarian democracy not only advocated equality before the
law and equality in the enjoynnnt of political rights and the performance
of obligations, but also demanded economic equality, the abolition of
capital and the elimination of private property. Only when there was
economic equality could there be equality in all other aspects: in poli-
tics, social status, education, and so on, he noted.

Comrade Shaoqi then went on to analyze the concrete situation within the

ranks of our revolution. He said that in society there were different
positions because of the division of work. For example, there were

16
commanders and soldiers in the army and they performed different duties.
The job of a commander was to command, while that of the soldiers was to
obey orders. Within the party there were leaders and people under their
leadership. However, everyone enjoyed the same human rights irrespec-
tive of their different work and positions. Even the commander in chief
was not entitled to give anyone a beating or use bad language against
others. Nevertheless, he continued, the spirit of equality or the demo-
cratic spirit was different from cgalitarianism. Comrade Shaoqi pointed
out that at that time the democratic spirit had not really taken root
among some of the comrades, but on the other hand there had been some
signs of egalitarian thinking. He analyzed the different peculiarities
of different people and pointed out that no two people could be exactly
alike. People received different pay and conditions because of different
work and duties. For example. Comrade Shaoqi continued to explain, we
allowed the coammnders at the battalion. regiment and brigade levels to
move on horseback, while others were not given such a privilege, and some
ate better than others. Comrade Shaoqi also said that among our comrades
there were certain phenomena of ultrademocracy. Some people denied the
importance of the sense of organization and the fact that within our ranks
there was a distinction between commanders and those under the command of
others and that within the party there were leaders and people under their
leadership. Such an egalitarian and ultrademocratic stand had nothing to
do with the spirit of equality or the democratic spirit. When people
worked in different positions, he said, they must be given different pay
and conditions according to the spirit of equality or the democratic
spirit, and to do otherwise was inequitable. He then went on to say that
egalitarianism negated distinctions and that this was wrong. However,
leading cadres at various levels must not, because of such distinctions,
consider themselves to be a cut above others, because such thinking also
ran counter to the democratic spirit.

in his analysis Comrade Shaoqi also looked at the social and historical
conditions in China. He said that due to its long years of feudal his—
tory and the social basis for the numerous small producers China was
devoid of a democratic tradition and its people lacked training in demo-
cratic practice. Even within the CCP many party members failed to
understand the meaning of democracy, he said. So we must educate the
masses of people in the democratic spirit and carry out the same educa-
tion within the party. Comrade Shaoqi pointed out that there was bureau-
cratism within the party due to the immense influence of nonproletarian
ideas within the party. As a result of the backwardness of China's
economy and culture, bureaucratism existed at that time and would con-
tinue to exist in the future. therefore, to eliminate bureaucratism it
was imperative to develop production. culture and education. He said
that this was a long-term task and that it was impractical to hope for
the immediate elimination of bureaucratism.

In his "On Communists' Self—Cultivation in Discipline and Sense of Organi-
zation," Comrade Shaoqi elaborated on democratic centralism and its

17
iaplementation. Some of the points he raised are still very instruc—
tional today. lle talked about the various expressions within the party
of mistaken understanding about democratic centralism and cited an
exaaple of then: Some people said they would submit themselves to higher
authorities or the majority when the higher authorities or the majority
had proved to be correct politically or correct in principle. Comrade
Shsoqi said that such an attitude was wrong because it undermined demo-
cratic centralism. According to the principle of democratic centralism.
one that aubmit to the decisions of the higher authorities or the major-
ity whether such decisions were correct or not. when such decisions were
incorrect, abiding by discipline was all the more important. “by should
one obey decisions that were wrong? First, when one considered one's
higher authorities or the Central Cot-ittee or the majority to be wrong,
the validity of one's opinion still needed to be proved. Before any-

thing ctI-ld be done about it. one still had to obey the decision. If
not, and if everyone refused to submit to his higher authorities, the
Central Con-littee or the majority, there would be no party unity and the
party organization would have to disband. In the past, Chen Duriu and '
Zhang Guoteo opposed the Central Couaittee on the pretext that "the
Central Conittee is wrong and I am right." Later, however, facts showed
that it was Chen Duadu and Zhang Guotao, not the Central Comittee, who
were wrong. Second, even if the great majority or the higher authorities
or the Central Comittee were wrong, one mat still submit to them and
follow the wrong decision. To do otherwise would lead to a split in
organization, show variations in action and weaken the party. Comade
Sbaoqi stressed the importance of the fight against liberalism, which
opposed submitting to the majority, the organization, hiyner authorities
and the Central Comittee. Party mentors who had different opinions
could air such opinions to higher authorities through certain formalities,
but they should obey the original decisions before their opinions were
accepted by the higher authorities. In short, democratic centralism
should be absolutely and unconditionally iqlemented.

Comrade Shaoqi also devoted one chapter to the question of how party

organizations at higher levels and leaders of the party should irplement
democratic centralism. He pointed out that the inlementation of demo-
cratic centralism embraced two aspects: One was how ordinary party mem-
bers. party organs at lower levels and any minority in any party
organization should implement democratic centralism. and the other was
how party leaders representing leading party organizations should inle-
ment democratic centralism. Only when we could do well in both aspects
would we be able to make democratic centralism e cowlete success. lie

Opened the discussion on the topic by pointing out the responsibilities
of the leading comrades of the party, the qualifications they should

possess and ways in which leading comrades broke democratic centralism.
He said that the following situations provided the best opportunity to
test the willingness of a party meaber to observe party discipline: A
person was a good consunist if: 1) lie obeyed and helped his superior
even though he was better than his superior in terms of political

18
consciousness. educational level, work ability or past experiences.

2) He submitted to his superior or the majority in his party committee
even though his superior or the majority of his party committee had made
a mistake. He maintained his own opinion while making representations
to higher authorities. 3) He continued to obey the instructions issued
by his organization and respected his superiors even though there had
been differences between his own opinions and those of his superiors on
matters of principle and in debates on such matters, and he could uphold
truth and avoid being overcome by all sorts of erroneous ideas at a time
when there was serious ideological struggle going on within the party.
6) He could practice the adage of "returning ingratitude with kindness"
and. during times of difficulty and danger, protect and help comrades
who had once opposed and borne grudges against him. 5) He could strictly
observe discipline under the most difficult or dangerous conditions when
even his own life was at stake. Then Comrade Shaoqi cited the following

situations and said that they provided the best opportunity to test a
cadre's ability to realize correct leadership: 1) Whether a cadre was
able to uphold principles and managed to bring the majority of comrades
in his organization around when they had all made mistakes in matters of
political principles. 2) Whether a cadre assigned to work in a new area
was able to gain increasingly popular support through work and struggle
and win the trust of superiors who originally had not had much faith in
him. 3) whether a cadre was able to forgive and respect other people.
including those under his leadership, when these people criticized and
opposed him (whether for good reasons or not). 6) whether a cadre was
able to straighten things out in his organization and reestablish dis-
cipline and order when people in his party organization had shown a weak
sense of organization and had become la: in discipline. 5) Whether a
cadre was able to persuade mischievous people to take their work seriously
and was resourceful enough to be able to educate and persuade people who
had previously refused to obey the decisions of their party organization
to do so. 6) whether a cadre was able to carry out his duties so well
that no one in his organization failed to set his mind on his work.

On the question of freedom and discipline Comrade Shaoqi also made eon»
in-depth analysis. He said that some people were afraid of the party's
discipline; they were not willing to join the party for fear that admis-
sion to the party would hamper their freedom. Some comrades who had
joined the party asked the party to allow them more freedom. He said
that these were all expressions of petty bourgeois subjective wishes for
freedom. However, in actual fact such freedom was impossible, because in
objective reality such freedom was nowhere to be found. Quoting from
Engels, Comrade Shaoqi said: "Freedom means understanding necessity."
That is to say. one could enjoy freedom only when one was able to under-
stand necessity; otherwise, one had no hope of enjoying freedom. This
holds true in everyday life, and there are numerous examples to prove

its validity. For example. to raise living standards it is first of all
necessary to deve10p production and improve labor productivity. However.
this has so often been neglected by people in actual life. Some people

19
become slack in their work because they think their wages are too low;
hence. they do not actively try to raise efficiency in production. These
comrades must know that their being slack in work will not inrove our
living standards but will cause our country to remain in the kind of
bacluvard situation that existed for long years in the past. This
reflects the blindness or even disruptive quality that can often be seen
in people's everyday actions. Both our theories and practice have
repeatedly told us that a sense of organization and discipline are the
prerequisites for acquiring the freedon to act according to objective
laws. The stronger we show our sense of organization and the more
strictly we observe discipline. the better we will realise the four
modernizations.

Integrate Theory With Practice; Combine Practical Examples With Precepts

Comrade Shaoqi paid a great deal of attention to theoretical and ideologi—
cal construction in our party and in particular stressed the unity of
theoretical study and ideological cultivation. Integrating theory with
practice has been one of the three fine traditions of our party, and

Comrade Shaoqi set a very good examle in this respect with his own
deeds.

In his letter "In Reply to Song Liens" (that is, Comrade Sun Yefang),
written in 1961, Comrade Shaoqi pointed out that in the period following
the founding of the CCP some people had been against party members'
undertaking thorough and specialized theoretical study. They had even
been against the "scholastic style" of study in schools where party
members gathered especially to study theory, and they favored steeling
oneself through practical struggles. He said that they used to refer

to party members who had been paying lore attention to study as makers
of the "scholastic faction." He said that they seemed to believe that
experiences gained through practical struggles alone would be enough to
lead our revolution to victory without the help of sophisticated theoreti-
cal study; they also seemed to believe that it was possible to grasp the
theories of Marxism-Leninisn without going through assiduous and pains-
taking study over long periods. At the same time, he said, there existed
within the party another view on theoretical study which neglected the
inortance of practice and was divorced from practice. Comrade Shaoqi
said that neither of these two tendencies had adopted a correct attitude
toward the relations between theory and practice and that neither of them
had correctly handled such relations.

According to Conrade Shaoqi, the viewpoint that neglected the signifi-
cance of theory prevailed within our party for a certain time and gave
rise to a coupon practice of opposing theoretical study. As a result,

the party's theoretical level had remained low all the tine. Conrade
Shaoqi said that such a practice should be opposed and rectified. It had
much to do with the fact that our party so far had not been able to attain
the kind of theoretical level it required. This had had a very bad

20
influence on our party and prevented the correct viewpoint within our
party. which advocated giving equal attention to theory and practice,
from being developed. Comrade Shaoqi further pointed out that the
numerous failures in the history of the CCP occurred because of failures
arising from wrong instructions-~failures on an all-party scale or
regional failures due to wrong instructions and instructions based on
naive ideas. He said that this weakness in theoretical study had not
yet been completely overcome. Hence, he said, it was very iaportant to
call for unfolding theoretical study within the party. The CCP would

be sure to lead the Chinese revolution through to final victory so long
as it could overcome this weakness.

Reading these expositions by Comrade Shaoqi today, we feel iunensely
inspired by his kind intentions. The theoretical study currently being
undertaken by our party still leaves much to be desired. How should the
proletariat administer the state and carry out socialist construction
after it becomes a political party in power? Questions like this are
pressing and are awaiting our answers. He must give answers that are
more in accordance with objective laws through practice and theoretical
study. Rereading these expositions by Comrade Shaoqi makes us recall
how Lin Disc and the "gang of four" wantonly distorted and tampered with
Harxist-Lcninist theories. Lin Biao claimed that in studying Marxism-
Leninism one should look for shortcuts and that it would be quite enough
to merely read the "three constantly read articles.” ‘lhey quoted articles
out of context, picked quotations at random and then used such quotations
as dogmas, as things to scare others with, and in a way that divorced the
quotations from the kind of historical background against which they had
been written. ls it not true that by so doing they reduced serious

science to a quack doctor's medicine or a peddler's candies? This his-
torical farce should be used by our theoretical workers today as a

reference. we must never again be tainted with that kind of evil prac-
tice.

Comrade Shaoqi said that theory must be integrated with practice, and he
energetically advocated and earnestly practiced this himelf. In the
reports he delivered at the party school he always painstakingly advised
leading cadres of the party that they should influence other cadres with
exemplary actions. He urged leading cadres to adopt the correct stand,
make progress in both study and work and be honest and upright in their
ways. Comrade Shaoqi himelf set an excellent crawls for others of
integrating theory with practice. Everyone knows that at that time
Comrade Shaoqi was political comlissar of the New loth Army and secretary
of the Central China Bureau. However. to the comrades of the New loth Army
his stature was much higher. Conrade Shaoqi was very much loved and
esteemed by the cadres in the entire party. There were many moving
episodes that reflected the respect and love that the then acting com-
mander of the New 10th Army, Comrade Chen Yi, showed for Comrade Shaoqi.

Despite his enormous prestige in the entire party and army, Comrade
Shaoqi was modest and prudent in all aspects, and he never abused his

21
power or thought himself a cut above others. He and Comrade Chen Yi
respected and cared for each other, and their true, natural and com-
radely relations left a deep impression on other comrades. This kind of
cordial and harmonious relationship between revolutionary leaders was
infectious, and our military and political cadres at various levels vied
with one another in emulating Comrade Shaoqi.

Comrade Shaoqi took great pains to educate the party cadres and spared no
efforts in constructing an excellent party. He showed great solicitude
not only for the cadres studying at the party school but also for their
families, and he attached much imrtance to enhancing their political
consciousness and ideological level. His farsightedness was of great
significance to party building, and his ideas an this matter are still
very valuable to us. To foster good party spirit we must not overlook
any question, large or small, related to this subject. Hany current
problems concerning our party spirit can be traced to the results of
education given to the sons and daughters "f revolutionary cadres.
Today, when our party has long become the political party in power, the
question of the education given by con-mists to their children and the
kind of influence they exert on them should be given a more inortant
position in the order of the day.

Throughout his life Comrade Shaoqi set strict requirements on himself in
self-cultivation, as a communist should. lie was able to contribute so
much to the party's theories on party building because he earnestly
practiced his ideas. His theories on party building have helped bring
up generations of CC? members during different revolutionary periods.
Let us learn from him, remed>er him and emulate him in earnestly and
constantly remolding ourselves. Connists of the older generation and
the younger generations, let us all unite and continue to strive to
build a glorious. great and correct party!

080: 60010

22
THE HISTORICAL ROAD 0? THE MAY 41'" MOVEMENT AND 11!! CHINESE INTELLECTUALS
Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 14-21
[Article by Xiong Fu [35710 1788]]

[Text] The great Hay lath Movement has already had a 61-year history,
and the Chinese intellectuals were the first to awaken during the nove-
nent. The historical road of the Chinese intellectuals and the histori-
cal narch of the new democratic revolution finally joined hands and took
up socialist revolution and socialist construction after 30 years of
meandering development. Today a review of the historical road of the
intellectuals since the May 6th Movement will help us mderstand cor-
rectly the conditions of the intellectuals of our country, carry cut

the policy of the party toward intellectuals and bring into full play
the service of the intellectuals as a new force in the four noderniza-
tions.

The Role of the Intellectual: in the Hay loth Movement and Their Parting
of the Ways

1. As the Vanguards of Anti-Twerialisn and Antifeudalisn. The May 6th
Movement was a natural product of the ever-sharpening class and nationality
contradictions in Chinese society after the failure of the 1911 revolution.
The Chinese people had launched numerous anti-inerialisn struggles before
the May 6th Hovenent, but they lacked scientific and in-depth understand-
ing of the nature of inperielisn. There were people who had illusions
about such imperialist countries as Britain and the United States.

The Paris Peace Conference and disputes among the inperialists over the
partitioning of. China nade progressive revolutionary intellectuals.
represented by Li Dachao, realize that the world of the imperialists is
a world of gangsters, that the inerialists by nature are plunderers of
weak and small countries and that all gangster organizations and gangster
activities in this world of gangsters are our enemies. Awakened by this
new cognition, Li Dachao can up with such anti-inperialisn slogans as
"overthrow the world of gangsters," "transform the world of gangsters."
The exposure of the true nature of inperialism by the revolutionary

23
intellectuals helped the Chinese people see more clearly the gangster
appearance of imperialism. This is why the Hay loth Movement x-n more
thoroughgcing and less compromising than the 1911 revolution.

The May 6th Hovenent was also an extremely influential ideological revo-
lutionary move-ant. "Smash the shopfront of Confucius" became the banner
of this antifeudalism movement. “mose carrying this big banner were
intellectuals who had just been exposed to comaunism and intellectuals
imbued with revolutionary democracy.

QINGNIAN ZAZRI [room MAGAZINE], founded by Chen Duxiu in 1915 but
changed to KIN GINGNIAN [NEH YOUTH] in 1916. was the first to kindle
the antifeudalisn flame. Chen Duxiu wrote in its first issue that China
needed radical changes and that it was better to see the quintessence of

(:hinese culture destroyed than to let the nation fall behind the current
of history either imnediately or in the future. writers like Li Dachao

and Lu Ken constantly contributed articles to XlN QINGNIAN criticizing
Confucius, as they attacked the decedent feudaliat and Confucian teach-

ings and laid bare the cannibalistic nature of the feudalist code of
ethics.

In 1917 KIN QINGNIAN launched a literary revolution attacking feudalist
literature and the classical style of writing. Chen Duxiu and ﬂu Shi
were the first to expound in m QINGNIAN their advocacy of literary
reform. They were supported by writers like Qian Xuantong and Liu
Bannong. Lu Xun's fiction, written in vernacular Chinese. was the model
of the literary revolution and the trailblazer of a brandnew literary
tradition.

2. As the Media for Publishing Democracy and Science. Democracy and
science were the weapons the Chinese intellectuals of the Hay loth are
used to oppose feudslist ideology. The democratic spirit they plbli-
cized favored individual emancipation and opposition to feudal autocracy
and feudalist ethics. This demand for individual emancipation, though
limited in scope, was a severe blow to the deep-rooted feudal autocracy.
In response to this cry for individual emancipation. numerous intellec-
tuals actually shook off the shackles of feudalist ethical teachings
and family ties and became warriors of the new democratic revolution.
Another cowonent part of this democratic spirit was the demand for a
democratic system of government. The kind of democracy the Chinese
intellectuals had in mind 60 years ago was no more than the capitalist
democracy of the Heat. The French Revolution and the "Declaration of
Human Rights" captured practically a whole generation of Chinese revo-
lutionary intellectuals, especially before the October Revolution. The
capitalist democratic ideology, though somewhat outmoded elsewhere in
the world, was a brandnew ideology in China at that time.

The science publicized during the May 4th era was principally a kind of
scientific ideology. realism and rationalise, diametrically opposed to

26
the feudalist system of idolatry. Publications such as XIN QIMGMIAM and
XIANGJIANG PINGLUN used to carry articles on these particular topics.
The intellectuals who wrote those articles advocated opposition to the
cult of Confucius: don't follow anything blindly, but think inde-
pendently; don't place full faith in those who are in r~ntrol of polit-
ical power, but seek to have rational beliefs; don't worship traditions
and destroy outmoded rules and practices incompatible with modern
civilization. The spread of capitalist democratic ideology and
rationalism was a positive influence in the struggle against feudal
autocracy. The historical contributions of the Chinese intellectuals

in spreading these new ideologies to combat feudalism deserve to be
affirmed. Of course, it should be pointed cut that the progressive
revolutionary intellectuals had learned from the failure of the 1911
revolution that capitalist democracy could not be the way out for China.
They turned their truth-seeking endeavor to MarxismrLeninism, which came
to China with the October Revolution. This was s new ideological current
since the May 4th era.

3. As Disseminators of Marxism. The dissemination of Marxism in China
began with the revolutionary intellectuals.

As early as November 1918, when the Allies were celebrating their vic-
tory in the European war, Li Dachao published two articles, "The Victory
of the Common People" and "The Triunph of Bolshevism," hailing the
October Revolution. In 1919 Yun Daiying published in Guangzhou his
Chinese translation of Kautsky's "Class Struggle.“ In April 1920 Chen
Hangdao published in Shanghai a complete Chinese translation of the
"Communist Manifesto." In May l9l9 XIN QINGMIAN put out a special issue
entitled "The Study of Marxism." edited by Li Dachao, who contributed an
article entitled "My Own Views of Marxism." Thereafter XIN QIIGNIAM
published a stream of articles on Marxism and set in motion a movement
to propagate Marxist theories. A more influential paper, the CHEN 3A0
Supplement, with the help of Li Dachao, in May 1919 began a special
column on "Studies of Marxism" which became one of the vehicles for the
revolutionary intellectuals to disseminate Marxism.

The dissemination of Marxism led to the formation of numerous progressive
societies which gathered together the first generation of communist
Chinese intellectuals. These included such societies as the Shaonian
Zhongguo Xuehui [Young China Society]. which began in Beijing and then
branched out to all parts of the country; the Xinmin Xuehui [New
People's Society] of Hanan; the Society for the Study of Marxism at
Beijing University; the Juewu She [Awakening Society] of TianJin; the
Huzhu She [Mutual Help Society] and Liqun Shushe [Welfare Book Club]

of Wuhan and the Xio Xueahengshe [New Student Club] of Guangzhou. The
progressive revolutionary intellectuals of these organizations fre-
quently held intraorganizational and interorganizational discussions of
such problems as revolution in Chinese society, new culture and new
ideologies. Sometimes the discussions took the form of published

25
articles, and some were personal correspondence. For instance, the
correspondence between Comrade Mao Zedong and Comrade Cai Hesen are the
earliest documents on the study of Marxism in China.

Intensified dissemination of Harrism and the advent of revolutionary
struggles led to the breakup of the organizations of intellectuals.
The Young China Society, which was the first to break up, is a typical
example of the development.

The Young China Society, formed in 1918, broke up in $975. It was
founded by young intellectuals who felt an urgent need to reform Chinese
society. However, they could not arrive at a consensus on how to pro—
ceed with the reform, which road to follow and how much reform China
could take. Differences in ideology and political views finally split
its loo-plus members into three different groups. One group consisted
of progressive revolutionary intellectuals who were committed to Marxism,
including Li Dachao, Mao Zedong, Yun Daiying, zhang Hentian and Shen
Zemin. Another group consisted of capitalist rightist intellectuals who
believed in nationalism and opposed miss. They were typified by
Zeng 01, Li Huang and Zuo Shunsheng. The third group consisted of petty
bourgeois intellectuals who ref lead to believe in either cot-union or
nationalism but advocated national salvation through education and
science. One of its representatives was Wang Guangqi, who even had the
illusion of saving the Chinese nation with male.

The breakup of the Young China Society was a microcosm of the historical
development of the Chinese intellectuals. Comrade Mao Zedong described
the cmlications among the Chinese intellectuals of the Hay 4th are.

He said: "At first the Hay lath Hove-ant was a revolutionary move-ant of
a united front of three different groups of people, the commist intel-
lectuals, the revolutionary petty bourgeois intellectuals and the capi-
talist intellectuals (the rightwing of the movement at that time)."

("as New Democracy") As the revolutitw ‘c—“Tcrei, the ideological
differences among these three groups became so increasingly violent

that they finally broke up. After a violent debate by mothers of the
Yomg China Society in 1925, Deng zhongxis, who had become a communist,
said to Zuo Shunsheng, a nationalist, as they parted: "We'll nest again
on the battlefield!" The remark turned out to be a historic summation
and an accurate prediction. The ideological differences among the
Chinese intellectuals after the Hay 4th Movement finally drove then to
divergent political roads.

The outer of rightiets who followed the bureaucratic coqradore capi-
talists and worked for their interests was very small. Their political
ideals reflected the selfish class interests of the capitalists. when
the revolution took an in-depth development, they leaned completely on
the bureaucratic compradore capitalists. The representative of the
rightists who followed this road faithfully was ﬂu Shi.

26
In the May 4th Movement Ru Shi advocated the use of the vernacular style
of writing and democracy and science. and he opposed Confucianism for a
while. His activities in these areas were manifestations of the opposi-
tion of the capitalist intellectuals to an outmoded feudalist culture.
It was a sign of progress, but Bu Shi was always a capitalist reformer.
After the working class joined the May 6th Movement and built a greater
momentum in the Chinese new democratic revolution. the capitalist intel-
lectuals began to break away from the revolutionary united front of
intellectuals. Mu Shi at that time felt very disappointed, because
"there are 'new elements' who publicize guild socialism and Marxist
socialism. 'class struggle' and 'surplus value.'" He became "so
impatient" that he engaged Comrade Li Dachao in a polemic debate about
"Issues and lame." Later he advocated "government by good people" and
"reform bit by bit." So it is no surprise that Hu Shi later befriended
the Northern warlords and finally went to serve Chiang Kai-shek. He
openly opposed the anti-imperialism and antifeudalism struggles of the
revolutionary people. In the ranks of the intellectuals of the May 6th
era, very few remained as loyal to ﬂu shi as Pu Sinian and Lo Jialun

of the Xin chao She [New Tide Club]. and fewer still acted like Duan
Xipang, who became the chieftain of the Kuomintang AB Corps.

The revolutionary intellectuals, such as Li Dacheo. Chen Duxiu and Lu Xun,
were much more firmly committed to a revolutionary approach in the May 6th
New Cultural Movement than such reformists as Bu Shi. During the May 4th
Movement, the fact that these progressive revolutionary intellectuals had
the courage to reflect the patriotic. democratic demands of the people
and launch unrelenting attacks against the government which betrayed the
country made them the real leaders of the May bth Movement and the masters
of the New Cultural Movement. The Chinese workers who entered the Chinese
political arena in the latter part of the May 4th Movement contributed
greatly to its mounting revolutionary influence. The revolutionary
intellectuals, newly exposed to communist ideology, began to rest their
hapes on the working class and worked hard to link Marxism-Leniniem and
the Chinese workers movement. Both successes and failures made them
aware of their lack of adequate ideological orientation and the need to
study Marxism. So many of them (including Zhou Enlai, Deng Xiaoping.

Cai Hesen, Zhu De, Zhao Shiyan, Chen Yi, Nie Rongzhen, Wang Ruofei,

Li Lisan. Li Puchun, Li Heihan, Xiang Jingyu, Cai Chang, Liu Baijian.

Chen Yannian and Xiong Xiong, all of whom later became well-known com-
munists) left China and went to Europe as work-study students to study

the world proletarian revolution. The May 4th Movement laid a firm

ideological and organizational foundation for the establishment of the
Chinese Comuoist Party.

Most of the Chinese intellectuals of the May 4th era took a middle posi-
tion in politics. This "middle position" means that they refused to go
along with the reactionary ruling class but did not quite understand
Marxism. They were on the side of the masses and shared their views

in opposing imperialism and feudalism. Many of them who were

27
revolutionary democrats. such as Csi Yuanpei, later became friends of the
Chinese Commist Party. But they did not share the views of the Marxists
on reform of Chinese society end the road to realizing such reform.
Their intention at the tine was to look around for a better future for
Chine. Cornered to the progressive revolutionary intellectuals. they
looked in the wrong direction, and their nethod of approach was not
scientific. As a result, they ended up traveling a long winding road.
That is unavoidable in history.

The Unique Qualities of the Chinese Intellectuals

The greatest njority of intellectuals in the old Chinese society were
either producers who did their brainwork, were engaged in liberal pro- .
fessions or were scholars. Just as Conrado Hao Zedong pointed out, they
were close to the worker and peasant nasses. "Like nanual workers, they
are the exploited brainworksrs who do not exploit others." ("On the
Question of National Capitalists and Enlightened Gentry") Both were the
victim of oppression by the iqerialists. feudalists and bureaucratic
capitalists. Due to the extrenely undesirable social environnent and
harsh living conditions. they were isolated and cut off from help in
their particular fields of endeavor, such as scientific research, educa-
tion, medicine and culture. The unique historical conditions of the
Chinese society in which they lived gave the Chinese intellectuals cer-
tain col-on unique qualitim. It was these unique qualities which
enabled than to units under the banner of the Chinese Con-mist Party in
1969 at the founding of the People's Republic and to join the people in
participating in the socialist revolution and socialist construction.
These unique qualities were as follows:

1. Patriotisn. The aggression by the isnerialist forces in China after
the Opiun war turned the Chinese feudalist society into a senicolonial,
semdfeudalist society. The Chinese intellectuals who lived under such
conditions saw with their own eyes inerialist aggression on the one
hand and the dark and backward Chinese society brought about by several
thousand years of feudalist autocratic rule on the other. No wonder
their political objective was to see Chin becone independent, free,
prosperous and strong. The most progressive of these intellectuals, the
proletarian intellectuals. who due to their communist world outlook
understood the special conditions in Chinese society and the revolu-
tionary tasks dictated by such conditions. worked hard to bring together
the patriotic struggle and the basic interests of the proletariat and led
the Chinese people in the new denocratic revolution to topple three
powerful forces. The national capitalist and petty bourgeois intellec-
tuals. also oppressed by the inperialists, were equally anxious to get
rid of inerialist control and make China prosperous and strong. 80
they becane the allies of the proletariat in the no; democratic revolu-
tion. The greatest majority of the intellectuals wanted to one China
independent. autonomous, prosperous and strong, no longer victinized

by other powers. Only a small ninority of capitalist rightist

28
intellectuals and bureaucratic conpradore capitalists were willing to
serve the interests of the imperialists to the detriment of the Chinese
nation.

2. The Pursuit of Science and DemocraCy. it is said that the kind of
capitalist education the Chinese intellectuals received in the old
society was responsible for the ideological and educational differences
between the intellectuals on the one hand and the workers and peasants
on the other. This is true. But the scientific and democratic spirit
engrained in the education turned out to be an antithesis and potential
threat to the deep-rooted feudslist ideology in Chinese society. Many
intellectuals dedicated their lives to the pursuit of national salvation
through science, education, industry and the like. In the past we were
more aware of the class inplications of these political ideals than we
were able to scientifically analyze their creativity. China. poor,
underdeveloped and backward, indeed needed to promote science, education
and industry. The problem was that it would be hopeless to push for
social reform, science, education and industry if feudalism and imperial-
ist control remained intact. We must admit that, even though most of

the intellectuals working for the realization of these ideals did not
understand this point, they were sincere in their conviction and
endeavored to alter the backward appearance of China. lnperialist influ-
ence and reactionary government were powerful inhibitors of activities
designed to revitalize the Chinese nation, such as the development of

science. education. cultural undertakings and national capitalist indus-
try and commerce. Working under double pressure, the Chinese intellec"

tuals kept alive their endeavor and struggle. The material and spiritual
wealth they created and preserved finally been-e valuable assets required
for the socialist construction after the founding of new China. The
historical achievements brought about by these activities of the Chinese
intellectuals should not be written off lightly.

3. A Sense of Righteousness and Historical Responsibility. "Everybody
is responsible for the fate of his country." This is an old Chinese
saying and also a traditional quality of the Chinese intellectuals.
Being a public-minded people, the intellectuals of ancient China used
to say: "Be the first one to serve the public but the last one to enjoy
comfort." Except for a small minority. today's intellectuals of China
have a sense of righteousness and historical responsibility. The mani-
festations of this are: moral integrity, excellent enterprising spirit,
dedication to one's profession, extreme concern for the position of
China as a semicoloninl, semifeudalist state. contempt for and refusal
to work with evil forces, anxiety about the future of the country, and
readiness to participate actively in social and political struggles
prompted by these qualities. The outbreak of the May 4th Movement was
an intense demonstration by the broad masses of Chinese intellectuals
of their sense of righteousness and historical responsibility. After
May 6th, whenever there was a national crisis. there were always noble-
minded patriots among the intellectuals to raise a cry of warning or put
up bloody struggles for the interests of the nation as a whole.

29
Between the war against Japan and the liberation war, the Chinese intel-
lectuals quickened their pace in the historic march toward progress and
revolution. During the war against Japan, as China faced a life-and-
death crisis, large numbers of intellectuals went to Yansn to be at the
frontline o.‘ the war of resistance. Many intellectuals in both the
occupied areas and areas under Kuomintang control joined the anti-
Jspanese and national salvation mass forces. Very few turned out to be
traitors and anticomunist lackeys. During the war of liberation the
masses of hardship-tempered intellectuals stood up to oppose the reac-
tionary government, which advocated national betrayal, civil war and
dictatorship. They opposed the American scheme to interfere in the
internal affairs of China and make China an American colony. They also
participated actively in the patriotic democratic movement led by our
party.

After the May 4th Movement the Chinese intellectuals traveled extremely
winding and complicated roads, even though the general trend kept pace
with the main historical development. No matter whether they followed
the line of Lu Xun, who began his career as an evolutionist, then a
class theorist and finally a cor-sander on the proletarian cultural war-
front; or the line of Zoo Taofen, a propagsndist and organizer of the

patriotic anti-Japanese movement, a professional promoter and organizer
of education and a leader of the Chinese proletarian publication business;
or the line of ’rao Xingzhi, a "popular education" expert, promoter and
organizer of the patriotic movement and patriotic education and a leading
figure of the patriotic democratic movement in areas under Kuomintang
control; or the line of "en Yiduo, a poet of the "Crescent School" and a
scholar who died a martyr defending the national liberation movement;

or the line of Zhu Ziqing, once a poet of high integrity, an essayist.

a true defender of the integrity of the Chinese nation who died at old
age by rejecting contewtuous charities; or the line of Li Siguang, who
advocated national salvation through science. then dedicated himself to
socialist scientific research work and became an outstanding Red expert
proletariat scientist, they all ended up under the banner of the Chinese
Comnist Party. This shows that the tide of history is irresistible.
Anyone seeking to reform society will be unable to accoaplish anything
if he divorces himelf from the force of the worker and peasant masses.
The May Ioth Movement was not an extensive sociopolitical movement until
the working class joined it. Reinforced by the Marust scientific world
outlook. the progressive columnist intellectuals who realized this
inevitable trend of history took the first step to integrate themselves
with the worker and peasant masses. After 30 years of probing between
the May 10th Movement and the founding of the People's Republic of China
in 1969. the majority of the Chinese intellectuals finally realized the
inportsnce of this point and acted on it in practice.

Intellectuals who had lived in the old society and witnessed the rise and

fall of the Chinese nation hail the emergence of a new China in which
they see the strength of the people and the hope of a nation. Marked

30
contrasts in history give then reason to favor our socialist system and
support the leadership of our party, the only place to turn to. A series
of important practices conducted under the leadership of the party,
including the drive for ideological transfornation of intellectuals, the
land reform and the socialist transformation, provided then with oppor-
tunities to rub shoulders with Marxian and adapt their ideology and con-
duct gradually to the needs of socialist revolution and socialist con-
struction.

Now there are over 20 million intellectuals in China, 10 percent of whom
had lived in the old society. Most of these intellectuals. including

6 million graduates of universities and colleges. have been brought up
by the party since the liberation. The greatest ujority are from work-
ing class fastilies and have received socialist education in schools.
They cherish a deep affection for the party and socialise. For 30 years
they have done their utsost to study and work actively and patiently. to
change their world outlook and to become the herd core cadres on the
socialist construction front.

He could see in the Chinese intellectuals such qualities as patriotism,
the desire to pursue democracy and science, and a sense of righteousness
and historical responsibility. sell of which have been kept intact. The
fact that the intellectuals who now live under the socialist systen have
gradually acquired the comuniet world outlook helps carry forward these
fine qualities and excellent traditions. Their high aoral qualities as
manifested in ardent affection for the fatherland and the party and self-
less dedication to the four modernitetions bring them even closer to the
communist standard of norality.

Now our intellectuals are masters of the working class, and their labor
falls within the scope of the total labor force serving socialist con-
struction. Without the labor of the intellectuals, our socialist con-
struction would never have achieved the level we have today. In deliver-
ing a "Report on the Problem of Intellectuale" before a conference on
intellectuals called by the party Central Co-Iittee in January 1956,
Conrade Zhou Enlai pointed out: "The greatest mjority of our intellec-
tuals are already members of the working class." However. due to
"leftist" ideological influence in the handling of intellectuals later
and the disruption by Lin Biao and the "gang of four" during the Great
Cultural Revolution, this scientific assessment has not been persistently
sustained. The party Central Connittee now affirm that the assessment
is coupletely accurate.

The Question of Iuplementing the Policy Toward Intellectuals

To recognize intellectuals as sewers of the working class is the starting
point for carrying out the policy of the party toward intellectuals. The
most urgent step in the actual implementation of the policy toward intel-
lectuals is to recognize their ability and use them accordingly.

31
To know a person's ability and use his accordingly is a strategically
vital point of policy in handling intellectuals. To know the ability of
the intellectuals means to understand them historically and comprehen-
sively. Sixty-one years have elapsed since the outbreak of the Hey 4th
Movement. "hat kind of political force do the intellectuals represent
over half a century after the May 6th Movement? The question is easy to
answer if we follow the analysis given above. During the democratic
revolution they were the allies of the proletariat. and the most pro-
gressive intellectuals played the role of vanguards and liaisons. During
the socialist revolution they became members of the working class, forming
a leading force in the socialist modernisation of our country. It is a
grave mistake to treat intellectuals as the object of revolution and
assault. This kind of "leftist" mistake often occurs where there is no
historical recognition of the intellectuals, and that was what happened
in 1957. During the Great Cultural Revolution, Lin Biso and the "gang of
four” persecuted the intellectuals in order to carry out their counter-

revolutionary conspiracy. Even though this differs basically from the
mistake made by the party in 1957, the lack or absence of a historical
assessment of the intellectuals was no doubt an important subjective
factor accounting for the conspiracy of Lin Bias and the "gang of four"
and their pernicious influence, which still haunts the minds of a
small minority of comrades.

Do the intellectuals have any weak points? Yes, they do. That is why
we have to have a comprehensive understanding of the intellectuals.

For instance, intellectuals are long-term brainworkers. Now many of

our colleges, universities and research institutes are so far removed
from the production departments and agencies that the intellectuals
engaged in research have been led to concentrate more on book knowledge
than knowledge of actual conditions. He must take note of this and help
correct it by providing opportunities for them to keep in touch with the
production departments and actual production activities. In the past
the only way for the intellectuals to get close to reality was to stop
teaching and research and proceed directly to factories and farms to
take up physical labor. That is a misinterpretation of the policy and
program of the party. When we ask the intellectuals to penetrate
reality, we simply ask them to integrate their research process and
results with the process of actual application and production, so as to
enable them to have a timely understanding and scientific observation
of the application of their research findings to various new problems
arising out of actual life. This is designed to help them develop their
research and teaching. The masses of intellectuals no doubt welcome this
kind of integration of research and teaching with practical production.
But this requires organic changes in the system of research and educa-
tion, a task far beyond the capabilities of individual intellectuals.
The responsibility rests with the party leadership. Instead of criti-
cizing and blaming individual intellectuals, the party must assume
responsibility for bringing about improvement.

32
We must "know a person" before we can "use him successfully." To "use

a person successfully" means that to use the intellectuals successfully
we met make good use of their specialization in the fields of science
and technolosh economics or culture. for instance, so that their
special knowledge and professional talent can be put to good use. Then
let them be the nainstay to lead and cultivate a new force armed with
modern scientific and technological knowledge as well as culture on the
one hand and to raise the scientific and cultural level of the masses

on the other. Even more inportent is to select those intellectuals who
have special knowledge and professional talent and uphold the socialist
line and place them in leadership positions at various levels and depart-
ments of both the party and the state to participate in leadership activ-
ities. Such a move is not only a question of iaplenenting policies but
also a vitally iwortant setter affecting our cadre system and the cospo-

sition of our cadre force. This deserves our close attention and careful
consideration.

Our country has now entered a new era of the four modernizations. This
new historical era places new and stiffer demands on our party cadres
and the leadership in the various fields of state activities. Apart from

a higher level of political awakening, they have to have a much higher
level of mdern specialized knowledge and professional skills. He used
to say that all laymen want to be professionals. This is absolutely
correct. 0n the other hand. since our country has large nusbers of
professionals, especially those whom we have been educating and training
for 20 to 30 years, why aren't they given lore responsibility to serve
the country? The fact is that a considerable nunber of cadres at the
provincial and county levels have had no care than a primary school edu-
cation. It is urgent that we raise the scientific and cultural levels
of these cadres. This, however, requires time and favorable conditions.
There is little doubt that the modernization of work of those units and
localities would proceed more satisfactorily if their leadership groups
could absorb sore intellectuals with specialized knowledge and profes-
sional skills so as to achieve a couplete integration of the practical
experience of workers and peasants and the nodern knowledge of the

intellectuals. Isplementation of the policy toward intellectuals requires
the restoration of their reputation in politics on the one hand and better
working and living conditions on the other. We mt do our best in both
areas and see to it that the requirements are met. On top of this. we
have to select the best qualified intellectuals to take up leadership
positions to guide and organize the four modernizations. These are the
stiffer and more exacting demands and tasks involved in our policy toward

intellectuals since the work priority of the party switched to socialist
modernization.

Frankly speaking, the socialist modernization of our country depends on
a close alliance of workers, peasants and intellectuals. Our socialist

modernization sins at developing a national economy based on high tech-
nology and a capacity to satisfy to the extent possible the

33
ever-increasing naterisl and cultural requirenents of our people. we must
have nodern culture, science and technology to build a strong economy, to
run large-scale socialist production and to achieve a rate of labor pro-
ductivity higher than that of the capitalists. we won't be able to do this
unless we have intellectuals with nodern scientific and technological
skills. He depend on intellectuals to raise the cultural and scientific
levels of the entire Chinese nation. He night say that the four moderni-
zations of our country will not succeed if we do not have the alliance of
intellectuals, workers and peasants.

Since the May 6th hove-ant of 1919 the intellectuals of our country have
gone through very severe tests and inherited a glorious revolutionary
tradition. Bound together in destiny with the people and the country,
they have weathered both the countless glooly hours preceding the final
trith of the revolution and the 10-year devastation brought on by Lin
Disc and the "gang of four." Their dedication to the fatherland and
their faith in the leadership of the Chinese Cos-lust Party have never
been shaken by hardship and persecution, no netter how brutal. We are
proud that our country has such a valuable contingent of intellectuals.
As long as we put this contingent to good use, the realization of our
grend project of socialist Iodernisation will he very promising.

5360
(:80: 1000!.
FIND OUR OHN ROAD TO AGRICULTURAL MORNIZATIGI Ill LIGlﬂ' OF CHINA'S
ACTUAL CONDITIONS

Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9. 1 May 80 pp 22-26
[Article by Chin Lisheng [“40 0500 3932]]
[Text] (I)

Realizing China's agricultural nodernization is an intensive revolution;
we therefore mat start fron our actual conditions and walk our own path.
Due to the differences in natural, economic and social conditions. the
countries of the world which have already accoqlished agricultural
nodernization followed different roads. This is a fact which deserves
our attention.

"hat are the actual conditions of our agriculture?

First, our natural agricultural resources, as a whole. are relatively
abundant. However, in term of the average acreage per capita they are
very inadequate. For instance, with an average acreage per capita of
only 1.5 au (as against the world average of 5.5 II), China is a country
with a large population and insufficient arable land. Our per capita

average of forestry is only 1.8 nu. while the world average is 15 nu;
our per capita average of grassland is 5.3 nu, which is not even half
the world average of 11.6 nu; our per capita average of water resources
is only 2,700 cubic asters. which is only slightly nore than a quarter
of the world average. In addition, the distribution of our resources

is very maven. Sons 92 percent of the arable land is found in the
southeast. which constitutes less than one-half the area of the country,
while the northwest, constituting lore than one-half the area of the
country, has only 7.7 percent.

Next, the single pursuit of grain crops over a long period of tine has
seriously disrupted the ecologcal balance of nature. For grain crops
we inroperly reclaimed wasteland and enclosed tidelsnd for cultivation,
which not only squeezed out the economic crops but resulted in the

destruction of vegetation. degeneration of the grassland, expansion of

35
deserts and enlargement of the area of soil erosion. As a result.
drought and flood disasters have becone ever nore frequent, and the
ecological balance is seriously disrupted. Today the annual silt
deposit of the Yellow River is 1.6 billion tone, the highest sung the
rivers of the world. That of the Changjiang River is also rising, reach-
ing 500 to 600 aillion tons per year. If the situation continues, the
Changjiang River nay turn into a second Yellow River. In addition, the
silt deposit of the river channels and water reservoirs in easy areas

is becoming ever nnre serious. This is a grave threat to the development

of our agriculture .

The third iten is the large rural population. The national population
has reached nore than 900 nillion, and 80 percent of the total is rural.
In the course of realizing agricultural modernization, several hundred
nillion laborers in the rural areas have to he placed. This is the
greatest reality confronting China's agricultural modernization.

The fourth iten is the poor foundation of our country, the scanty reserve
of the costumes and brigades and the low intone of the peasants. The
agricultural nodernizstion of may countries was acconplished after
industrialization, or after their industry was fairly developed, and by
Deans of industry rendering support to agriculture. As we are currently
still in the process of industrialization and our country is still very
poor, it is iwossible to lake large invest-ants in and loans to agri-
culture, and we nust depend nainly on the peasants' own effort to
nodernize. Yet the incou of the overwhelning majority of the con-mes,
brigades and peasants is still very low. and they cannot furnish my
funds. This is a big contradiction.

The conditions in the aspects discussed above nake it necessary for us to
adopt special nethods and take special measures and to walk our own path
to acco-plish agricultural nodernization.

Generally speaking, agricultural modernization neans equipping agricul-
ture with mdern science and technology and nodern industry, nanaging it
with modern scientific econonic nathods and raising the land utilization
rate, soil productivity and productivity on a large scale.

Sone people in foreign countries generalize agricultural nodernization
into two upsets: "Hodernization of nchine technology," which leans
equipping agriculture with Indern industry, such as agricultural mechani-
zation; and "nodernization of biological technology," which means equip-
ping agriculture with modern science and technology, such as rational
layouts, inroved varieties, scientific fertilizing, rational use of
water, etc. The mhasis of "nodernization of nachine technology" is on
raising the work efficiency, saving labor tin and isproving labor pro-
ductivity on a large scale. The euphasis of "nodernization of biological
technology" is on esploying the late of nature and the achievensnts of
biology, generally developing production in accordance with local

36
conditions and raising the quality and quantity of farm products. Need-
less to say, the two are mutually supportive and proactive, not mutually
exclusive. The countries of the world which have already realized agri-
cultural modernization, though they differ in thousands of ways and each
has its own special characteristics, all follow one of three ways. Son
countries. with a large population but little land, stress unit area
yield, following mainly the path of "modernization of biological tech-
nology" and launching "modernization of machine technology" only after
their industry has developed. Others, with a small population but vast
land, are short of manpower. They therefore stress efficiency, following
mainly the path of "modernization of machine technology." Still others,
with a small population and little land, stress both unit area yield and
efficiency and follow the path of simultaneous "modernization of biologi-
cal technology" and "modernization of mchine technology."

By referring to the experiences of foreign countries and in accordance
with China's characteristics. we must, in our pursuit of agricultural
modernization, primarily stress the "modernization of biological tech-
nology," l.e. , equipping agriculture with modern science and technology.
Thus, we must start from the practical conditions of the particular
areas. eliminate the restrictive factors blocking the development of
production, act concretely according to natural and economic laws, fully
emloy our abundant manpower and natural resources and comprehensively
develOp farming, forestry, animl husbandry, sideline production and
fishery. Meanwhile, we mat coordinate agriculture, industry and com-
merce and solve the problem of funds needed for agricultural moderniza-
tion and the placement of the labor force. With the development of
production we must, in accordance with the actual conditions of the
different areas and the currently available farm machinery, gradually
reslite agricultural mechanization and raise labor productivity. Natu-
rally, China's conditions are complex. Instead of generalizing, we must
adjust to the local conditions. For instance, while nationally speaking
our population is large and our land inadequate, some areas (certain
regions in the northeast and the northwest, for instance) have a small
population but much land and urgently need mechanization. While nationally
speaking the reserve of comes and brigades is small and they cannot
buy much farm machinery all at once, some areas are relatively rich, have
the ability to buy more farm machinery and can hasten their strides toward
agricultural mechanization. Nationwide, "total mechanization" cannot be
acconplished all at once. He can only follow the order of importance and
urgency, actively create the conditions and realize nechanization by
stages and in groups.

Some comrades illustratively describe the work of agricultural moderniza-
tion as follows: Grasp the main body and fly with both wings. The "main
body" is planting, and the "two wings" indicate the comprehensive develop-
ment of farming, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline production and
fishery and the coordination of agriculture, industry and comerce. 0n
the foundation of vigorously applying modern science and technology, we

37
must grasp the "nain body“ and let the "two wings" fly together. In this
way the agricultural modernization of our country will proceed smoothly.
Food is the most vital thing to the people. The population of our coun-
try today has reached more than 900 nillion, while the amount of unculti-
vated land is limited, and sole land must be used for industrial and
agricultural production and the development of communications. At present
only 1.3 billion of the 1.5 billion mu of arable land is used for grain
crops. By the end of this century, with the continued growth of the
population, it is estimated that the average cultivated area per capita
will be only a little over l mu. Currently the amount of grain per capita
is GOO-plus jin, only satisfying the caloric standard of nutrition, while
the protein nutrient is inadequate. To reach the required levels of
calories and protein, the amount of grain per capita should be at least
1,000 jin. In a situation of l mu per capita of cultivated land, the
average output per mu has to reach 1.000 jin, and such 3 h1g1 unit area
yield is not found in any of the agriculturally modernized countries of
the world today. For us to become the country with the highest unit area
yield in the world, the main method is to equip our agriculture with
modern science and technology, because it will be difficult to accomplish
by relying only on complete mechanization to raise work efficiency.
Therefore, to realize China's agricultural modernization we must primarily
solve the following issues: First, we must prope‘E-r nske comrehensive
surveys of natural agricultural resources and agricultural regional
divisions and, in accordance with such regional divisions, formulate an
overall plan for agricultural modernization, create rational production
structures, reverse the current situation of a single pursuit of grain
crops and realize the coaprehensive development of farming, forestry,
801-181 husbandry, sideline production and fishery. Next, we must intro-
duce the coordination of agriculture, industry and comrce, create a
rational rural industrial and agricultural production layout and solve
the problem of the source of funds required for agricultural moderniza—
tion and the placement of the labor force. Thirdly, we lust create a
couplets scientific and technical system, fully develop the tremendous
impact of modern science and technology on agricultural modernization and
greatly raise the land utilization rate. Pourthly, starting from the
practical conditions of the various areas, we must, on the foundation of
selectively providing the areas with farm machinery, gradually realize
total mechanization, equipping farming, forestry, animal husbandry,
sideline production and fishery with machinery, and greatly raise labor
productivity. Pifthly, we must build socialist new rural villages and
gradually close the gaps between the city and the village, between the
worker and the peasant and between mental and manual labor. No hard-and-
fast line can be drawn among these several item of work. He met inter-
twine them according to the concrete conditions of the particular areas
and place our emphasis according to the different areas and different
stages. The key is a relatively accurate assuwtion and a rational
layout right from the beginning.

38
(II)

To search for the path of China's agricultural modernization, the Academy
of Sciences, with the approval of the party Central Committee. in the
spring of 1978 began to cooperate with hebei. Hunan and Heilongjiang and.
with the provinces as the main units. created three comprehensive scien-
tific experimental bases for agricultural modernization. These bases

are located in three different types of regions representing north China,
the Changjiang River valley and the northeast.

The bases have three characteristics:

The first characteristic is their experimental nature. Their goal is to
deter-ins how, by means of the practice of the base counties, to start
from China's actual conditions and walk our own path of agricultural
modernization. Currently there are numerous views on how to accomplish
agricultural modernization. Just how to conform to China's actual con-
ditions must be answered by the experiences of the base counties. Prae-
tice is the only criterion for testing truth. Whatever succeeds after
the test of practice indicates that an objective truth has been found;
whatever fails indicates that it is erroneous and requires rectification
and repractice until a Chinese way of agricultural modernization is found.

The second characteristic is their scientific nature. They search for
ways to equip agriculture with modern science and technology and modern
industry. Honey and materials alone will not accomplish agricultural
modernization. Today every bass county has created a research institute
to study the major scientific and technical prubleas and problems in
agricultural economy in the course of the agricultural aodsrnizetion of
the county. Some of then are also in the process of forming an experts
group to serve as the technical advisory unit to the county party con—
nittee and people's government. Meanwhile, they are striving to grad—
ually assign experts in agronoay. animal husbandry, veterinary science,
horticulture, forestry, farm machinery, accounting and agricultural
economy to the commune level and corresponding peasant technicians to the
brigade and production team levels. In addition, the base counties pay
attention to training technical talents and spreading scientific and
technical knowledge and to raising the scientific and cultural levels of
the cadres and masses. The spread of the fruits of scientific and tech-
nological research is, to a great extent, determined by the capacity of
the cadres and masses to accept then. The bases plan to create agri-
cultural technical schools, train the existing technical personnel and
turn some of the administrative cadres into technicians. Some reforms
are needed in the rural education system. Besides the addition of agri-
cultural courses in the rural middle schools, some middle schools should
be converted to vocational schools in order to train professionals for
the comprehensive development of farming. forestry. animal husbandry.
sideline production and fishery and the coabined operation of agriculture,
industry and commerce.

39
The third characteristic is their comprehensive nature. Agricultural
modernization requires not only agricultural science but also biology,
pedology, mathematics, physics, chemistry and new technological science,
combining applied science with basic and technical sciences; it requires
not only natural sciences but also the guidance of the social sciences,

integrating natural and social sciences and solving the economic and

the scientific and technical problems encountered in the course of
modernization, in order to act according to natural and economic laws
and hasten its progress. We plan to ask more research institutes inside
and outside the academy and institutions of higher education to form
cooperative links with the base counties, constantly transmit the new
scientific and technological results to them, conduct intermediate
experiments and promptly turn the results into a direct production force.

With the vigorous support of the relevant departments. scientific research
units and higher schools, the three base counties performed the work of
comprehensive surveys of natural resources and agricultural regional
division as the first step toward agricultural modernization and made
obvious achievements.

Generally speaking, such work included the following aspects:

1. They clarified the resources. By ascertaining the farmland, wooded
and hilly land, grassland, water surface and mineral deposits, they
supplied the scientific bases for the comprehensive development of farm-
ing, forestry, animal husbandry, sideline production and fishery; by
ascertaining the types of soil and fertility, they supplied the scien-
tific bases for rational fertilizing and soil improvement; by ascer-
taining the water, soil, light and heat resources, they supplied the
scientific bases for adapting to the locale and organizing production.
In its comprehensive surveys, Luancheng County discovered that its cotton
seeding time in the past coincided with the end of the cold wave. Last
year they delayed the seeding for 20 days and found the most suitable
period for seeding. As a result. the sprouting was complete and the
output increased. This shows that as long as we clarify the condition
of the resources, act according to the laws of nature and introduce
scientific farming, output will increase on a large scale.

2. They made agricultural regional divisions. 0n the foundation of the
comprehensive surveys and in accordance with such natural conditions as
water, soil. light and heat and the social economic conditions, they
made comprehensive analyses, determined the direction suitable for
agricultural development, performed agricultural regional division and
supplied the scientific bases for the rational layout of crops. In
accordance with the results of the comprehensive surveys, ﬂailun County
readjusted the layout of crops and introduced regional planting accord-
ing to the temperature and the distribution of rainfall. Consequently.
the corn crop in the southwest part of the county produced about 200 more
jin per mu than that in the northeast part, while the soybean crop in the

50
northeast part yielded about 50 more jin per mu than that in the south-
west part. This adjustment alone resulted in a grain output increase of
more than 10 million jin for the county.

3. They located the restrictive factors blocking the development of pro-
duction. In its soil survey in 1957, Taoyuan County discovered a total
of 150,000 mu of low-yield marshy farmland. At that time they felt that
it was caused by the lack of fertility in the soil and that all they had
to do was to apply more fertilizer. However, for more than 20 years such
efforts not only failed to solve the problem but expanded the low-yield
farmland to 400,000 mu. By means of the comprehensive surveys this time,
they discovered that the inferior ventilation, presence of numerous
poisonous substances, paucity of bacteria and difficulty for fertilizer
to decompose were due to the improper drainage and irrigation and culti-
vation over a long period of time and that fertilizing alone would not
solve the problem. In its comprehensive surveys Luancheng County dis-
covered that the general presence of a firm plow sole in the soil stunted
the growth and development of the root system of the crops, blocked water
retention in the soil and affected the supply of nutrients and oxygen.

They also found that 98 percent of the soil was deficient in phosphorus
and that half of it lacked such trace elements as zinc.

4. They determined the direction of development. The comprehensive sur-
veys enabled the three counties to locate the causes of their ailments
and the cure, thus pointing out the direction for the development of
production in the future. The 10 suggestions made by Taoyuan County
after the comprehensive surveys possess an important significance in the
development of agricultural production.

5. They promoted scientific research and production. Based on the
preliminary results of the comprehensive surveys, Taoyuan County launched
reforms and experiments in eight aspects and achieved remarkable results.
Compared with 1978, its 1979 grain output increased by 19.43 million jin.
cotton by 27,000 dan, oilbearing seed by almost 3,200 don, the output
value of livestock by almost 4.2 million yuan, the output value of com-
mune and brigade industries by 25 million yuan, and the average income
per capita of the commune members by more than 20 yuan, bringing the
total income per capita to 110 yuan.

6. They spread scientific knowledge and trained technical personnel.

The comprehensive survey is a great school. In the process of surveying,
a group of local technical backbone elements was trained; this sowed the
seed and trained the personnel for generally launching natural resource
surveys and agricultural regional division work in the provinces, pre-
fectures and counties. The comprehensive survey team also served as a
propaganda team to spread science and technology. wherever it went, by
means of forums, lectures and joint surveys and analyses, it raised the
level of scientific knowledge of the cadres and masses and enabled them
to understand the significance of preserving the ecological balance, the

41
effect of soil surveys. the utilization of light. etc., thus producing a
great pronotive effect on agricultural nodernization in the future.

As shown by practice, coaprehensive surveys of natural resources consti-
tute an indispensable basic task for realizing agricultural moderniza-
tion. Only when such work is performed properly will we be able to
fornulate an overall plan for agricultural nodernization, and only then
will we be able to base our planning on a reliable scientific founda-
tion.

(III)

After coqleting the cowrehemive surveys of natural resources. we met
fully apply the results and march toward agricultural nodernization in
depth and range. Based on the conditions of the base comties, the
application of the results of the surveys included the following main
aspects:

1. Formulating overall plans for agricultural aoderniration with the
results of the cmmheuive surveys as the scientific basis: The short-
tern plans should be relatively concrete, while for plans of a longer
range an outline nay be drawn first, to be substantiated according to
future conditions.

2. Readjusting the layout of crops and gradually shifting toward the
regionalization and specialization of production in accordance with the
agricultural regional division: Judging fron the experiences of Bailun
County in acting according to the Inn of nature and the conditions of
the local areas, readjmting the crop layout will benefit the development
of agriculture. Naturally. production specialization requires a corre-
sponding production socialization. To introduce regionalization and
specialization of production we met adopt regulatory measures to insure
the supply of conndity grain to the economic crop, forestry and live-
stock regions. Heanwhile, we not break through the traditional influ-
ence of the self-sufficient small peasant economy and gradually larch
toward modernized large-scale agricultural production.

3. Reforming the cropping systen and the agricultural production struc-
ture according to the results of the comprehensive surveys: Based on

the survey results, 'l‘aoyuan County reduced the seeding area of "rice-
rice-wheat," increased the areas of "rice-rics-oil" [oilbearing crops]
and "ricrrice-fertilizer," experimented with "rice-oil, rice-wheat and
rice-fertiliser," the three kinds of crop rotational system, stopped
plundering the soil of its fertility and changed to the cropping systea
of cultivation and building the soil, made the soil even more fertile and
consistently harvested high yields. Taoyuan County also released 2.4
million jin from the emergency grain reserve in order to return more than
60,000 nu of farnland to the forest. introduced the integration of farm-
ing, forestry and animal husbandry and promoted the ecological balance.

62
It also vigorously pursued the breeding industry, developed livestock and
promoted the general development of farming, forestry. animal husbandry,
sideline production and fishery.

6. Gradually attaining layout regionalization, production specialization,
processing mechanization and quality standardization of seeds according
to the results of the comprehensive surveys: With the county seed com-
pany as the seed supply unit, the base counties are striving to introduce
all improved varieties within a year or two and to rapidly create the
seed system of “4-modernization l—scpply." As proved by the practice of
the base counties. introducing improved varieties requires very little
money but produces great benefits. i.e., there is a big profit with a
small investment.

5. Concretely handling methane production to solve the rural fuel supply
problem: According to a computation made by Luancheng County in the
coaprehensive surveys, the stalks of the various crops in 1978 totaled
342 million jin. If such stalks were used as feed and processed by

fermentation, alkalization and nmmoniation to raise their feed value,
the potentials for developing such herbivores as cattle, sheep and
rabbits would be great. Some 1&8 million jin of the total could be used
for hog feed, sufficient for 290,000 head; 135 million jin could be used
for cattle and sheep feed, sufficient for 19,000 head of meat (dairy)
cattle or 95,000 head of meat (dairy) sheep; 58.86 million jin could be
used for large animal feed, sufficient for 11,000 head of horses, mules
and donkeys. To attain this goal, we must develop methane and solve the
rural fuel problem in order to release the stalks now used for fuel for
animal feed. Utilizing methane is a revolution in the history of rural
fuel. Using stalks as firewood utilizes only the energy, while the
organic matters are lost; returning them to the soil utilizes only the
organic matters, while the energy is lost. By promoting methane we
utilize both the energy and the organic matters of the stalks; it is the
repeated utilization of energy. If, like promoting gas in the city,
promoting methane in the rural areas is considered a part of moderniza-
tion, a great change will occur in the rural appearance. In addition,
the qualified areas must also develop small hydroelectric stations and
utilize the energy from the sun and the wind and solve the rural energy
problem in multiple ways.

Currently the base counties are in the process of launching surveys on
coordinating agriculture. industry and commerce. After comprehensive
surveys and studies they will formulate concrete and feasible programs
and, upon approval, introduce the combined operation of agriculture.
industry and commerce. This is also an important content of their agri-
cultural modernization. Coordinating agriculture, industry and commerce
means linking agricultural production with the processing, shipping and
marketing of farm products and the supply of agricultural production
means and making them into an organic whole for a combined operation.

This is the necessary path for China's high-speed development of

43
agricultural production. Only thus will the problem of funds and the
placement of the labor force in agricultural modernization be solved
relatively rapidly.

Judging from the countries of the world which have already realized
agricultural modernization, we find that coordinating agriculture.
indmtry and comerce is an inevitable tendency in the development of
history. It is the inevitable result of the development of production
and the increased exchange of counodities. as well as an iaportsnt
component of agricultural modernization. It is particularly urgent for
China to introduce the coordination of agriculture. industry and consrce.

An extremely coupler issue, the coordination of agriculture, industry
and comrce involves the reform of. the rural economic structure and the
economic management net. of the state. The key issue is to let the
comm handle the processing of a part of the agricultural and side-
line products. the small industrial and lining enterprises and rural
commerce, so that it will have some reserve and acquire the capacity for
expanded reproduction in order to realise modernisation by self-
revitalization.

Agricultural modernization requires a tremendous effort from the entire
party. The Academy of Sciences, under the guidance of the party Central
Committee and the State Council. is determined to develop the influence
of its mltiple academic subjects and multiple eras of service and
strive to contribute to agricultural aodernisation.

6080
C80: 6001.

Mo
TAKE COMPREHENSIVE MEASURES T0 SOLVE THE PROBLEM OF URBAN HOUSING
Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 27-28

[Article by Hang Changsheng [3769 7022 0581]]

[Text] He completely agree with the viewpoint expressed in the article
by Comrade Su King [5685 2502]. "How To Solve the Housing Problem More
Quickly?" published in RED FLAG No 2 this year and wish to develop
extensive discussion of this problen in order to explore a path suitable
for housing construction in our country.

To solve our urban housing problem as soon as possible is the canon.
urgent demand of the vast ranks of employees and workers. Summing up
pest experience and responding to the actual situation at present, we
are of the opinion that we can solve this problem lore rapidly only by
taking measures of "comprehensive treatment“ in approaching it in a
versatile manner-by emphasizing both new construction work and mainte-
nance and management, by paying attention to reforming both the existing
housing construction management system and the existing housing rental
system.

Give Pull Play to the Initiative of the State, the Locality, the Enter-
prise and the Individual and Build More Housing

First of all, ours is a socialist state; the purpose of developing pro-
duction is to satisfy people's needs in their material and cultural life.
Housing is one of the basic conditions in people's life; the state should
take the solution of the housing problem as seriously as it does the
solution of the feeding and clothing problems. At present, food grain
quotas and cloth rationing coupons are provided for urban residents, so
that they are guaranteed supplies in these aspects, but the contradiction
in housing alone renains outstanding in a serious way. He hope the state
will list housing construction as a special heading, include it in the
long-range plan as well as fiscal year plans of the national economy,
establish a reasonable investment ratio for housing construction accord-
ing to the law of planned proportionate development of the national
econosy, and proceed in an orderly manner to carry out construction work,

45
so that old debts in this regard can be paid up more rapidly and no new
debts will be incurred.

Next, we must give full play to the initiative of the enterprises, so
that they will build more housing. Can we not consider, for instance,
enabling the industrial and cos-imitation enterprises to gradually solve
the problem of providing construction capital for the housing of their
employees and workers through fund-raising program of their own? This
is something which is not only necessary but also possible. Solution of
the housing problem of the employees and workers must be closely combined
with efficient enterprise management so as to permit more spacious and
finer housing for those ewloyees and workers whose enterprises have
achieved better productivity, earned more profits and made greater con-
tributions. According to available statistics. capital raised by enter-
prises for their own housing construction in 192 cities amounted to 1.54
billion yuan in 1979. and this sum made up one-third of the total invest-
ment in housing construction by these cities; this outcome illustrates
that this is an important approach to accelerating housing construction.
Along with the expansion of enterprise autonomy from now on, the poten-
tial in this regard should become even greater.

Third. we must actively encourage individuals to buy or build their own
housing. This is one way to solve the housing problem in the cities.

and it should be made an inortent policy of the state. He must explicitly
prescribe that property rights to all housing bought or built by indi-
viduals belong to then and are protected by law so as to mobilize the
enthusiasm of individuals among the masses to build their own housing.

In view of the experience of the peasants in building their own housing
through self-reliance and considering the fact that fixed-term savings

in the country's cities and towns now amount to more than 20 billion yuan.
it appears that organizing individuals to buy or build their own housing
is quite feasible. Huxi Municipality has built a total of 2.54 million
square meters of housing during the past 30 years. 0.83 million square
meters of which, or 32 percent of the total, were built by private indi—
viduals. Relongjiang Province's individually built housing in 1979
amounted to 0.61 million square meters. Both are persuasive exswlee.

The way to organize individuals to build their own housing should be
versatile and flexible so as to adapt to the needs of different objectives.

One approach would be for the state to put up the investment, build the
housing and then sell it to inlividuals on the basis of building costs;
the individuals could pay for it all at once or in installments. Another
way would be for relevant departments of a city to gsc"er the scattered
capital of individuals, build the housing in a centrally planned manner
and then "divide it among them according to their original capital con-
tributions." A third approach would be to open housing construction
savings accounts and, on a voluntary basis, encourage those employees and
workers who need housing and who at the same time have the economic means
to participate in housing construction savings program; capital from
this source can then be applied to the construction of housing, the

66
establishment of construction material factories and the development of
collectively formed working forces. When a participant's savings reach
a given amount, he would be entitled to buy his residence, or a relevant
portion of the housing built could then be allocated to him on a priority
basis, with attendant rentals as his repayment into the savings capital.
And a fourth way would be to allow individuals to build their own housing
in small cities and towns, but they must conform to the requirements of
urban regulations and obtain advance approval.

The development of private housing construction should facilitate the
concentration of floating capital and reduce the burden of the state;

it should help the euployees and workers to run their households with
industry and frugality, accumulate capital and inrove their residential
conditions through their own efforts; it should facilitate the develop-
ment of production of crnstruction materials and the placement of
unenloyed youths; and it should help recall surplus currency and reduce
the pressure on supply in the market. All authorities concerned should
actively support such a measure.

In housing construction work at present a shortage of steel products,

ludaer and cement supplies is an acute problem; if we want to accelerate
housing construction, we mat do all we can to solve the problem of find-
ing the source of such supplies. The main solutions are increasing pro-

duction and practicing economy. He should mobilize the relevant units
to actively increase the production of steel products, lumber and cement
supplies for construction use. we must seriously take inventory of our
warehouses to make as much use as possible of our stockpiled resources;
some of them may be processed and changed so that they can be converted
from unsuitable to appropriate materials for inediate use. At the same
time we must improve our designing work, enforce control over the con-
suqtion of materials at construction sites, minimize losses, preclude

waste and endeavor to use the same amount of supplies to build more
housing.

Reform the Existing Housing Construction System and House Rental System

Doing things according to economic laws is the fundamental way to solve
the housing problem more rapidly. The existing system takes housing as
a welfare arrangement; it is therefore built with state investment and
allocated to the employees and workers as their residence with a small
rental collected from them; in reality this is a "quasi-free supply

system." Under such a system the state must invest large amounts of

capital each year without being able to recover them, thus incurring a

heavy burden upon itself. If housing is regarded as a co-nodity, then,
like an industrial product, it can be sold once it is built; thus the

investment is recovered and a certain profit is made. This way the

reproduction of housing can be expanded on the one hand, and the state's
economic burden can be reduced on the other.

57
Since housing falls in the category of commodities, it should be managed
as such. But under the existing law rental system the rentals collected
are not sufficient to even cover maintenance expenses. According to
statistics of 192 cities, a yearly average of only slightly over 1 yuan
in rent has been collected for each square meter of construction space,
whereas at least 1.2 yuan would be required for maintenance expenses for
the same space. Because of low rents, 50 percent of existing housing

is not properly repaired and maintained. If we manage it as commodity,
then the component factors of house rental should include depreciation
costs, maintenance costs, management costs, rent and interest; under such
circumstances. it would be possible to maintain the reproduction of
housing and achieve "maintaining a house with its own rental income."

Perhaps some people will say that our present production level is rela-
tively low; even if such production is further developed heueafter, a
citizen's average income will still not be very high, and we still cannot
adopt a system of high salaries; hence, it is unrealistic to readjust
house rentals. This consideration is offered, however, merely from the
standpoint that the burden of the employees and workers should not be
increased. He think that managing housing with economic means is the
fundamental way to solve the housing problem; reform of the existing
rental system is something that must be done. Re have conceptualized a
way to accommodate the interests of both sides: one is to calculate
house rental according to maintenance costs, management costs and
depreciation costs. with rent and interest exempted; the financial or
business unit concerned would subsidize the difference between the new
rental and the existing rental; the other way is to calculate the

rental according to the above-mentioned factors of the rental structure
and require the occupant to pay it himself. In order not to increase the
burden of the employees and workers, we may refer to the auxiliary food
subsidy method and formulate a housing rental subsidy scheme after
thorough investigation and study. Relatively speaking, under the former
approach the state would provide a smaller subsidy, but the subsidy can-
not be recovered; this subsidy is also offered in a hidden way and does
not directly concern the masses. The rental each family must pay each
month accounts for only a very small proportion of its income; hence it
often demands more housing and thereby aggravates the contradiction
between housing supply and demand. Under the latter approach the state
would provide a larger subsidy, but the subsidy can be recovered, and it
is also offered explicitly. The occupant must thus make some calcula-
tions regarding ways to economize: a family occupying less space would
enjoy some surplus, whereas a family occupying more space would suffer a
shortage, since the "housing subsidy" would be insufficient and it would
have to pay more from its wages. This way there is encouragement to not
waste housing space, and the system would also be more reasonable.

48
There Is Need To Enforce House Management and Maintenance

An iwortant question in house management work is to allocate housing
reasonably by apportioning limited space first of all to families lacking
housing or short of housing. Housing utilization standards and regula-
tions nust be formulated. Pertinent readjust-eats must be made in the
case of those who occupy too much space, or progressive rental charges
should be made for portions exceeding the prescribed limits. While
urgent efforts are being made to build new housing, existing housing
should also be maintained well. so that the term of utilization can be
prolonged and natural depreciation reduced: this would be equivalent to
building more new housing. 0n the premise of not affecting any existing
urban planning, limited construction efforts should also be considered,

as expanding housing from existing space is also a good measure of
expediency to alleviate housing contradictions.

To sun up, we must take comprehensive measures to solve the housing
problen. He must correctly handle the relationship between production
and our livelihood. ‘l'he inrovement of housing conditions and raising

of our housing level mat be handled on the basis of the development of
our production. housing construction requires large quantities of capi-
tal and construction materials such as steel products, lunber and cenant
supplies; we must have an abundant material base. We mat actively handle
our four modernizations work well, make a go of our production and create
beneficial conditions for building more housing.

9255
C80: 10006

69
GROSS INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT VALUE All) NET OUTPUT VALUE
Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 29-30. 35
[Article by Zhang Yinghua [1728 5391 5678]]

[Text] The coqautation and use of the quota for industrial output value
is an inortant problen in industrial planning and business administra-

tion.

Since the founding of the People's Republic we have been using the fac-
tory method to coapute the gross industrial output value in our planning
and statistical work. The factory aethod takes a factory as a counting
unit to reflect production achievesents. The gross output value of a
factory is the sun total of the various products produced multiplied by
the producer's price for each product. The gross output value of a
factory consists not only of the value of finished products (including
aetainanufactured products on sale) but also of the value of industrial
processing done on contract for other factories (repair of indmtrial
products and the processing of naterials. parts and senifinished
products brought in by other factories) and the increased value at the
end of a given period as comared with that at the beginning of that
period of seainanufsctured products and products which take a longer
period of tine to finish. As a unit of value, the gross output value

consists of three different coqonenta: (1) The value of raw mterials,
fuel. power and fixed assets consuned during production; (2) the wage and
welfare fund of staff and workers; and (3) profit fros sales and tax.

This means that gross output value consists of the converted value of the
scans of production and value newly created by workers. At present,
industries and enterprises of all sizes at various localities and the
depart-ants of industry lust periodically cowuts their gross output value
according to a unifora procedure prescribed by the state and report the
results through channels to the responsible depart-eats and the general
statistics departaents so that composite reports can be prepared.

Judging fron years of experience, gross output value, which reflects the

develop-ant and changes in industrial production as well as interdepart-
nent and intradepartnent exchange of products, provides an important basis

50
for the study of such economic factors as the speed of development of
production and the ratio between labor productivity and the national
economy. The couputation of gross output value is cooperatively simple.
It can be done within a short time by any economic agency, be it an
enterprise at the grassroots or any economic administrative organ at

any level. But the quota for gross output value can very easily breed
abuses.

First of all. let us look at the internal relations of the national
economy. Since some departments or enterprises have to use the products
of other departments or enterprises as raw materials, the former are
likely to include a part or the entire gross output value of the latter
as transferred value in their own gross output value. This kind of
overlapping cosputation occurs more frequently in industry, heavy indus-
try and processing industry than in agriculture, light industry and
industry turning out finished products directly from raw materials. This
cannot accurately reflect the ratio of relations between industry and
agriculture and within industry. But overlapping cowutations are
unavoidable as the economy and technology develop and the social divi-
sions of labor multiply.

Secondly, as the gross output value of individual enterprises computed by
the factory method contains are transferred value of the means of pro-
duction, the greater the transferred value, the greater will be the gross
output value. This can lend to :- nunber of problem. If an enterprise
seeks only to boost the value of its products, it will try to use more
raw materials and might even try to use more expensive raw materials and
manufactured products which cost more to produce. If it is interested
only in fulfilling the quota for gross output value, it will want to
produce only standard and popular products which do not take too much
labor and will not want to spend too such time producing improved new
products. Thus, it produces the wrong kind of products, overstocking the
market with products not in demand and creating a shortage of goods in
acute demand. There also are enterprises which practice fraud. They
often ask other enterprises to manufacture parts which they are capable
of manufacturing and buy them back at a price below par for assembly.

But these parts are comuted at a price at or above par in their gross
output value. Sometimes they emit much more rm! material to production
at the end of each month and increase the amount of products being manu-
factured. Thus, the gross output value of these enterprises does not
accurately represent the economic efficiency of their operations. In the
days of the "gang of four," who did not observe the objective law of
economics, the quotas for gross output value were an unreasonable that
the' industries felt pressured to resort to any practice to meet the quota.
Hhen this became impossible to fulfill, they simply rigged their output
value. This erroneous practice still persists to a certain degree in a
nuber of localities.

51
To overcome the abuses associated with quotas for gross output val'-e,

it is suggested that quotas for net output value might be a be" r basis
for assessing the achievement and rate of growth of industrial production
and a yardstick for measuring the business administration >f all enter-
prises.

Net output value is the monetary equivalent of the new value created by
an industry. It is the remainder of gross output value after deducting
raw materials, fuel. power and depreciation of fixed assets. Viewed as
a measure of distribution, net output value stands for the tax an enter-
prise pays to the state, profits, the wage and welfare fund of staff and
workers, the production reserve fund and interest paid to banks. There
are two methods of calculating net output value. One method is the pro-
duction method, which obtains net output value by deducting directly from
the gross output value the transferred value of the means of production
used in the process of production. This is a more accurate but compli-
cated method of conutation. Moreover, the fact that many enterprises
are so weak in aanagement and do not have cowlete financial and cost
data further cmlicates the procedure. The other method is the distri-
bution method, which obtains net output value by adding up the total
amount of the wage and welfare fund of staff and workers. the production

reserve fund, profit from sale of products, tax and interest paid to
banks.

Quotas based on net output value are better than those based on gross
output value for the following reasons:

First, they reflect more accurately the production activities and
achievements of an enterprise. because the transferred value of the

means of production is not included. If labor productivity is comuted
according to net output value, the labor efficiency of the enterprise
can be more accurately assessed and easily cowared with other enter-
prises of the same kind.

Second. profit constitutes a major portion of net output value. If com-
modity prices are stable. an enterprise seeking to increase its net out-
put value must practice austerity, reduce consultation of raw mteriels,
fuel and power and increase production in order to earn more profit.
This is conducive to more effective economic accounting, ilproved busi-
ness administration and enhanced economic efficiency.

Third, as for products which take equal amounts of raw material, those
of higher quality of course require better technology and more labor.
When production achievements are expressed in term of net output value,
it is more direct to show that high-quality products are higher in value
than ordinary products. They yield greater profit and encourage the
enterprises to produce higher quality goods.

52
Fourth, the value newly created by an enterprise is distributed to a
number of sectors, a part as profit and tax paid to the state, a part
retained as the production reserve fund, and another part as the wage and
welfare fund of staff and workers. As net output value is the monetary
equivalent of the value newly created by an enterprise, if its production
achievements are calculated in terms of net output value, it will be
easier to assess its business achievements, its distribution ratios and
its contribution to the state's capital accumulation.

In a word, the use of quotas for net output value could overcome the
unavoidable shortcomings of quotas for gross output value. Now, as the
party Central Committee is rallying all enterprises to pursue more
actively the four modernizations and to overhaul our economic system as
a whole, the use of quotas for net output value is even more meaningful
and practical.

Of course, no economic quota system is perfect. The use of net output
value cauld run into difficulties, too. First of all, since profit is
the core of net output value, when comedity prices are irrational, an
enterprise interested solely in the pursuit of profit might want to
produce products which yield higher profit than those urgently required
by the state. This would upset the schedule of industrial products
planned by the state. When commodity prices are stable, the same enter-
prise might try to do shoddy work and use inferior material in order to
earn more profit, thus lowering the quality of products. Moreover, net
output value represents only the newly created Vu.ae of one enterprise
or department instead of the total value of all products. This quota
alone can reflect neither the exchange of products between any two units
nor the ratio of economic relations between different categories of
products within individual enterprises. Furthermore, the computation of
net output value requires comparatively complete financial and cost
accounting, and the computation procedure is complicated. Any delay by
a grassroots enterprise in its report to the higher authorities would
affect the timely control over the progress of production by the higher
responsible authority. But practice and experience would solve these
problems one by one. For instance, the use of quotes for net output value

could be accompanied by quotas for specific products in kind to prevent
unrestrained changes in the direction of production. The quotas for gross
output value could be retained to stop shoddy work, the use of inferior
material and the lowering of product quality and help the planning and
statistical authorities to prepare composite averages. On top of all
these, an overall assessment of other quotas would offer a basis for comr
parison. At present, since a considerable number of enterprises do not
have sound cost statistics, it is advisable not to push hard for the use
of net output value as a basis for quotas. It takes time to work out the
system. The best way is to make preparations for putting it into practice,
along with reform of the administration of the economy as a whole.

5360
C50: 4004

53
SERIOUSLY STUDY THE HORLD 8W AND PROM CHINA’S POUR HODBRMZATIONS
Beijing RBD FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 31-35
[Article by Qian Junrui [6929 0193 3863]]

[Text] China has entered a new period of development. The general line
and general task of our party and state in this era is to unite. be of
one heart and one mind and advance bravely toward the magnificent goal
of the four modernization. Us are carrying out the four modernizations
in a world filled with contradictions and intense struggles, and we need
a peaceful environment. Therefore, one of our vital tasks in inter-
national affairs is to oppose heg'emnism and safeguard world peace. We
aust develop foreign econonic relations on the basis of equality and
mutual benefit, learn and draw on the useful experiences of other coun-
tries for reference in carrying out the four eodernizations, make proper
use of foreign capital and energetically introduce advanced technology
under the logical preaise of relying on our own efforts. All these
things require us to conscientiously and proqtly acquire a penetrating
insight into the world economy and political situation and thoroughly
study the new conditions and probleam in the present world economy in
order to adroitly provide guidance according to circumstances, males
foreign things serve China and effectively promote our country's four
modernizations.

The world economy is a historical concept. It is a product of the capi-
talist form of production. Although there were relations of commodity

exchange in the long period of slave and feudal societies, these inter-
national relations of exchange could only be of a limited, regional and

fortuitous nature because of the low productive forces. Only after the
Industrial Revolution did a real world msrket come into being. Following
the development of the international division of labor, the utilization
of world currencies and the expansion of the enport of capital, a unified
world economy began to take shspr on the basis of the world market. It
was not until capitalise developed into monopoly capitalism that a uni-
fied world economy eventually materialized. The world economy of this
period was a completely capitalist one. It was also a unified, all-
enbracing world economy wholly dominated by the capitalist form of pro-
duction.

5/.
The formation of a capitalist world economy played a great progressive
role in the development of human society. It eliminated the state of
isolation between nations and countries and opened up a broad road for
the flourishing development of the worlc's material production and
exchange of science and culture. It also greatly promoted the inter-
nationalization of economic relations and prepared material prerequisites
for setting up a unified world socialist economic system.

The victory of the Great October Revolution founded the first socialist
state--the Soviet Union--and opened up a new era in the history of san-
kind. From then on the world economy entered a new historical period:

the transition period from a unified capitalist world economy to a uni-
fied socialist and communist world economy. In this period, as Stalin
pointed out in his political report of the Central Committee to the 16th
CPSU Congress: "Capitalism is no longer the only all-embracing world
economic system; apart from the capitalist economic system, there is also
the socialist system." ("Collected Works of Stalin," Vol 12, p 216) These
two economic systems not only coexist but are in opposition to each other.
This will be a long and tortuous historical period filled with unprece-

dentedly violent struggles and a period of revolutionary changes of great
historical significance. We are in this kind of transition period. As the
inevitable result of the development of the world's material production,
the socialist economic system will ultimately triumph over the capitalist
economic system throughout the world; consequently, the world economy in
which both systems coexist will change into a united, all-embracing
socialist and communist world economy that is infinitely bright. pros-
perous and happy. Only then can mankind begin to write its own history
with complete awareness. This historical trend of the world economy is
the objective law governing the development of human social production,
independent of man's will.

This transition period of the world economy may be divided into two
stages. The first covers the period from the victory of the October
Revolution to world War II. What are the special features of the world
economy at this stage?

1. The fundamental change in the nature and pattern of the world economy.
The world economy is no longer a united, all-embracing capitalist world
economy but a transitory unity of contradictions in which the two opposing
systems of capitalism and socialism coexist at the same time. In the
international economic relations of this time, in addition to the mutual
contention and collaboration among the inerialist countries and the old
economic relations of exploited and exploiting between imperialist coun-
tries and colonial and semicolonial countries, there appeared the inter-
dependence and mutual struggle between the socialist Soviet Union and the
imperialist countries and the new economic relations of equality, mutual
benefit and cooperation between them and the weaker small countries.

55
2. The development and growth of the socialist economic system. Under
the leadership of Lenin and Stalin. the Soviet people realized that the
industrialization of the state and the collectivization of agriculture
emancipated social productive forces. developed rapid economic develop-
ment and labor productivity, greatly improved the level of material

and cultural life and gave play to the superiority of the socialist
system. After several 5-year plans from 1928 to 19b0, the Soviet national
income increased 4.1 times, industrial output value 5.5 times and agricul-
tural output value 30 percent. The speed of these developments far
exceeded that of the capitalist economic system of that time.

3. The upheaval and decline of the capitalist economic system. World
War I and the emergence of the Soviet socialist system in particular
camed the capitalist system to go through a period of general crises

for which there was no cure. At that time the capitalist system became
more decadent. and various contradictions became more acute. The economy
of the capitalist world went through recovery, crisis (1920-1921), rela-
tive stability, general crisis (1929-1933) and special depression and
crisis (1937-1938) until the outbreak of World War 11. During this period
the colonial and senioolonial countries bore the heaviest economic exploi-
tation and burden. which caused their national democratic revolutionary
movement to gather momentum daily.

World War ll was the inevitable outcome of the contradictions between the
capitalist countries and the unprecedented intensification of contradic-
tions between the imperialist and socialist countries on the basis of the
capitalist general crisis. The final result of World War II greatly
weakened the foundation of capitalist imperialism. greatly improved the
socialist position and gave rise to a number of developing countries.
Thus, the world economy entered the second stage of the transition period.
We are in this period now. What are its special features?

After the war the capitalist general crisis further deepened. The social-
ist economic system further developed and strengthened but also experienced
and is experiencing serious setbacks. A new situation of unprecedented,
cowlex interdependence. interpermeation and mutual struggle has appeared
between the socialist and capitalist economic systems. The eurgsnce and
development of Third World countries has made them the principal target

for the exertion of influence and contention between the two systems.

Under this basic condition, many new conditions and problem have

appeared in the world economy.

First. let a talk about the capitalist econouc system. We should see
that at the moment the capitalist economic system still occupies the domi-
nant position in the world economy. After a period of recovery and read-
justment following World War II, the principal capitalist countries of the
world went through a period of rapid economic growth in the 1950's and
1960's. At that time the growth rate of such countries as Japan and West
Germany set the highest record in capitalist history. In spite of this,

56
the general crisis of capitalism continued to deepen, and periodic
crises continued to appear. The most serious postwar economic crisis of
a worldwide nature broke cut in 1976-1975. After the economy had slowly
recovered, a new form of depression appeared. Economic stagnation or
slow growth, serious inflation and high unenployment combined to bring
about a new situation of "stagnation" or "recession growth." This sit-
uation could continue for a long time. Naturally, economic crises of a
worldwide nature could appear in between, and there is also the possi-
bility of faster economic growth for individual countries at a given time.
In this way the cycle of capitalist production tends to shorten, and
crises and depressions tend to multiply and continue.

The international bourgeoisie has long experience in domination. To pro-
long the life of the capitalist system, it adopted all sorts of means to
adjust the existing capitalist relations of production so that they can,
within certain limits, adapt to the needs of the development of productive
forces. The major policies and measures taken by the international
monopoly capitalists at present are as follows:

1. The inplementation of state monopoly capitalism. This is s new stage
in the development of monopoly capitalism. They closely combine monopoly
capital with the bourgeois state machinery and, by means of state inter-
vention (including planning, nationalization, credit, taxation, finance
and increased military orders). control and adjust every link of domestic
and international economic life to achieve the goal of earning the highest
profit for monopoly capital. At the same time, for the sake of contending
for world markets, while vigorously enforcing the concentration of capital
they have at the same time paid attention to giving play to the special
features of the adaptability of medium and small enterprises, raised the
levels of their administration and technology and promoted "intermediate
crafts" or small but exacting crafts of a very flexible nature. 0n the
other hand, the major enterprises themselves have generally practiced the
strategic policy of diversification and set up a succession of cosposite
and joint enterprises to increase their own competitiveness in the inter-
national market.

2. Going in for a range of bourgeois reforms: "welfare society."
"people's capitalism" and the "humane market economy." For the sake of
mitigating bourgeois contradictions and safeguarding the capitalist
system. they energetically promoted all sorts of reformist methods such
as "high wages" and "high consumption," encouraged the workers to buy
shares, allowed worker representatives to participate in enterprise
management, presented gifts to workers on New Year's and holidays and
permitted worker representatives to take part in the formulation of
economic plans and even economic policies, consultations about wages
between management and worker unions and increased profits and income
tax. The development of capitalism to the stage of imaerialism has
indeed entered its senile and dying period. However, the capitalists
are definitely not reconciled to their doom. They are still waging a

57
dying struggle, making certain partial readjustments in the relations of
production and the superstructure and. like an old man taking tonic,

trying to preserve a certain degree of vitality.

3. Paying close attention to scientific and technological developments.
After the war the developed countries relied mainly on new breakthroughs

in science and technology to increase labor productivity and speed up
economic development. The governments and enterprises of these countries
put large amounts of manpower and funds into departments of scientific
research and development. Scientists. engineers. technicians and economists
often become important government officials and leading forces within
enterprises. They will use modern scientific methods and computers to
forecast economic development, production and the level of consumption in
the latter part of the 20th century and the early part of the 2lat century.
trial-develop new products for the year 2000 or further ahead and strive
to seize the initiative and control the world market.

4. The further internationalization of capital and the adoption of a new
form of infiltration of the Third World by international monopoly capital.
Transnational corporations have gradually become the organizational form
of the internationalization of capital and monopolize the economic life-
line of the greater part of the world. Faced with the powerful pressure
of the demands of developing countries for economic independence and for
the establishment of a new international economic order, the developed
countries adopted a policy of making limited concessions and allowing the
developing countries a certain degree of development in their national
economy. and they used this to safeguard their international domination.
It is precisely against this kind of background and in addition to the
struggle of the developing countries that many international economic
organizations have been set up and international economic relations
greatly developed. The amalgamation of the capitalist economies into a
single body has developed a stage further, whereas the growth of the
recently coalesced democratic economies of the Third Horld has, on the
one hand, strengthened the forces against hegemonism. imperialism and
colonialism and. on the other, developed into a part of the reserve force
of the world's capitalist economic system.

Second. let us talk about the socialist economic system.

After World War II. on the basis of the victory of the war against
fascism and the protracted struggle of the peoples of various countries,
China and other socialist countries were born. This greatly strengthened
the power of the socialist economic system and enabled it to more effec-
tively contend with the capitalist economic system. These socialist
countries generally developed their national economy as well as their

science and culture with greater speed. Take China. for example.

Despite many reverses, especially the serious sabotage caused by Lin Bias
and the "gang of four.“ if we take the overall situation into considera-
tion, the rate of our economic development has still been faster than

58
that of Many capitalist countries. From 1952 to 1975 the average annual
output value of our industry increased by more than 11 percent. Compared
with 1969. grain output in 1978 increased 1.7 tines and cotton 3.9 times.
In 1979 the fixed assets of enterprises owned by the whole people reached
320 billion yuan, the equivalent of 25 times the fixed industrial assets
accumulated by old China in nearly a century. The other socialist coun-
tries have also shown a faster rate of development, with a marked improve-
ment in the living standard of the pe0p1e.

However, important changes and complications have appeared in the socialist
economic system in the last 20 years. Following the rise to power of the
Khrushchev-Brezhnev clique, the first socialist country, the Soviet Union
founded by Lenin, degenerated into a social imperialist country that
internally oppresses the people and the minority nationalities and
externally contends for hegemony and wantonly carries out invasion and
expansion. Its ambition for world domination far exceeds that of the old
tears. and it has become the most dangerous source of a new world war.
This is causing great harm to the socialist economic system and to the
cause of progress of all mankind. The world's socialist camp no longer
exists. Under the instigation, utilization and support of Soviet hege-
moniam, Cuba and Vietnam have practiced mercenary hegemonism and regional
hegemonism to invade and menace socialist and developing countries. Most
unfortunately, for the sake of realizing their sinister design to usurp
party and state power and restore capitalism in China, Lin Bias and the
“gang of four" went on a rampage for 10 years, practiced feudal fascism
in a big way and almost brought our socialist economy to the brink of
collapse. These bad events greatly damaged the lofty prestige of social—
ism among the world's people. However, they were only of short duration
in the long river of history. Following the heightening of consciousness
among the people, these events will eventually be washed away by the
mighty current caused by the inexorable advance of history. The fact
that the Chinese people, under the wise and brilliant leadership of the

Chinese Communist party, smashed the "gang of four" in a single stroke
and are advancing with big strides on the road to restoring and develop-

ing the socialist cause and making splendid achievements is the most
convincing proof.

As mentioned above, in addition to the Soviet Union a number of other
socialist countries also appeared after Horld war 11. Under the leader-
ship of Stalin, the socialist economy of the Soviet Union was a highly
centralized economy planned in the order of heavy industry, light indus-
try and agriculture. This is one example. In the course of building
socialism, Yugoslavia under Tito practiced worker and socialist autonomy
which embodied great political and economic democracy. It attached more
importance to the market economy and at the same time gradually paid
attention to planning and adjustment. This is another example. China
at first completely copied the Soviet Union but later carried out certain
reforns. Korea and Romania also have their own unique experiences. He
must conscientiously compare and study all the experiences in socialist

S9
construction, learn from their strong points and avoid their shortcomings
to speed up our socialist modernization.

Finally, let us talk about the developing countries. These are the coun-
tries that have cast off the yoke of colonialism, semicolonialian and
dependency. They are the main force of the contemorsry era in the
struggle against hegemonism. iwerialism and colonialism. On the whole,
they may be divided into three categories and present a spectacle of big
in the niddle and small at both ends. One of the "ends" refers to the
developing socialist countries and the other to countries which still
depend on other foreign countries since their independence and which
have not really cast off their colonial and asmicolonisl status. The
so—called "middle" refers to the developing nationalist countries which
are in the majority. These countries usually have nationalists holding
power. with eaphasis placed on developing the national econony. They
are powerful allies of the international proletariat in the struggle
against hegemonism, inerialism and colonialism. These developing coun-
tries are relatively poor; some are still very poor. The gap between
then and the affluent countries is still widening. In the present in-
creasingly serious energy crisis and rat material shortage, some of these
countries have taken up all manner of weapons (such as petroleum and other
raw materials) to carry out an effective struggle against the developed
capitalist countries. The developing countries are uniting and working
hard to establish a new international economic order with the Group of 77
nations as the mainstay.

The above are the principal new contradictions and problems that have
appeared in the world economy since the war. He must carefully and
thoroughly study them, use the basic theory of Marxian for guidance,
always proceed from reality, coiine theory with reality and make a con-
crete analysis of concrete things to study these new conditions and
problems. as well as the new conditions and problems that will continue to
emerge in the future. Proceeding fron these constantly moving and chans-
ing realities, we must, by means of analytical study, raise them to the
plane of theory to develop and enrich our eldsting world economic theory
and use them in turn to guide our practice. For the sake of adapting to
this urgent need, we propose that. together with Maradst economists of
various countries in the world, we share in the arduous task of establish-
ing and developing Marxist world economics on the basis of the theories
of the writers of Marxist classics. The object of this new science of
world economics is to study the general pattern of production in the
world since the formation of the world economy. For the present this
nainly entails studying the for. of production of capitalism and social-
ism thenselves and their interrelations and the fetus and laws of their
movement in the world. The new conditions and problems of the world
economy aentioned above are isportant contents of the world economics we
are studying today. The establishment and development of Marxist world
economies will enable us to obtain guidance by more closely combining
reality with specialized theory in understanding and studying world

60
economic problems. so that we can better see through the appearance and
grasp the essence and main trend of the political and economic world
situation. At the same time. it will also help us when studying and
introducing the experiences of other countries in realising modernization
to inrove the quality of scientific achievements, so that they will play
an advisory and helping role when we make strategic policy decisions.

Our basic method for studying world economics and world economic problems
is materialist dialectics. At the same time, we lust analytically and

critically study the methods of the Western bourgeoisie in studying
international economics. such as the input and output method, mathemati-

cal economics. operations research. systems engineering and forecasting,
and assimilate their scientific contents to enrich and iqrove our own

methods. We must also use the Marxist stand. viewpoint and method to
transform them into our own scientific methodology. He should have this
aspiration, and this is what we met do. In this way we will enhance our
ability to understand and study the world economy.

C50: 10006

61
TEE SOCIALIST GADSB CANNOT SUCGBD “ITEM UNIT! OF BILL AND IRON
DISCIPLINE

Beijing RBI) FLAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 36-61
[Article by Dai Yun [2071 0061]]

[Text] Sixty years ago Lenin wrote "'beftwing' Commlsm, an Infantile
Disorder," explaining to the mists of all countries the basic
experiences of the Bolsheviks in withstanding all rigid tests at that
tins after assuming the reins of government. He elphatically pointed
out: "Absolute centralization and the strictest discipline of the pro-
letariat constitute one of the fundanentsl conditions for victory over
the bourgeoisie." (”Selected Works of Lenin," Vol 4. p 181) Today the
party Central Co-ittee stresses strengthening party building, improving
party leadership and heightening the party's fighting capacity to guaran-
tee the smooth progress of socialist nodernisation. Rereading this work
by Lenin will help us learn from the above experiences of the Bolsheviks

and gain new insights.
The Crux of Socialist Economic Construction

In this work Lenin first talked about the international significance of
certain fundanental features of the Russian Revolution. Indiately after
that, in the chapter entitled "One of the Pundauntal Conditions for the
Bolsheviks' Success," he straightforwardly pointed out: "‘me Bolsheviks
could not have naintained theuelvcs in power for 2 1/2 months, let alone
2 ll 2 years, unless the strictest. truly iron discipline had prevailed in
our party and unless the latter had been given the fullest and most
unreserved support of the whole mess of the working class, that is, of all
its thinking, honest, self-sacrificing and influential elenents who are
capable of leading or of carrying with then the bacbIard strata." Indeed.
we can just look back into history, put ourselves in the Russians' posi-
tion and think about the difficulties which the young Soviet republic
faced after the October Revolution: The people were exhausted by the
imperialist war during the preceding years, the moribund bourgeoisie was
nadly offering resistance, the Soviet state in this pressing situation
had to accept the extrenely harsh terns of a peace agreement with German

62
imperialism, and very soon after that there were the inerialist arned
intervention by the Entente countries and the counterrevolutionary
rebellion of the white Guards at home... Once we think about all this,
we can easily realize that each of the sentences Lenin wrote in this
work carried weight.

However. Lenin did not regard the maintenance of iron discipline merely
as a special requirement for winning the war at home. He repeatedly
emphasized the need to apply this experience to "a war without bloodshed,"
that is, peaceful construction. Before writing this work, that is, a
short time after the ninth congress of the Russian Comnist Party
(Bolshevik), he pointed out: "Not only the experience of the Red Army
and the experience of victory in the war at home, but also the more deep-
going things which are fundamentally connected with the tasks of exer-
cising the dictatorship of the working class, nuke us concentrate all our
attention as we did 2 years ago on the questions of labor discipline, that
is. on the crucial question concerning the entire socialist econonic con-
struction and the fundaeental question of how we should approach the
dictatorship of the proletariat." ("Speech Delivered at the Third All-
Russian Congress of Trade Union," "Collected Works of Lenin," Vol 30.

p 462)

Why is the question of discipline the crucial one concerning all social-
ist econoaic construction and the fundaeentai question of how we should
approach the dictatorship of the proletariat?

He can aux up Lenin's relevant writings during this period in the follow-
ing several points:

First, after the proletariat seizes political power in a socialist revolu-
tion, and after the task of expropriating the srploiters and suppressing
the resistance of the exploiters has been accolplished in the min, the
proletariat invariably faces a still more difficult and cowlicated task
of concentrating all forces on economic construction and creating a labor

productivity higher than that in a capitalist society. This is the most
inortant and nest essential thing guaranteeing the victory of the new

social system.

Second. socialise is a product of the machine-building industry. The
nachine-building industry invariably requires not only absolute obedience
to the unity of will of the leaders in the course of work, but also the
observance of the strictest discipline. This requirement is very
obvious, whether technically, economically or historically. However,
sone of the workers who have just shaken off the capitalist rule cannot
inedistely adapt themelves to the new situation. They lack the sense
of responsibility of being essters of their own affairs. Under these
circumstances. it is necessary to establish new labor discipline and a
new type of social relations between one man and another and to create a
new pattern and a new method which will draw nore people into the work.
This task will take many years and even a few decades to accouplish.

63
Third, the proletariat should not expel and suppress the peasants, who
account for the overwhelming majority of the country's population, as it
did the landlords and capitalists. It must form an alliance and build
socialism with then. However, on the one hand the peasants are laborers
and are willing to join the workers in advancing along the socialist
road; on the other hand they are private, sasll-conodity producers, and
small production often engenders spontaneous capitalist forces. At the
same time, being economically decentralized, the peasants lack the comma
basis which unites the proletariat in cities and factories. They are
incoapatible with the unity of will and iron discipline which are pre-
requisites to large-scale production. Socialism will then be iqossibls
if the conscious discipline of the proletariat cannot triumph over the
spontaneous petty-bourgeois anarchy.

Fourth. the dictatorship cf the proletariat not only aims at overthrowing
the bourgeoisie and the l-ndlords but also is "the guarantee for the labor
system, labor discipline, labor productivity, statistics and supervision
and the unprecedentedly consolidated Soviet govern-ant of the proletariat."
("All-Russian Conference of the Central Brecutive Connittee," "Collected
Works of Lenin," Vol 27, p 274) Lenin put the cultivation of new dis-
cipline on an equal footing with the suppression of the resistance of
exploiters. the civil war, the recruitment of remolded petty-bourgeois
elements and peasants and the use of bourgeois experts, and he listed
the: as the five most important new twice for the dictatorship of the
proletariat and five new forms of class struggle. He said: The general
slogan of the proletariat during the period of transition from the seizure
of political power to state manath and construction is: "Build iron
discipline, thoroughly exercise the dictatorship of the proletariat and
oppose the wavering of the petty bourgeoisie." (“Concerning the Six-
Point Program for the Current Tasks of the Soviet Government," "Collected
works of Lenin," Vol 27, p 293)

Fifth, for these reasons the proletarian political party "must be organized
in a highly decentralized way and enforce iron discipline in the fora of
military discipline within the party. The party Central Comaittee mat
hold extensive power. have the trust of all party mowers and bacon an
authoritative organ." ("Conditions for Joining the Co-aunist Inter-
national," "Selected Works of Lenin," Vol ’0, p 312) Only in this way

can the party perform its duty. correctly, effectively and triumphantly
play the role of an organizer and lead the proletariat and all workers to
smoothly build socialism.

Of course, we want conscious discipline. This does not deny inner-party
criticism and controversies and vivid democratic life within the party but
takes them as preconditions. Lenin drew up a famous definition of the
discipline of the workers‘ political party: "Unity of action, freedom of
discussion and criticism." ("Party Discipline and the Fight Against the
Pro-Cadet Social Democrats," "Collected Works of Lenin." Vol 11. p 301)

64
Are Lenin's assertions applicable to the current situation in our country?
He should say that our current situation is greatly different from the
situation in Russia soon after the October Revolution. Yet, Lenin's basic
viewpoints are still applicable tn our country‘s current situation. The
following two points alone can sufficiently explain the question.

First. Russia was then in the historical period of transition from civil
war to peaceful construction, whereas our country was founded three
decades ago. Our newly established discipline and unity withstood severe
tests, such as that during the 3 years of difficulties in the 1960's.

At that time, in response to an order, 20 million people went to the
countryside to overcome the tenporary difficulties. This was marvelous.
However, this iron discipline and unity was later seriously damaged by
Lin Disc and the "gang of four." At present, vestiges of a catastrophe
can be seen not only among the working aliases but above all within the
party. It can be seen not just at the grassroots levels but particularly
in some lending organs and many localities. It is aanifested in intol-
erable laziness, delay, confusion, low proficiency, a demoralized atti-

tude, unhealthy tendencies and other phenomena of lack of organisation
and discipline.

Second, the Chinese peasants differ from the Russian peasants in that they
have formed collectives which are steadily advancing along the socialist
road. Selecting a phrase or two from Lenin's works, the "theorists" of
bin Biao and the "gang of four" said that our country was an ocean of small
production which engendered capitalism and the bourgeoisie daily, hourly
and on a mass scale. This was conpletely unfounded nonsense. However,

our practice in the past three decades has proved this truth pointed out
by Lenin: "The transfer-nation of small peasants and the whole of their
psychology and habits takes a few generations to cmlete. This mention
concerning the small peasants cannot be solved and the whole of their
psychology strengthened until the material base and the techniques exist,
until tractors and machines have been used in large nuabers for agriculture
snd until electrification is realized on a large scale." ("Tenth Congress
of the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik)," "Collected Uorlts of Lenin,"
Vol 32, p 205) We have a relatively strong material and technical base,
but modernization in agriculture is needed to basically transform the
peasants and "the whole of their psychology and habits." At present the

habits of small producers which have been forned over the past centuries
are still exerting a foraidable force.

This shows that unity of will and iron discipline are the crux of our
country's socialist modernizations and the key to our correct approach
and adherence to the dictatorship of the proletariat.

Three Conditions for Maintaining Iron Discipline

However, Lenin pointed out: Knowing the utmost importance of strengthen-
ing discipline is not an inportant question, because. it can be easily

65
understood by "those who are unable to think or who have not had occasion
to ponder over this question"; the important question is that we “should
more frequently make a profound analysis of the reason why the Bolsheviks
were able to build up the necessary discipline of the revolutionary prole—
tariat." make clear "why they were able to build up and maintain the iron
discipline under very difficult conditions" and make clear the questions
of "how this discipline is maintained, how it is tested and how it is
reinforced.“ ("'Leftwing' Communism, an Infantile Disorder," “Selected
Works of Lenin," Vol b, p 181) Making these questions clear is of very
great significance in rectifying the style and strengthening the discipline
of our party.

After raising these questions. Lenin analyzed the necessary conditions in
Russian history which existed during the rise of Bolshevism. He gave this
answer "First, the class consciousness of the proletarian vanguard,

its devotion to the revolution, and its perseverance, self-sacrifice and
heroism existed. Second, its ability to link itself with, keep in close
touch with and, to a certain extent. merge with the broadest masses of
the toilers--primarily with the proletariat, but also with the nonprole-
tarian toiling masses—-existed. Third, correct political leadership
exercised by this vanguard and correct political strategy and tactics
which won the support of the broadest masses existed. without these
conditions, discipline in a revolutionary party which is really capable
of being the party of the advanced class and whose mission is to over-
throw the bourgeoisie and transform the whole of society cannot be
achieved. Without these conditions, all attempts to establish discipline
inevitably fall flat and end in phrase-angering and grimacing." (Ibid.,
pp 181-182) He also pointed out that these conditions could not be
created overnight but could only be formed through protracted efforts and
strenuous experiments.

Then what are the conditions for our party to restore and strengthen its
discipline?

To make it simple, I want to start with the third condition, that is, the
condition of party leadership. Indeed, as far as party leadership is
concerned, the correctness of the ideological and political line decides
everything. The unity of the whole party based on its ideological and
political line is the foundation for maintaining party unity and the pre-
condition for establishing really conscious discipline. This conformed
to the experience of the Bolsheviks. Our party's history also shows that
if the ideological and political line is wrong it will be very difficult
to maintain a correct organizational line, and it will be impossible to
really maintain discipline in the form of democratic centralism. Lin Biao
and the "gang of four" deliberately created and pushed an ultraleftist
line which basically betrayed the interests of the party and the people

and did serious harm organizationally. It destroyed democracy and cen-
tralism and freedom and discipline. After toppling Lin Biao and the "gang

of four," our party restored its fine tradition of seeking truth from facts

66
and reaffirmed its political line of achieving the four modernizations,
which is the Marxist line which has won the wholehearted support of the
900 million Chinese people and is the fundamental condition for strength-
ening discipline at present. Marked improvements have been made in party
style and discipline. which were impaired by Lin Biao and the "gang of
tour." This is because. first of all. the ideological and political lines
have been rectified. The correctness of the party's lines can be regarded
as the most fundamental guarantee for eliminating chaos and restoring
order which has developed during the past few years. Although there still
are many problems in inner-party political life and in party style and
discipline. wlth a correct line it is possible to solve the problems in
this connection. This is clearly laid down in the "Guiding Principles for
Inner-Party Political Life" recently promulgated by the party Central
Committee' "Adhering to the party's political line and ideological line

mentation of the party's line, principles and policies. The comrades
inside and outside the party are now very critical abOut the unhealthy
tendencies, such as bureaucracy and seeking privileges, among some lead-
ing cadres. In rectifying party style and discipline we must seriously
solve problems in this connection. because these unhealthy tendencies
seriously corrode our party as an organism and prevent us from working
wholeheartedly to accomplish the four nodernizations. However, in guid-
ing ideological and practical work we should pay attention to closely
combining the elimination of these unhealthy tendencies with the imple-
mentation of the party's political line and our efforts to achieve
stability and unity and accomplish the four modernizations. In no way
should we adopt the methods formerly employed to launch political
campaigns.

The second condition concerns the question of maintaining close ties with
the masses of people. Our party has also learned a very impressive lesson
in this connection. Without winning the love and support of the masses

of people and fully carrying out the mass line, our party cannot estab-
lish healthy democratic centralism and maintain iron discipline. when a
party member begins to part from the masses, he is consciously or uncon-
sciously disrupting party style and discipline. Our party is the vanguard
force of the proletariat. A characteristic of this vanguard force is that
it conprises only a few people of the proletariat. If these few people
depart from the proletariat and the majority of the masses, and if they
cannot win support and supervision from this majority, our party cannot

be the vanguard force of the proletariat and maintain its discipline.
Today the Chinese people of all nationalities are deeply concerned about
party building and the rectification of party style and discipline. This
shows that our party has bright prospects. Our party has created this good
mass base with hard work, through arduous, tortuous and protracted strug-
gle in the past six decades and by shedding the blood of a large number

of martyrs. This mass base is an invaluable asset for building our party.

67
Every party member should treasure it and consciously maintain party style
and discipline.

The first condition is this: Whether the party can enforce and maintain
iron discipline is determined first of all by the situation within the
party. During the years of revolution and war our party's ranks were
small but well trained, like the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik). Our
party members' consciousness and loyalty to the revolution were tested in
rigorous struggles. However, after our party seized political power, the
opportunists who worked for private interests by taking advantage of the
party's position, those who boasted and flattered in order to get promo-
tions and become rich, and those who wanted to profit from the party's
position and were unwilling to work selflessly for communism tried to sneak
into the party in every possible way. That was why Lenin, Stalin and
Comrade Mao Zedong always stressed the need to pay attention to the quality
of party members and not just concentrate on quantity. Lenin and Stalin
strongly stressed party purges and registration of party members in order
to maintain and improve the quality of party members. We carry out party
rectification and not party purges. We stress ideological rectification.
which also includes organizational rectification. The total number of our
party members has increased by more than 100 percent since the Great Cul-
tural Revolution. Recently the party Central Committee seriously pointed
out that some new and old party members were not well qualified. There-
fore, the decisive condition for strengthening discipline at present is

to do a good job in party rectification, improve the quality of party
members, increase the number of qualified party meabers and help party
members establish the communist world outlook and outlook on life,
heighten party spirit and consciously carry out the party's political,
ideological and organizational lines.

Struggle Against Petty-Bourgeois Revolutionism

The ability of the Bolsheviks to build up strict centralism and iron
discipline under the very difficult conditions in the 1917-1920 period
was inseparable from certain characteristics in the history of the
Russian Revolution. in analyzing this history, Lenin emphatically
pointed out that the Bolsheviks grew up and became strong and steeled
in the course of struggle against the enemy within the working class
movement. The struggle was first and foremost against the Hensheviks
and the Second International, who were opportunists siding with the
bourgeoisie. Then it was against pettyobourgeois revolutionism.

Lenin pointed out: Petty-bourgeois revolutionism smacks of or borrows
something from anarchism. In essential areas it falls short of the con-
ditions and requirements of a consistently proletarian class struggle.
Ideas of this kind reflect the wavering of the social stratum comprising
small owners and small masters. They easily go to revolutionary extremes,
because under capitalism they always suffer oppression and a rapid
deterioration in their condition and are brought to ruin, but they are

68
also incapable of perseverance, organization, discipline and steadfast-
ness. Such revolutionism is characterized by its instability, its barren-
ness and its liability to swiftly turn from ultraleftist revolutionary
fervor to submission. apathy, fantasy and even a "frenzied" infatuation
with one or another bourgeois “fad."

This kind of petty-bourgeois revolutionism was reflected in the Russian
Cons-unist Party (Bolshevik) and some European comnist parties. Such
"leftist" ideas involved a series of questions concerning the party's
strategy and tactics. A prominent viewpoint was that the party was put
absolutely against the class and the leader against the masses. thereby

underestimating and even denying the party's role and party spirit and
discipline.

During the early 20th century, as a result of the uneven development of
capitalist imperialism. some advanced countries in Europe and America
were in a privileged, monopoly position, and some labor srtistocrats were
bought over or paid directly or indirectly by the bourgeoisie and split
off from the proletariat. This gave rise everywhere in the Second Inter—
national to a certain type of traitorous. opportunist. social-chauvinist
leader who championed the immediate interests of his own craft and the
vested interests of the labor aristocracy and betrayed the cause of the
liberation of the proletariat as a whole. The masses of workers naturally
had the utmost contempt for such a party and leaders and were utterly
indignant toward them. Some people who cherished petty-bourgeois ideas,
such as the "leftwing" communists of Germany and Britain, went from one
extreme to the other and publicly put forward such slogans as "He went
dictatorship of the class and not dictatorship of the party" and "He went
a mass party and not a party of leaders." In Germany, Karl Brier made the

absurd proclamation that political parties were generally unnecessary and
that all political parties were "bourgeois."

Some groups within the ruling Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik). such
as the "leftist communists," the "democrat centralists" and the "working
class reactionarics" which emerged later than the other two. vigorously
propagated these ideas and views. For exaaple, they demanded that the
work of managing the national economy be assigned to the trade union-
the "All-Russian Congress of Proletariana"--and denied the role of the
party and the Soviet state as leaders in socialist construction. They
demanded full freedom for different factions and groups within the party
and opposed centralism and strict discipline in economic management.

“he: deserved attention was that they used opposition to bureaucracy
in the work of the party and state as an excuse.

In light of these petty-bourgeois "leftist" ideas at home and elsewhere,
Lenin elucidated in this book in an all-round manner the relationship
among the leaders, the political party, the class and the masses and

stressed that it wss extremely necessary to uphold the party's centralised
and unified leadership and iron discipline. he said.

69
"The mere presentation of the question-~‘dictatorship of the party or
dictatorship of the class. dictatorship (party) of the leaders or dicta-
torship (party) of the masses?'--testifies to the most incredible and
hopeless confusion. These people are straining to invent something quite
out of the ordinary and. in their effort to be clever, make themselves
ridiculous. Everyone knows that the masses are divided into classes;

that the masses can be contrasted to classes only by contrasting the vast
majority in general, regardless of division according to status in the
social system of production, to categories holding a definite status in
the social system of production; that usually, and in the majority of
cases, at least in modern civilized countries, classes are led by polit-
ical parties; that political parties. as a general rule, are directed by
more or less stable groups composed of the most authoritative. influential
and experienced members, who are elected to the most responsible positions
and are called leaders. All this is elementary. ("'Leftwing' Communism.
an Infantile Disorder," "Selected Works of Lenin." Vol 4, pp 197-198)

"Repudiation of party principles and party discipline is the opposition's
net result. This is tantamount to completely disarmdng the proletariat
in the interest of the bourgeoisie. It is tantamount to that petty-
bourgeois diffuseness, instability and incapacity for sustained effort.
unity and organized action which. if indulged in, must inevitably destroy
every proletarian revolutionary movement." (Ibid., p 200)

Our party has acquired direct experience regarding Lenin's assertion.
Like the Russian Communist Party (bolshevik), we won victory in a big
country where the petty-bourgeoisie accounted for the majority of the
population; we carried out socialist construction and gained experience
in launching a protracted revolutionary struggle against the petty
bourgeoisie. Lin Bias and the "gang of four" were able to push the
ultraleftist line for such a long period and on such a large scale chiefly
because they stirred up and used the feverish revolutionism of the petty
bourgeoisie. This revolutionary fever was at that time expressed largely
in the form of "leftist“ anarchical or semianarchical ideas. Its
unbridled spread was in a sense a sort of "punishment" for the inter-
national revisionist ideas and the daily growing bureaucracy at home at
that time. Now that we have toppled the "gang of four" and repudiated
the ultraleftist line, this petty-bourgeois revolutionism has gone to the
other extreme, turned into apathy and pessimism. deviated from and turned
against the four basic principles and become another "tad“ of bourgeois
liberalism. In a sense, this is also a "punishment" for the ultraleftist
line. In the course of correcting the phenomena of too much centralism
and a lack of democracy within the party some time ago. some comrades

did not pay much attention to the whole situation and the party Central
Committee's instructions and consciously or unconsciously deviated from
the demands for party principle and the party's centralized and unified
leadership. Some comrades showed a kind of "leftist" impatience toward
the rectification of the party's defects and mistakes. 0n the other
hand. their underestimation of the danger of bourgeois liberal ideas in

70
society was expressed in their rightist tendency to neglect and slecken
party leadership. This petty-bourgeois instability is greatly dis-
advantageous to us today in completely wiping out the organizational and
ideological remnants of Lin Biso and the "gang of four," continuously
opposing ideological ossification within our ranks. strengthening and
improving party leadership and opposing the idea of doing sway with the
four basic principles. He must pay attention to struggling against this
petty-bourgeois revolutionism and overcoming the interference condng from
the right or the I'left." However, in launching this struggle we lust seek
truth from facts and make a concrete analysis, and in no way should we
rush our work and demand uniformity. Only in this way can we success-

fully rectify party style and discipline and do s still better job of
party building!

C50: 4004

71
THE SPIRIT OF "BUILDING ENTERPRISES MID EARDSKIPS HIST BB CARRIED EDWARD
IN THE MODERNIZA‘I’ION EFFORT

Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9. 1 May 80 pp 62-“, 7
[Article by Wang Chonglun [3769 1506 0263]]

[Text] In February this year I returned to the Anshan Iron and Steel
Comeny to spend the pleasant Spring Festival with worker-coated“ with
when I had fought together in the past. As we recalled earlier events
and exchanged ideas, everyone was of the opinion that what Comrade Deng
Xiaoping had proposed was entirely correct-mly, "In China's effort to
promote four nodernizations we must earnestly and practically build our
enterprises aaid hardships," “vs out have a spirit of hard struggle

in building our enterprises." This proposal has an extremely inortant
meaning for us in our attth to secure decisive victory in our four
nodernizations vorlt in the 1980's.

hard struggle is our party's fine tradition and style of work and a
legacy of our proletariat. Conrade Mao Zedong said: ”we must constantly
remind our cadres and people that our country is a socialist power but at
the same time an economically backward, poor country; this is a great
contradiction. to make our country prosperous and powerful we need
several decades of hard struggle." ("On the Correct Handling of Contra-
dictions Among the People") During the past 30 years our working class
has resolutely tolloved this path of building enterprises amid hardships
and has achieved one victory after another. The development of the
Anshan Iron and Steel Cowany is a vivid exaaple. "hen Anshan was
liberated. the Anahan Iron and Steel Company was full of weeds, with
hares running everywhere and crows flying confusedly over a general
scene of ruin. lqerialist forecasters mm that "'l'l'ie Chinese can
only plant sorghum on these ruins"; but facts have refuted the halluci-
nations oi’ the iaperialists. For the sake of building a new Anehsn Iron
and Steel Cowany at the ties, old hero Hsng In [1322 311.1] shoulder-
poled his luggage and his rice bag into the plant to live there, taking
the plant as his home. he earnestly organized others to recover old and
othentise useless parts in order to have the blast furnaces repaired.
Taking old hero Kong Tel as its angle. the working class at the Anshan

72
Iron and Steel Company adopted the attitude of masters of the house,
bargained about neither wages nor their working conditions and proceeded
immediately to labor in e selfless manner. Thanks to everyone's hard

and earnest work, steel production was restored in 4 short years, and our
country‘s very first steel base was thus built; the working class'

prowess was vindicated and the motherland'e glory redeemed. Subsequently,
the working class continued to maintain this spirit of building enter-
prises amid hardships and thus enabled this particular old enterprise to
make more and more new contributions without interruption. Especially
after the smashing of the “gang of four," the party committee at the
Anshan Iron and Steel Company, while proceeding under the leadership of

the provincial and municipal party committees and in accordance with
arrangements by the party Central Committee to expose and criticize the
criminal conduct of Lin Biao and the “gang of four,“ eliminate the rampant
poison and influence of the ultraleft line and realize the various poli-
cies of the party, at the same time energetically restored and gave full
play to the party‘s fine tradition, struggled hard, developed production
and thereby brought further profound changes to this greatest steel and iron
joint enterprise of ours; the situatiou of stagnation or even retrogression
in steel production created by the interference and sabotage of Lin Biao
and the "gang of four“ was terminated; the best historical record of a
daily production of 20,000 tons of steel was broken; and the plant joined
the ranks of advanced enterprises. The victories secured by the Anshan
Iron and Steel Company fully demonstrated the great power of hard struggle.

When our conditions were very bad in the past, we gave full play to our
spirit of building enterprises by way of hard struggle; now that our con-
dltions have improved, is it all right for us not to promote hard struggle
any longer? of course not. Not only can we not abandon our spirit of
building enterprises by way of hard struggle, but we must develop it even
more energetically. Because our economic foundation is weak and our popu-
lation large, the addition of 10 years of vicious sabotage by Lin Biao and
the "gang of four" pushed the national economy to the brink of collapse.
Since the smashing of the "gang of four," our economic situation has
changed rapidly for the better and achieved new development. But because
the state of disproportionate development of our national economy has
remained basically unchanged, problems and difficulties of this or that
kind continue to exist in our production and our livelihood. Under these
circumstances, giving full play to our spirit of building enterprises by
way of hard struggle in handling our four undernizations work is no doubt
of decisive significance for us. He cannot buy modernization; we cannot
beg modernization from the "philanthropists"; and it is even less likely
that eodernization will drop from heaven or spring up from the earth. We
can only rely on the people of the whole country to bring into play their
wisdom and strength and work out modernisation with their diligent hands.

In devoting ourselves to the four nodernizations work by way of hard
struggle, we must give full play to the role of old enterprises and old
equipment. We must comprehensively carry out the policy of relying

73
mainly on ourselves and securing foreign aid only as a resedy. In a
situation in which the science and technology of various countries is
developing rapidly, a refusal to learn advanced things from other
countries or looking down on our own strength will hardly help build a
socialist sodern power at high speed. We must therefore criticize the
“closed-doorisn" of Lin Disc and the "gang of four." appropriately inert
advanced science and technology fros foreip countries and also pay full
attention to the utilisation of our own resources, thereby setting forth
a path of starting from our existing foundation in order to explore our
potential and effect renovation. Comrades of certain mterprises today
often think of "divorcing" their old equipment as soon as the moderniza-
tion effort is mentioned; they went to throw away the old equipnent,
inport entirely new equipaent and start things all over again. In thus
placing the full development of the role of old enterprises and old
equipment in opposition to the iwortation of advanced technology from
foreign countries, they adopt an approach which is obviously biased and
simply will not work. In our native district there is an old saying
which points out that "If one has to pin one'- hopes on a relative, one
can hardly become rich oneself; if one waits o be fed, one can never
gain weight by oneself." The whole sets of equipnent we can buy from
foreign countries can, after all. only be limited in quantity. He swat
never abandon our policy of self-reliance. In our modernisation effort
we cannot rely solely on inorted equip-ant for the establisheent of new
enterprises; we must still rely ssinly on our ol ‘ enterprises. He must
nobilize the broad ranks of workers and technical personnel to get to work
on the technical transfer-anon of our existing enterprises and on the
creation of new technology and new nterials. He now have (000,000 large,
nediun and snall enterprises, and the overwhelming najority of then are
old enterprises of the 1960's. 1950's and 1960's. These old enterprises
possess great potential; they are the inortant "bases" from which we can
march forward toward the four modernizations. For instance, the Anshsc
Iron and Steel Cowany is a large enterprise as well as an old enterprise.
After 30 years of transfornstion and construction through hard struggle
by its working class. the Anshan Iron and Steel Cowsny has already been
built into an iron and steel joint enterprise of a fairly large scale and
considerably advanced technology. both in term of its productive capacity
and in terns of the degree of its sschanization and automation. The
entire cowany has nearly 100 factories and lines. and both in technology
and in management it has already acquired a good foundation. and its
productive capacity is fairly solid. Therefore, we nust see not only the
fact that the equipnent of an old enterprise is outdated and its crafte-
nanship and technology not sufficiently advanced, but also the fact that
the nsnpower. mterial resources and other potentials of such an old
enterprise are fairly great. As long as we have that spirit of building
enterprises by way of hard struggle, we can turn disadvantageous factors
into advantageous. factors and backwardness into advancement and create a
new level of nodernization with our old equipment.

76
Many industrially developed countries in the world also enphaaize the
transformation. utilization and full development of the role of their old
enterprises. Last year I went to Japan for a visit; of the more than 20
factories I inspected. most were medium or saell enterprises; many still
had their old buildings and old equipment; the buildings of some were
only wood structures reinforced by steel bars and steel plates. In one
of the factories of the Osaka Steelcaating Works, old lathes of the
1930's still numbered among the present equipment, and some equipment
was quite similar to that at the northern branch of the machinery repair
plant of our Anshan Iron and Steel Coapany; such equipment is still play-
ing its role and doing so with great efficiency; the quality of its
products is also very good. This shows that. while they have new equip-
ment of the 1970's, they also retain equip-ant of the 1930's. He mmt not
think that the equipment that produces modern products in foreign coun-
tries is all newly installed. Many of our domestic enterprises have done
things this way, Just as they are done in foreign countries. Our Chinese
working class has the necessary aspirations and capabilities and is bound
to work out a modernization on the existing foundation.

Ours is a socialist state; it can neither exploit our own laboring people
nor plunder the laboring people of foreign countries. Rhea we work on
our modernization, we can only rely on ourselves, struggle hard. and
transform our old enterprises, utilize our old enterprises, give full
play to the role of old enterprises and old equipment and let old enter-
prises and old equipment produce modern products. The technical trans-
formation of old enterprises can be effected with only limited investment
and in a short period of time, while the result is efficient operations
which can double output with half the labor which otherwise would be
required. In recent years the workers at the Anshan Iron and Steel Com-
pany have insisted on the principle of effecting great change in the case
of large repairs, medium change in the case of udium repairs and small
change in the case of small repairs, as well as a change in each case of
repair in order to replace the backward with advanced technology, to
change the backward into the advanced, to change a small productive
capacity into a great productive capacity and thereby to gradually trans-
form tho Anshan Iron and Steel Company into a modern enterprise. In a
series of steps they have carried out technical transformation on 3 blast
furnaces. 4 open-hearth furnaces, I. coking furnaces, lo sintering machines
and 8 sets of steel rolling machines. adopted several dozen new techniques
and hence achieved conspicuous results. Steel refining plant No 2 reno-
vated 6 old open-hearth furnaces of the 1960': into a new type of open-
hearth furnaces employing the oxygen top-blowing technique. The steel-
refining time of each furnace was thus reduced from the past average of
10 hours to only lo hours. In 1979, 3 of the 6 renovated open-hearth
furnaces were put into productive operations. and the yearly production
of each of these furnaces increased from 240,000 tons before the trans-
formation to 450.000 tons, an increase of 87.5 percent. The steel-pipe
welding plant of the Anshan Iron and Steel Cowany insisted on the
approach of making changes while keeping production going; in 1978 it

75
succeeded in changing the set of fixed-position intermittent-furnace—
welding machines of the 1930's into a set of continual welding machines
by investing only 1.8 million yuan; thereby raising productivity by 22
percent cowared with the past. The actual yearly increase in produc-
tion of welded steel pipes was 18,600 tons, of which 95.72 percent was

up to qualifying standard, showing an ilmrovement of 7.07 percent con-
pared with the past. The coat of each ton of steep pipes was also reduced
by 15.71 yuan, and the yearly profit was raised by more than 7 million
yuan. All main economic indicators became conspicuously superior to
those of the set of the old welding machines. The quality of 38 products
put out by this plant reached the domestic advanced level, and some of
these products entered the international market. Facts thus prove that
the utilization and transfornation of old enterprises is an inortant way
to realize mdernization.

In working on the four nodernisations by way of hard struggle we nust pay
full attention to undertakings in scientific research. We mt closely
cosbine our revolutionary spirit of hard struggle with our scientific
attitude of seeking truth fron facts, so that we can do not only hard
and earnest work but also skillful work. Harden views science and tech-
nology as productive power. The key to the realization of the four nod-
ernisations is scientific and technological modernization. For a long
time Lin Disc and the "gang of four" truweted the idea that they "would
rather have socialism at a low speed than capitalism at a high speed,"

wantonly alleging that "when the satellite flies into the sky the red
banner drops to the ground." As a result, our contingents of scientific
and technological personnel were subjected to devastating blows, our
scientific research work suffered serious obstruction and serious dange
was brought to the cause of our socialist construction. After the smash-
ing of the "gang of four," the party comittee at the Anshan Iron and
Steel Comany seriously carried out the party's policy on intellectuals
by carefully arranging the work of the scientific and technological
personnel according to the principle of having everyone put his talents
to practical use; in a series of steps it pronoted 103 persons to posi-
tions of chief and deputy chief engineers and 1,756 to engineers. It also
paid attention to giving full play to the role of ms organisations in
technical cooperation. At present there already are 73 factories which
have restored and established technical cooperation co-Iittees, with labor
models as their core members and workers and engineering personnel as
participants, plus 661 technical trouble-shooting groups; those who regu-
larly participate in technical cooperation activities already nuber
nearly 10,000. This contingent of personnel works to meet the demand

for continued development of our production by energetically attemting
to carry out the technical transformation of old enterprises and old
equipment as well as by helping to develop extensive scientific research
and technical renovation with mass participation. Last year the entire
cospany carried out 3,959 scientific research and renovation projects,
662 of which were major ones. These achievements are the rich fruits
reaped by the working class of the Anshan Iron and Steel Coqany in

76
relying on themselves to carry out scientific research and to conduct
technical renovation.

In working on the four modernizations by way of hard struggle we must
insist on the principle of running enterprises with industry and thrift.
He amt endeavor to increase production and practice economy, preclude
extravagant spending and especially reduce the number of rejects, cut
down on raw material consuntion, raise the capital utilization rate and
isprove labor productivity. This is one iaportant question to which the
enterprises must pay great attention. In working on the four moderniza-
tions we must carefully calculate everything in order to spend less and
do more and thereby effectively use every single penny for the cause of
our socialist modernization work. He must use as little manpower and
material resources as possible to produce as many and as fine products
as possible in order to satisfy the needs of society. After the focus
of work of the whole party was shifted, the party coauittee at the Anshan
iron and Steel Germany mobilized all employees and workers to unfold
within the entire conpany an increase-production and practice-economy
mvement centered on improving quality, expending variety. reducing con-
sumption and boosting profits; it achieved conspicuous results in this
regard. In 1979, while the production of steel, pig iron, steel ingots
and steel products scored increases, the me of heavy diesel oil decreased
by 250,000 tone from the 1978 figure, the use of natural gas decreased by
56 million cubic meters and the use of electricity decreased by $9.8
million kilowatt-hours; these decreases were equivalent to a savings of
360,000 tons of standard coal, and more than 600,000 tons of steel and
iron rejects were also recovered. This shows that the increase-
production and practice-economy movement offers great promise and is an
important measure to accelerate the four modernisations work. In devel—
oping such an increase-production and practice-economy movement we must
both grasp the ranks of specialized personnel and extensively mobilize
the masses, both grasp key measures and generally develop activities to
induce reasonable suggestions, so that everybody will think up some ways
and offer some ideas, work on some reform and rake some contribution;
this way we are bound to achieve great results.

In working on the four modernisations by way of hard struggle we must
change our leadership style. First of all, we must demand that a lead-
ing cadre develop the spirit of "starting with myself" by setting him-
self up as an example and operating as a model of hard struggle, so as to
lead hundreds and thousands of others to work on the four modernizations.
Many leading cadres at the Anshan Iron and Steel Company dug deep into
reality to conduct their investigation and study. to discover problems
and to provide timely solutions to them. and they have thus played a very
good role. To satisfy the needs of consumers and solve the problem of
low-quality products, the principal leading comrades of the Anshan Iron
and Steel Company personally participated in the work of product quality
investigation groups by paying visits to consumers and listening to their
opinions; they also seriously solved their problems, improved the quality

77
of the products and aade the consumers satisfied. In early 1977 the
party conittee at the Anshan Iron and Steel Comany, in order to accel-
erate the aodernization work there, decided to take advantage of the
period of extensive repairs on blast furnaces No 7 and No 8; it
organized a joint codat program to urge the two furnaces into one
modern, large-type blast furnace. In the course of this operation, asny
leading coarades participating in the joint conbat worked just like the
workers, eating and sleeping at the operating ground and getting dusty
on a sunny day and soaked on a rainy one. Thus the masses were inspired
and their enthmiaea became even aore pronounced. Pro- designing to
execution of the work to the return to production, only 9 nonths were
spent on comleting the rebuilding of this blast furnace No 7 at the
iron-refining plant; this was a nirscle in the history of furnace-
building in oar country. Practice thus indicates that every single word,
deed, act or nove on the part of the leaders constitutes a silent order
which directly influences the masses. So long as the leading cadres take
the lead in engaging theuelves in hard struggle, it is always possible
for us to nintain and raise the prestige and credibility of the party.
to secure the support of the "sat ranks of the masses, to mobilize the
enthusiasa of the aasses and to forge a col-on will and con-on effort in
working out our four modernisation.

The 1980's are years of great promise. He of the working class mast,

under the guidance of the spirit of the 5th plenary session of the party's
llth Central Canittee, fully recognize the heavy historical nissioa we

shoulder. insist on giving full play to the spirit of self-reliance and
building enterprises by way of hard struggle and make out due contribu-
tions to the four modernisation work.

9255
680: 4006

78
HON TO UNDERSTAND 'TRUTHFUL HRI'l‘ING'--0N THE DELEGATION LINE RENEW
REVOLUTIONARY REALISH AND NAWRALISM

Beijing RED FIAG in Chinese No 9, 1 May 80 pp 4548

[Article by Lu Guishan [7120 6311 1472]]

[text] Our literary and art circles today camot agree on the inter-
pretation of "truthful writing." This is noraal. Discussion of "truth-

ful writing" enhances a healthy literary and art Invenent and enriches
literary creations.

"Truthful writing" as a literary theory of the naturalists was advanced
first by Zola of France. Later, Stalin. who read into "truthful writing"
the implications of s new era, also promoted the theory. I think it is
correct to take "truthful writing" as a siuple explanation of revolu-
tionary realism and a summary of Bagela' ezqoosition that "in addition to
truthful details, truthful writing should also portray typical characters
in typical situations." Sut a snall nuﬂ>er of comrades have given "truth-
ful writing" a naturalist interpretation.

Different interpretations of "truthful writing" which reflect different
philosophies of writing deterrine the different inclinations and social
consequences of different writings. It is therefore urgent that we draw
a deurcation line between revolutionary realist “truthful writing" and
the naturalist "truthful writing."

I

The naturalists favor truthfulness in describing appearances and details.
Revolutionary realism favors the use of descriptions of phenomena as a
vehicle to penetrate the internal relations of things in order to portray
the true intrinsic qualities and to present details that make possible
the emergence of "typical characters in typical situations."

In his scientific discussion of realism, Engels criticized. on the one

Mod, the idealist inclination to portray intrinsic quality divorced
from description of detail and, on the other, the naturalist inclination

79
to pursue only the description of detail. Engels thought that (Heiknise),
author of "City Girls," was not a true realist because this prorevolu-
tionary writer did not really understand that truly realist writings
should reveal the reality of "typical characters in typical situations."
it is clear that Engels' exposition of realism was the outcome of his
struggle against these inclinations in literary and art creations. It
overcame the one-sidedness of both idealism and naturalism and brought
into the limelight the revolutionary dialectical method. A comprehensive
and correct understanding of Engels' exposition of realism provides a
guideline to the development of socialist literary and art work. The con-
fusions in our literary undertakings are due not only to social and polit-
ical reasons but also to the lack of a correct understanding of Bngels'
exposition of realism. when the "gang of four" were in power. our lit-

erary and art work was dominated by an idealist inclination to portray the
"intrinsic quality" divorced from both real life and the truthful pre-
sentation of details. The downfall of the "gang of four“ gives the
literary drive for "truthful writing" a new lease on life and sweeps away
the fog of literary "deception and fraud." But a few comrades have car-
ried their criticism of idealism to such an extreme that naturaliam
begins to emerge in the theory and work of literature and art.

There are people who believe that, inasmuch as "intrinsic qualities are
invariably reflected in life," it is unnecessary to stress "the intrinsic
quality of life" as long as "the reality of life is portrayed." This
approach confuses the distinction between phenomena and intrinsic quali-
ties and obliterates the difference between the reality of life and the
reality of art. It is true that the intrinsic qualities of life are
present in phenomena. but phenomena do not reflect the intrinsic quali-
ties in all cases. False appearances are the reflections of distorted
intrinsic qualities. Fortuitous phenomena do not always reflect the
inevitable, while outward, fragmentary. scattered and fleeting phenomena
are too far removed from the intrinsic qualities. Some phenomena might
be meaningful and valuable in certain areas, yet they do not fully reflect
the intrinsic qualities and the trend of development of life... In a
word, an artist must select the typical phenomena and put them through
artistic synthesis and purification to reflect certain aspects of the
revolutionary intrinsic quality.

We know that the most important requirement of naturalism is to eliminate
artistic selection and purification, abandon artistic fiction and imagina-
tion and emphasize one-sidedly minute and accurate descriptions. Zola
said: "Imagination is no longer the highest virtue of a novelist," and

he believed that "the more commonplace a story is, the more typical it
becoues" and that the highest principle of art is to apply "a sense of
reality" to demonstrate "a return to nature." ("0n Fictions") But, as
pointed out by (Lafarge), "the vulgarity of their observation“ makes

them "see only the appearances of phenomena which everyone else can see.

They are unable to penetrate the direction of the development of an
event, nor can they search for its cause." ("Money," by Zola. in

80
"Selected Essays on Literature," by (Lafarge), p 153) Referring to the
literary viewpoint of the naturalists, Gorkiy said very candidly: "I am
not a naturalist, and 1 am of the opinion that literature should be a bit
above reality so as to observe reality from a commanding position, because
the role of literature is more than the reflection of reality. A descrip-
tion of existing things is not enough. We must not forget the things
which we hope will happen or might happen. He must make phenomena
represent a type." ("Talk With Young Writers") He also pointed out:

"The reality of literature represents the essence extracted from numerous
facts of the same type." ("To Young Writers“) Even those outstanding
critics of realism realized the importance of artistic synthesis and
purification. To Chekhov, a typical character is "filtered out of the
filter-like memory of the writer" ("Letter to P. D. Batyushkov") or "the
essence distilled from the character of a man," as Turgenev put it.
("Letter to Annenkov") Goethe was of the opinion that "Works of litera-
ture and art must be selective." ("Poetry and Reality") The achievements
and creative experience of these writers demonstrate convincingly the
importance of artistic "filtration," selection, synthesis and purification,
as well as fiction and imagination, in the creation of typical artistic
images and the attainment of a high degree of artistic reality.

II

Naturalism asks all writers to be detached, objective observers, main—
taining strict neutrality as outsiders and passing no judgment on the
object they describe in order to preserve the so-calluu "absolute
reality." This theory of literature pits goodness against reality, the
inclinations of literature and art against the reality of literature and
art. suggesting that the former would ruin the latter. The literary
theory of revolutionary realism, which takes Marxism as its guiding
ideology, regards the will, interests, wishes and needs of the prole-
tariat and the masses of people as being in accord with the general trend
of historical development. The pursuit of the dialectical unity of the
inclinations of literature and art, on the one hand, and the reality of
literature and art on the other, agree not only with the trend of history
and the wishes of the people but also with the law of literature and art.

Instead of indicating expressly the inclinations of literature and art,
the story should unfold naturally as the plot evolves. Footnotes, charts
and deductions must not be permitted to influence the reading public and
viewing audience. But this does not mean that the attitude of an artist
toward the object he depicts, such as his love and hatred, likes and
dislikes and judgments, can be overlooked, played down, covered up or
obliterated.

Strictly speaking, literature and art showing no inclinations simply
do not exist anywhere in the world, even though some might be more

explicit than others. Literary work and art represent the conscious
activities of the mind. Gorkiy pointed out that an artist, as the

81
spokesman of his times, “enjoys ideological and emotional freedom," but

he has to adapt to the requirement of the times, abide by the interests

of the class he represents, and "be responsible for what he says."
("Letter to B. Y. Livine“) All revolutionary writers and artists who
seek to use literature and art to light “the torch of national spirit,"

to penetrate the human world and human mind, to bring nourishment of the
mind to the people and enrich and raise the mental state of the people
with new ideology, new morality and new habits of a new era should con-
sciously employ the Marxist position and viewpoint to reflect and evaluate
life.

The Marxist theory of literature and art recognizes both the decisive
effect of life and the far—reaching influence of the world outlook on the
works of literature and art. The difference in the position and view-
point of the revolutionary realist writers and those of the naturalist
writers determines their selection and handling of life, what they write
about and how they write it. Gorkiy made a comprehensive study of all
these possibilities. He pointed out that in the minds of the revolu-
tionary realist writers, "since the reality we construct" is "more
inportant" than "the reality which is in the process of dying," it is
acceptable that "we sacrifice certain parts of that obsolete reality

for our own reality." ("Selected Essays on Literature," p 1.0) Thus,
they concentrate on describing the newly emerging revolutionary things
and "endeavor to create even better, wiser and brighter things.“
("Letter to E. Y. Livine") The naturalist writers, however, "do not
seem to find those phenomena which require affirmation and development.”
("Selected Essays on Literature," p 31‘) "They still focus their atten-
tion on the path of critical realism which dwells 'exclusively' on
descriptions of 'bad phenomena of life.'" ("Selected Essays on Litera-
ture,” p 301) According to Gorkiy. revolutionary realist writers should
not overlook the need to expose the dark side of life and might even use
the technique of the critical resliste. "We need this kind of realism,"
he went on to say, "simply to expose the remnants of the past, to strug-
gle against them and destroy them.“ ("Selected Essays on Literature,“

p 357)

These observations of Corkiy remind all artists to consider what to
praise and what to expose, to have the correct attitude toward exposures
and to weigh the social consequences of one's own work. Exaggerations of
the ugly side of our lives, the belief that the sole responsibility of
a writer is to expose "the repulsive phenomena of life," and detached,
objective and pessinistic elaborations and playing up of ugly and
repulsive phenomena are incompatible with the intrinsic qualities and
reality of actual life in a socialist society. writings such as
"Transfer," a fiction. and "In the Social Archive," a film scenario, are
not good enough to help people see the positive historical background,
the true revolutionary force which represents light, the confidence of
a courageous socialist state relying on its own strength to overcome all
the dark and negative phenomena and the historical trend of light

82
replacing darkness. The overall inclination of these writings calls for
careful scrutiny.

All works of literature and art, including those by the naturalists or
influenced by naturalism, are bound to show certain inclinations. Take
the description of love, for example. The inclinations shown in revolu-
tionary realist writings and those by the naturalists are distinctly
different. "Anxious To Return to His Unit" is a moving, successful love
story. It is the story of Hei Desheng, a wounded soldier who has fallen
behind his unit. he falls in love with s gentle, virtuous and open-
minded village girl named Yuchen who had saved his life. Being a dedi-
cated revolutionary warrior, Wei Deeheng is not intoxicated by the bliss-
ful atmosphere. he is anxious to return to his unit. Moved by his lofty
behavior, Yuchen, who knows very well the righteousness of his cause,
gives him a memorable sendoff instead of pressing him to stay. After
returning to his unit, Wei longs for his sweetheart as he watches the
flying migratory geese, legendary letter carriers for lovers. The film
presents love so rationally that it demonstrates the healthy proletarian
view of love and revolutionary outlook on life. Descriptions of love in
writings influenced by naturalism are usually indecent, base and full of

vulgar and extremely individualistic, selfish desires. Such writings are
hateful to both society and youths.

The philosophical basis of the naturalist writings is mechanical material—
ism. Instead of revealing the intrinsic qualities of phenomena as seen in
their development and interrelationship, it encourages outward, lopsided,
isolated and static observations. Lenin, the great leader. once called

on all revolutionaries to master the materialist dialectical way of think-
ing and know how to observe things comprehensively. They “must not grab
at worthless isolated instances and facts which could easily be drawn from
the relations of social phenomena." ("Selected works of Lenin," Vol 3,

p 73) To do so is "to indulge in triviality, perhaps even worse than
triviality." ("Statistics and Sociology," "Lenin on Literature and Art,"
p 86)

III

The "reality" written about by revolutionary realists ought to be beauti-

ful. Even the ugly things they write about must pass through careful
artistic treatment. The naturalists, however, love to write about the

vulgar. trivial, filthy and ugly phenomena of life.

Gorkiy said: "Man's own activities, especially those in the field of
art, ought to be artistic." ("Letter to B. Y. Livine") Beautification
of art does not imply false affectation. It means improving the objects

described through artistic processing and transformation so as to impart
brilliance to reality. we must make use of the technique of art to affirm
good and beautiful things in life in order to arouse man's enthusiasm to
pursue light and foster his fine and noble values. We must make use of

83
the technique of art to expose decadent things in life, to make people
disdain, look down upon and hate ugly phenomena and help them gain a
comprehensive. in—depth understanding of truth in life and the differ-
ence between beauty and ugliness.

Not long ago, works of literature and art actually played a vanguard

role in exposing and criticizing the offenses and atrocities of the "gang
of four." But some of these writings were influenced to a certain extent
by naturalism. They became commonplace writings about murder. brutality,
robbery, gang war, scandals and the pursuit of sensationalism and physio-
logical stimulations. The writers even went to the extent of elaborating
and exhibiting sympathetically and appreciatively a morbid mentality and
filthy conduct. Even though there are not too many writings like this.
this literary phenomenon is still worth watching. This does not imply
that art must not reveal ugliness. but ugliness in art should not be the
replica of ugliness in life not the playing up of minute details. writers
should erploy their cleansing pens to punish ugly things and ugly souls.
Only artists imbued with the ideal of revolutionary realism can make
light replace darkness and let beauty tear down ugliness.

Extra-sly disgusted with nihilism and pessimism, Gorkiy looked at life as

a whole and the trend of its development and found "life brighter than
ever." ("Letter to B. Y. Livine") Art depends on the esthetic feeling

it generates to make its social impact felt. As socialist works of lit-
erature and art take on the new historic mission to struggle for the
realization of our country's four modernizations, all revolutionary
artists should demonstrate the beauty and ideals of art to envisage the
triumph of light over darkness and affirm the good things in life in
order to cleanse man's soul, broaden his views and strengthen his confi-
dence and courage to fight for the realization of lofty ideals and a
promising future. We know that members of the audience viewing "The
Flower That Ushered in the Spring" fell in love with Bai Jie because of
her virtuous soul, fine disposition and remarkable achievement. They
were also moved by Li Jinn. a selfless treilblazer of the new Long March.
His lofty ideals. courage and vitality are so inspiring that they, like
Bai Jie. want to follow the leadership of Li Jian and march forward joy-
ously along the road to the [our modernizations. The people really need
writings which rally then to advance.

In conclusion. we would like to give a revolutionary realist interpreta-
tion instead of a naturalist interpretation to the slogan of "truthful
writing.“ we do not mean to abandon it simply because some comrades have
given it a naturalist interpretation. The fact that I have tried to point
out traces of naturalism in certain writings does not amount to total
rejection of them all. My purpose is to arrive at a scientific interpre-
tation of ”truthful writing" through discussions of literary works and

to defend "truthful writing."

5360
C50: 6004

84
ON SOLVING THE PROBLEM OF URBAN HOUSING

Beijing RED FLAG in Chinese No 9. 1 May 80 inside back cover

[Letter to the editor from Comrade Li Ying [2621 3576] of the Pharma-
ceutical Company of Guangdong Province]

[Text] Unreasonable housing rentals have really aggravated the problem
of unreasonable housing occupancy. I am not aware of the situation in
other places. but the way housing rentals are collected in Guangdong
basically belongs to the “free supply" system. The standards for charg-
ing these rentals were formulated by the provincial people's council in
the l950's, and they are far lower than those prescribed by today's real
estate companies. For living in public dormitories. employees and work-
ers only have to pay a "symbolic" house rent and water and electricity
charges: the unaccounted portions are subsidized by their affiliated
institutions from "administrative expenses" (these subsidized portions
exceed 50 percent of what they should have paid). whoever occupies more
housing space actually also takes greater advantage of the public. Com-
rade Su King's article said: "He who occupies better housing and more

rooms should have to pay more rent; such an economic approach may be more
effective than criticism and education." I think the case is not "may be"
but "will surely be" more effective.

Comrade Su Xing considered it unrealistic to raise housing rentals when
the wages of employees and workers are very law. But I think we can find

a way to readjust housing rentals which increases neither the burden of
the employees and workers nor the expenditure of the state.

Take the current housing rental regulations of Guangdong, for example:

I think only some slight change is needed--that is, if we change the rent
which today is subsidized from administrative expenses and paid to the
real estate owner into "house rent and water and electricity charges
subsidy" according to housing occupancy standards of the employees and
workers (Guengdong's rule: in general. 5 square meters for each employee
or worker himself and 6 square meters for each member of his family) and
paid to the employees and workers themselves in the first instance, and
then let the employees and workers in turn pay their rent to the real
estate companies according to the standards of rental charges based on

85
their actual housing occupancy, and their water and electricity charges
to the water and electricity companies. respectively; and let rentals
also he collected on enterprise-owned housing according to the standards
of housing rental charges, and let subsidies also be granted in the
show—mentioned way—-and when this change is thus made, expenditure is
by no means increased insofar as the affiliated units are concerned.

But for the employees and workers themselves. three situations will
emerge: in the first situation, the burden of those enployees and
workers who occupy housing according to prescribed standards is by no
means increased: in the second situation. there is some gain for those
employees end workers whose housing occupancy is lower than the pre-
scribed standards; but in the case of the extra rent charged to those
whose housing occupancy exceeds the prescribed standards, the public no
longer provides any subsidy for it, and it is changed into "payment by
your noble self ," this being the third situation. Such a scheme will
then have the effect of "economic restraint" on those who occupy better
housing and more rooms. For instance, in the case of a section-level
cadre with a family of to. he should. according to prescribed standards,
occupy 210 square meters of an ordinary housing structure; if, beyond
this limit, no further subsidy is granted to him as his rental payment,
then the more and the finer housing he occupies. the greater will be the
rent he has to shoulder himself. Adoption of this kind of economic
approach. 1 think, requires no extra mobilization or persuasion, because
those who occupy more housing. especially those who occupy plenty of
high-clear housing, would be coqelled by the heavier rental burden to
automatically propose a housing readjustment and return the extra hous-
ing occupied on their own. To do so would be not only beneficial to
alleviating the current housing shortage but also especially conducive
to limiting the assumption of privileges and improving relations between
ca-lruu and tho masses and between the party and the assess.

When we raise standards of rental collection according to the principle

of helping to maintain the reproduction of housing. the portion of the
raise may also be adopted in the form of a "subsidy." This will neither
edd to the burden of the eeployess and workers not increase state
expenditures very much. This kind of “subsidy" is different from the
"subsidy" granted after an increase in the price of agricultural and
sideline products today. in the case of the “subsidy" granted after so
increase in the price of agricultural and sideline products, the bene-
ficiaries are the peasants; in the case of the subsidy granted after an
increase in housing rentals, however, except where private buildings are
rented (these being very few in number). the entire reesinder of such an
increase is reccllected by the real estate cowanies as "rentals"; here
the beneficiary is the state. And ouch "rental increases" are most likely
to be beneficial to the maintenance of the simple reproduction and expanded
reproduction of such housing. as well as to an accelerated solution of the
housing problem: at the same time they would even more effectively restrain
cadres from assuming undue privileges in housing.

9255
C50: 6001.

86
350:

4004

87