FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10431

2 Apr“ 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 11/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those fron English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT
POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS

(rouo 11/82)

PREVIOUSLY UNPUBLISHED CHERNENKO SPEECHES

Moscow K. U. CHERNENKO: IZBRANNYYE RBCHI I STAT'I in Russian 1981 pp
1, 3-4, 133-149, 372-391, 423-432, 495-513, 676-679

[Annotation, Table of Contents, and Speeches from the book 'K. U.
Chernenko: Selected Speeches and Articles', Politizdat, 679 pages]

CONTENTS
Anmtation........ ............. 0.......................'.......0.....'....... 1
Table of Contents oooooooooooo .0000...0.000.000.00000.000000000000000...Doe... 2
ENE the Publismr....C... ............. 0.. .......... .......‘..C.............. 6

Realize the Historic Decisions of the 25th CPSU magma”

oeeo-ooooeeeeooooeo 8

Improve the Style and lhthods of the Work of the Party Apparatm............. 25

A High Award to Our Valorous Border Guards......... ........... .... .......... . 45
'me Award Sumns to New Achievemnts.... ................ ..... . ...... SS

Lkase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreln Soviet............................ 72

- a - [III - USSR - 35 FOOD]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Text] ANNOTATION

The book by a member of the Politburo and the Secretary of the CC CPSU comrade

K. U. Chernenko contains his selected articles and speeches during the period from
1971 through December 1980. The works which have gone into the collection throw
light upon the fundamental problems of the work of the CPSU and of improving the
system for the management of socialist society, and on the issues of the foreign
policy activities of the CPSU. The author touches upon a wide range of theoreti-

cal and practical questions.

The book is designed for n wide range of party. government, and economic workers
and lor the nktiv.

1

Ft”!(nﬂﬂClAl.USII(MVLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents
[Articles marked with an asterisk are translated in ful

Pros the Publisher

THE PARTY--OUR HEINSNAN
Speech at a Nesting with workers of the Kuybyshev Election
District of the City of Moscow on 15 February 1980

THE 25th CPSU mNGRESS ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTRA-PARTY
AND GOVERNMENT DEIDCRACY. AND ON IMPROVING THE PARTY AND
STATE APPARATUS
Prom an Article Published in the Periodical VOPROSY
ISTORII KPSS No 9 1971

THE LEADING ROLE 01' V. I. LENIN AND THE CPSU IN THE DEVELOP-

MENT OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DOCUMENTS OP STATE CONSTRUCTION
From an Article Published in the Periodical VOPROS!
ISTORII KPSS, No 11 1973

SOME QUESTIONS IN IMPROVING THE PARTY AND STATE APPARATUS
From an Article Published in the Periodical VOPROSY
ISTORII KPSS, No 8 1975

THE CONFERENCE IN EELSINH AND INTERNATIONAL SECURITY
From an Article Published in the Periodical EZHDUNARODNAYA
ZHIZN', No 10 1975

A YEAR AFTER HELSINKI
A Pamphlet Published by the Publishing House of the
"Novosti" Press Agency, 1976

LENIN'S STRATEGY OF PEACE IN ACTION
From an Article Published in the Periodical EZHDUNARODNAYA
ZHIZN', No 4 1976

* REALIZE TEE HISTORIC DECISIONS OF THE 25th CPSU CONGRESS
From a Report at the All-Union Conference of Party Workers
on 19 Hay 1976

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4
SOHE QUESTIONS 0? A I-XNINIST STYLE IN THE WORK OF THE CPSU
An Article Published in the Periodical 2mm MIRA
I SOTSIALIZHA. N6 8 1976

THE 25th CPSU CONGRES ON A FURTHER DEVEIDWT OF THE
LENINIS'!‘ STYLE IN PARTY “ORR

Article Published in the Periodical VOPRDSY ISTORII
RPSS, No 12 1976

EXECUTION SUPERVISION AND VERIFICATION—A HIGHLY IMPOR-
TANT CONDITIM FOR muzmc THE PARTY 'S DECISIONS

Article Published in the Periodical PARTIYNAYA IIZN',
No 19 1976

SPEECH AT THE 25th CONGRESS OF THE MIST PARTY OF
DENMARK

210 September 1976

SIXTY YEARS OP THE CREATIVE EMBODIMENT OP LENIN'S IDEAS
IN THE WORK OF THE PARTY AND STATE APPARATUS

Pron an Article Published in the Periodical ROWIST,
No 12 1977

COHNUNISTS IN THE USSR. IDEOLOGICAL BASIS. STRUCTURE.
PEOPLE AND PAR.‘.'Y

Pamphlet Published by the Publishing House of the
"Novosti" Press Agency, 1978

THE STRENGTHENING AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE CPSU' S TIES WITH
THE HASSES

Pros the Book "Some Questions of the Creative Develop-
ment of the Style of Party and State Work" which was

issued by the Publishing House of Political Literature,
1978

FOR EUROPE-A DURABLE PEACE AND RELIABLE SECURITY

Article Published in the Periodical WONAYA
ZHIZN', No A 1978

UNDER THE BANNER 0P PRDLETARIAN INTERNATIONALISN

Speech at the 10th Congress of the Conuniat Party of
Greece on 16 Hay 1978

* IMPROVE THE WORK STYLE AND HETHODS 0? THE PARTY
APPARATUS

From a Report of a Conference of Party Horkers of
Séberis and the Far East, Krasnoyarsk, 11 July 1978
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSTANTLY STRNGTHEN RELATIONS WITH THE HASSES
Speech at a Heating with the Voters of the Rishinev-
Lenin Election District, 26 Pebruary 1979

THE HOMELAND'S AWARD—ON THE STANDARD OF THE CAPITAL
0F KIRGiIZIYA

Speech at a Gala Meeting Devoted to the Presentation
of the Order of the Red Banner of Labor to the City
of Prunze. 15 August 1979

e A HIGH AWARD FOR OUR VALOROUS BORDER GUARDS
_ Speech at a Festive Heeting Devoted to the Presenta-
tion of the Order of the Red Banner to the Border
Guard Detachment of the Red Banner Eastern Border
District. 16 August 1979

HORK FOR THE PEOPLE AND TOGETHER WITH THE PEOPLE--THE
LENINIST TRADITION 01' THE CPSU
Article Published in the Periodical PROELDIY MIRA
I SOTSIALIZHA, No 5 1979

THE LENINIST NORK STYLE AND THE COMMUNIST EDUCATION
01’ THE WORKERS

From an Article Published in the Periodical VOPROSY
ISTORII KPSS, Ho 9 1979

SPEECH IN SOFIA AT THE PRESENTATION OF THE ORDER OF GEORGIY
DIHITROV
3 December 1979

PRATRRNAL COOPERATION
Speech at a Meeting of Soviet-Bulgarian Friendship at
a Telephone and Telegraph Equipment Plant, Sofia,
5 December 1979

FOR A LENINIST STYLE IN PART! NORK
From a Report at the All-Union Conference of Party

Workers on 26 Hay 1980

* THE AWARD IS A SUP‘HONS TO NEW ACCGIPLISHHENTS
- Speech at a Festive Heeting Devoted to the Presentation
of the Order of Lenin to the City of Chelyabinsk.
29 Hay 1980

THE CREATIVE DEVELOPMENT OF A LENINIST STYLE IN THE WORK

OF PARTY BODIES '
Prom the Book "Questions in the work of the Party and
State Apparatus" Published by the Publishing House of
Political Literature, 1980

POROFFICIALUSEONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4
TRUST AND COOPERATION AIDNG PEOPLES—A GUARANTEE OP PEACE
AND SECURITY (ON THE FIFTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE EUROPEAN CON-
PERENCE IN HELSINKI)

Article Published in the Periodical WMA
ZHIZN', No 8 1980

THE INCREASED LEADING ROLE OF THE CPSU UNDER THE CONDITIONS
OF DEVELOPED SOCIALISH AND THE LENINIST WEE STYLE

Article Published in the Periodical VOPROSY ISTORII
KPSS, No lo 1980

THE GREAT UNITY OF THE PARTY AND THE PEOPLE
Article Published in the Periodical KOHHUNIST, No 17 1980

FROM A SPEECH AT A MEETING IN HAVANA WITH THE PUPILS AND
TEACHERS OP THE BOARDING SCHOOL DIENI V. I. LUIN
16 December 1980

SPEECH AT 111: SECOND CONGRESS 01' THE COHIUNIST PART! 01' CUBA
18 Decesber 1980

ms cm'r rouse or MERNAL mmnsun

Speech at a Meeting of Soviet-Cuban Friendship at the
Metallurgical Plant ineni Jose Marti on 19 December 1980

Sub j ect Index

Thematic Table of Contents
FORIMHHCMULIEIHONLY

From the Publisher

The book being offered to the reader by the member of the Politburo and Secretary
of the CC CPSU comrade R. u. Chernenko includes speeches and articles pertaining
to the period of his work in leading party posts from 1971 through December 1980.

This period in the life of our party, the Soviet state, and the entire Soviet
people was marked by outstanding historical events-the thh and 25th CPSU Con-
gresses, the adoption of the new USSR Constitution, and the celebration of the
60th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution and the 30th anniver-
sary of the Victory by the Soviet people during the Great Patriotic War. These
and other events are reflected in the materials of-the book.

The speeches and articles which have gone into the collection deal with the fun-
damental problems of the work of the CPSU and convincingly demonstrate the in-
creased leading role of our Leninist party in the society of developed socialism
and the untiring creative work of the Central Committee of the CPSD. the Politburo
of the cc, and the General Secretary of the CC CPSU and Chairman of the Presidium
of the USSR Supreme Soviet comrade L. l. Brezhnev.

Among the major social and political problems which are raised in the book, the
topic of mastering the Leninist style of party and state work runs through it like
a red thread. The Leninist style, the author emphasizes, is one of the very great
possessions of the party which makes it possible for it to successfully perform
the leadership of Soviet society.

Many of the materials in the collection are devoted to the issues of improving the
system of the management of socialist society and the work of the apparatus of our
party and state agencies, and to strengthening its relations with communists and
with all of the workers. An especial place has been assigned to R. U. Chernenko's
addresses at the All-Union Conferences of Party “others in 1976, 1978, and 1980
which are being published for the first time. In these addresses there is a broad-
based examination of such aspects of the work of the party apparatus as the pre-
paration and making of decisions, supervision and verification of execution, and
work with vorkers' documents and letters; they also reveal the many-sided work of
the party in the selection, education, and placement of cadres, the strengthening
of the party and state apparatus, and an increase in_responsibility and performance
discipline at all sectors of party, government, and economic vork.

IKMRCHHNCIAI.IEIE(H€LY
A nuaber of the materials which have gone into the collection are devoted to the
issues of the foreign policy activities of the CPSU. As a member of the Soviet
Union's delegation at European Conference on Security and Cooperation in Helsinki,
in a number of his articles and addresses on this topic the author devotes a

great deal of attention to the many-sided activities of our party and state in the
struggle for a durable peace, international cooperation, disarmament, and the
relaxation of international tensions. K. D. Chernenko's addresses at congresses of
our fraternal parties and at international solidarity movements have also been
included in the book. They express the firm Leninist foreign policy course of our
party and its Central Committee, a consistent internationalism, and the unshakable
endeavour of our communists and of the entire Soviet people to realise the Peace
Program which was worked out by the 26th and 25th CPSU Congresses.

The range of the theoretical and the practical issues which are touched upon by
the author of the book is wide and diverse. However, it will not be difficult for
the reader to define the chief topic which unites them: the indefatiguable work

of our Leninist party and its indissoluble unity with the entire Soviet people in
accomplishing the magnificent tasks of communist construction.

The book opens up with a speech by K. 0. Chernenko to the voters of the Kuybyshev
Election District of the city of Moscow on 15 February 1980. After this the
speeches and articles which have been placed in the collection are in chronolo-
gical order. Some of the materials are being published in abbreviated form. For

the convenience of the reader, a thematic table of contents and a subject index
are provided.

F(”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USIZ(HVLY
IKNI(HWWC1A1.USE(MVLY

REALIZE THE HISTORIC DECISIONS 0? THE 25th CPSU CONGRESS

From a Report at the All-Union Conference
of Party workers on 19 Hay 1976

[Text] Dear Comrades!

All of us find ourselves under the profound impression of the 25th CPSU Congress.
This outstanding event in the life of our party and of the entire Soviet people
has given rise to enormous political and labor enthusiasm and has determined the

life and work of every communist and every Soviet person for many years into the
future.

Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev spoke profoundly and movingly about the congress: "The
history of our Leninist party has been marked by a remarkable galaxy of congresses.
Each of them was an important landmark in the life of the party and the country.
And you need have no doubts, comrades, that the 25th Congress will occupy among
them its own special and inimitable place-as a congress of great accomplishments
which was held under the sign of realism and efficiency, and a calm confidence in
our strength, a confidence in new victories for our great cause of the construc-
tion of communism. . . ."1

The 25th Congress convincingly demonstrated the enormous successes which have
been achieved by our party and the Soviet people in the struggle for the preser-
vation, defense, creative development, and multiplication of the gains of October,
and for the realization in concrete reality of the ideas of the construction of

a socialist and communist society.

The life-giving power of the ideals of Marxism-Leninism, and the gigantic scope
and depth of the constructive accomplishments of the Soviet people were demon-
strated at the congress.

The forum of Soviet comnnusts took.plsce under the conditions of the monolithic
unity of our party, its indestructible solidarity with the people, and the growing
authority of the CPSU in the world communist and workers' movement and in the
minds and hearts of all of progressive mankind.

History knows of parties which have called themselves socialist and which have gone

out onto the arena of struggle for social ideals. But some of them sooner, and
others later depart from this arena, and become dissolved in petty bourgeois, some-

FOR<0FFKJA1.USE(HNLY
times nationalistic, but, for the most part, reformist aspirations. unable to
endure the strenuous struggle which they attempted to wage.

Our Leninist party not only withstood all storms and bad weather, but, having
become hardened in this struggle, proved with practical deeds the greatness of
its ideals, the correctness of its entire strategy and tactics, and the mighty
transforming force of the ideas for which it was struggling.

This is why the eyes of all progressive mankind are turned to it. They see in
it a combination of boldness and stauncbness, devotion to the ideas of Marxism-

Leninism, and solidarity and unity with the people the expressor of whose thoughts
and hopes it is.

All of this was demonstrated in the most convincing manner at the 25th Congress of
our party.

Comrades! The atmosphere of the congress, its exceptionally practical and creative
approach to the solution of extremely large problems left an unforgettable im-
pression. Its work was distinguished by enormous optimism, purposefulness, and
exactingness toward communists and cadres. This is a result of the unshakable
confidence in the success of our work, in the fact that if the party with its
collective mind maps out goals, sets tasks for itself and for the country, then

these goals will without question be reached, and these tasks, indisputably, will
be accomplished.

The many-faceted and fruitful work of the Central Committee and its Politburo
headed by the outstanding political leader of the present-day and the tireless
fighter for peace comrade L. I. Brezhnev received unanimous approval and high
praise at the 25th CPSU Congress.

It was emphasized in the speeches at the congress that the Central Committee is
steadfastly implementing the general line of the party and consistently pursuing
the course which was worked out after the October (1966) Plenum of the CC CPSU and
which received a further development in the decisions of the 23rd and 24th Con-
greases. The delegates to the congress noted with deep gratitude that the work
of the Central Committee, Politburo, Secretariat of the CC, and personally of the
General Secretary of the CC CPSU L. I. Brezhnev is a vivid example of service to
the people, and a model of the realisation of a Leninist work style and of our
communist construction plans. It is characterized by a scientific approach,
realism and far-sightedness, collectivity in developing decisions and efficiency
in realizing them, the greatest trust in cadres and great demandingness with
regard to them, and a close connection with local party organisations.

The results of the country's economic development and the titanic work of the party
in this field received a high evaluation at the 25th Congress. As L. I. Brezhnev
noted, the past five-year plan was the best of all of the five-year plans. Our
party has achieved enormous successes in the accomplishment of our chief economic
task--"Everything in the Name of Man, For the Good of Man."

FOR OFFICIAI.lElI(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After discussing the results of the past five-year period, the 25th Congress
nade an attentive and objective analysis of the experience which had been gained,
examined the plans for the future, and concentrated its attention on unsolved
problems. The congress outlined a principled political course for the party. It
defined, on a scientific basis, the econoaic strategy for the 10th Five-Year Plan
and for the note distant perspective, and put forward tasks to increase the
country's economic potential and to strengthen its defense capacity.

The congress devoted a large snout of attention to the situation in the world
and to the international activity of our party. After having unsninoualy approved
of the fruitful work which has been done by the Central Co-ittee of the CPSU,
the Politburo of the CC, and by coerade L. I. Brezhnev in this field, the con-
gress -phasized that the Soviet Union's international position is strong today,
as never before. The noble and constructive foreign policy goals of our country
which were described fro. the rostru of the party congress have been welconed
with understanding and hope by the peace-loving progressive forces of the planet.

The 25th Congress synthesized as it were the party's entire colossal long years
of experience in the struggle for coinunisn. Basing itself on the solid founda-
tion of this experience, the congress defined a new prograa for advancing the
economic, political, and spiritual life of the Soviet people, throwing a bright
light on the path for the further growth of public welfare.

The results of the 25th Congress of the CPSU and the trenendous tasks which were
put forward by it astonish the boldest iaagination. These results are giving rise
among our people to unprecedented political and labor enthusiasts. The tasks
which have been put forward by the 25th Congress inspire us columnists, and
smon us to new victories and new acconplishnents.

The entire country is living today with the ideas and decisions of the congress.
The decisions of the 25th Congress are the source froa which co-unists will for
many years in the future get answers to the most important questions of our life
and work. Their beneficial influence is having an effect upon all of the aspects
of the life and work of Soviet people, and upon the work of party, govern-eat,
economic, and public organizations. The delegates to the party congress have
taken its ideas and decisions into the masses, there where victory is forged, and

where the plans of the 25th CPSU Congress are put into practice and materialized
in concrete deeds and accomplishments.

After the congress plenulns and meetings of the party aktiv took place everywhere.
Everywhere where the work results of the congress were discussed in one or
another form they found a living response anong comunists and non-party people,
among all of the workers of our country. During the course of these measures
there were discussions of the prospects for the future and of the tasks which
follow froa the decisions of the congress, and concrete plans of action were
discussed and napped out.

The entire work of the congress and its ideas and instructions represent a high
dynanisn, accumulate a charge of enormous energy and power, and, for this reason,

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exclude slowness and call to action. The party today is conducting a combat
review of the forms and methods of work and is discovering unutilized reserves so
as to put all of its detachments into movement in an organised manner and, without
losing time, to begin the practical realization of the decisions of the congress.

Comrades! The content and importance of intrs-party work was discussed from the
lofty rostrum of the 25th Congress with great personal involvement and concern.

A concrete place has been determined for every party and government worker in
the great national work of accomplishing the tasks which have been put forward by
the party congress. They must, first of all, be conscious of and understand the
full depth of the responsibility which is being placed upon the workers of the

apparatus who have the task of performing a large amount of organizational work
to realize the decisions of the congress.

It is extremely important witn regard to the high demands of the 25th CPSU Con-
gress to self-critically evaluate the state of affairs in our work sector also,

to weigh the importance of the changes which have taken place in recent years,

to analyze the experience that has been gained, and to extract the necessary
lessons for the future. By measuring what has been achieved against the tasks
which have been set by the congress, and by evaluating the past from the point of
view of the present. it is possible to define with the necessary measure of
objectivity our successes and defects in the work that has been done and, thereby,
come to a better understanding of the vital problems of the present day.

The period in the history of the CPSU which is connected with the direct work of
V. I. Lenin to form a party and state apparatus has left for our party a most
valuable heritage of Leninist norms and demands upon the style of party work.

"The results of the past five-year period,"Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev said in the
Summary Report to the 25th Party Congress, "convincingly testify to the fact t t
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union has been following a Leninist course."
During these years Leninist norms of party life and Leninist traditions in the
work of the party apparatus received a further creative development with regard
to the new demands and new tasks. They have been gaining a new content and

have been strictly implemented, and have become the basic factor in improving

the political and organizational work of the party.

Creative constructive work was performed at all sectors. and the organizational
strengthening of all of the party's elements and qualitative improvement of all
of the parts of the party mechanism was carried out on a wide front. Highly im-
portant experience was acquired in solving a number of important problems of
party construction. The qualitative composition of the appsratus's cadres was

steadily improved, their responsibility for their work became greater, and their
creative initiative was developed.

In recent years appreciable successes have been achieved in improving the style
and methods of party work on the basis of more careful attention to it and a
scientific approach. This is expressed above all in better organization, a

11

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
INIR‘OFFTCJAI.IISEZ(HULY

detailed analysis of the actual state of affairs, the practical use of the
results of scientific research. and the selectionof optimal forms in relation
to the specific nature of the work of the party organizations. The level of ex-
ecution supervision and verification for decisions which are taken has risen.

The study and use of public opinion on the most important issues of political,
economic, and cultural life--a careful, daily analysis of the letters, proposals,
and responses received from workers-whee occupied a substantial place in the
work of the party apparatus.

The content and importance of the measures which have been carried out in this
field and the breadth and depth of the changes provide us with grounds for char-
acterizing the period after the 26th Congress as the beginning of s new stage

in the development of the work system of the party apparatus.

One of the characteristic features of this stage is the increased attention of
the Central Committee and of local party agencies to the work of the party
apparatus and to the organization of work with documents. The fact that the
Central Comittee shows constant concern for this important aspect of party work
is a remarkable Leninist tradition.

The attention of the CC to the work of the party apparatus is marked today by the
purposefulness and concreteness of its approach and it is :omprehensive and con-
sistent. It is precisely the generous and timely concern of the Central Couittee

that became the basis of the positive changes, for example, in the field of work
with doctments.

The necessity for improving work in this field was and is dictated by the rapidly
growing demands of life, and by the expansion of the dimensions and complexity of
all of party work. In view of this, the Central Cor-ittee developed and carried
out a whole system of concrete measures. A number of decrees were adopted which
have had a profound influence on all of the aspects of work with documents and on
improving the work of the entire party apparatus.

A central place in improving the work of the party apparatus belongs to the theses
and conclusions set forth by Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev in the Smary Report to the
25th Congress, at the plenuas of the CC, and in his speech at the Conference of
Party Workers on Io April 1976. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev called attention to the
importance of correctly organized work with documents as an indispensable condi-
tion for the establishent of a genuinely party style. lie provided a principled
evaluation of the state of this matter; and he revealed the deep connection be-
tween work with docuaents and such vitally important issues as the strengthening
of party and state discipline, an increase in the personal responsibility of
cadres, the eradication of bureaucratic manifestations, an uncompromising struggle
against the creation of "paper work," an improvement of management, and so forth.

Speaking at the All-Union Conference of Party Workers, Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev
emphasized that without observing the necessary precision in the preparation of

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0_NLY
FIN!()FFICD\L lﬁﬂE(NVLY

all types of party documents, without scrupulousness in this matter, and without
a sincere and party attitude toward documentation we cannot know the true face of
our party.

The decrees of party bodies, he stated, demand especial attention and responsibi-
lity. It is important that every work and every formulation in a party decision
be carefully weighed; they have to be distinguished by precision, briefness of
exposition, expressiveness, and political pointedness. This is what needs to be
achieved in the preparation of materials in a party committee. The deeper a
question has been thought out and the higher the quality with which it has been
prepared, the richer in content and specificity is the decision, and the stronger
its aobilizing and organizing influence. The costs which are permitted in the
preparation of a document and the insufficient substantiation of reconmnmdations

may create difficulties for work in the future when the document becomes the
basis for organizational work.

As is known, the decrees of the CC CPSU and the principled theses and practical
recommendations stated by comrade L. I. Brezhnev were welcomed by the workers of
all of the elements of the party with great satisfaction and perceived as a guide
to action; they were at the basis of a broad complex of measures which have
already been carried out or are planned for the future.

Note has to be taken of the ever increasing attention of local party committees
to improving work with documents as one of their paramount and important
questions. In them there occurs a collective interpretation of these questions,
and an analysis of the ways, forms. and methods of work performed. All of this
fosters a deeper understanding of the place and role of documents in the system
of the party's organisational and political work and has a positive influence
on the effectiveness of the work of the party apparatus.

Planned measures are in the final analysis verified by concrete deeds and evaluated
through achieved restite. And in this sense the improvement of the system of

work with party documents during the period after the 24th Congress convincingly
testifies to the correctness, timeliness, and great vital strength of the measures
being carried out by the party.

A study of the work in a number of republic, kray, and oblast organisations shows
that everywhere there has been a growth in the responsibility of apparatus workers
for complying with the demands of the cc, greater punctuality and better quality
in the preparation of materials, and efficiency and clarity in the execution of
the documents and letters of workers; the level of supervision has also risen.

It is important to note that these positive changes are being spread to most of
the party's gorkons and raykoms, and also to many primary party organisations.

Party committees are showing more and more activeness in influencing the organiza-
tion of the execution of their decisions, and an improvement of the work style of
the apparatus of government and economic agencies. And this is very important.
For the results of the execution of many party decisions are directly dependent
upon the responsibility, confidence, and quality of the work of the apparatus.

13
FINICHHHCIAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
FINI(HHﬂCJAI.USElMNLY

There is one other circumstance that should be especially emphasised: during the
course of improving and strengthening the system of work with documents and
letters the cadres of apparatus workers have natured. They have built up a
substantial experience. Their knowledge has increased. In their majority they

possess the necessary measure of responsibility, and the ability to approach
their work with initiative and efficiency.

Comrades! The paramount task today consists in carefully preserving what has
been achieved and persistently increasing it. Everything that we have succeeded
in achieving in recent years has to be regarded as the beginning of a great
responsible job to improve the style of all of the aspects of our work.

It has to be remembered that no matter how substantial the results which have
been attained, they, as the party demands, should without fail be evaluated with
regard to the increased possibilities and, most important, with regard to the
high demands upon party work which follow from the decisions of the 25th CPSU
Congress: take a mature approach in evaluating your work, do not engage in
self-delusion, and consistently seek the solution of issues in accordance with
the demands of the party congress.

In defining the concrete participation of the workers of the party apparatus and
their place in the realization of the tasks put forward by the 25th CPSU Congress,
one has to proceed first of all from the demands of s Leninist style. It is
precisely in the Leninist style, as comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted at the congress,
that there is an important condition for the success of party leadership.

The questions of improving work style are today the most important ones. Party
workers and activists are showing an untiring interest in them.

Our communists discussed these issues with great personal interest during the
period of the report and election campaign on the eve of the 25th CPSU Congress.
Hhatever problems the delegates to the party conferences and congresses touched
upon, the discussion invariably concerned the necessity for a further improve-
ment of the work style and methods of the party committees and an increase in
performance discipline.

Comrades! I have had many occasions to emphasize in my speeches that the ability
to work with a document is an inseparable aspect of the successful work of a
party apparatus worker.

The effectiveness of party work depends upon how deeply and validly a document has
been prepared, upon whether it responds to the issues of the day, and whether it
is capable of mobilizing people for the organization of a concrete deed so as to
obtain as a result the greatest effect and the fullest return.

However, it is not a secret that sometimes there appear documents in which
general and non-concrete tasks are merely declared, arbitrarily, and without

regard to the demands of life. Frequently this reduces the effectiveness and,
sometimes, completely devalues the decisions which are being taken.

14

FOR 0F15C1A1.U8£‘0Nlﬂ
FOI:0FIIC1A1.USE‘0NLY

The reason for this, as a rule, is a superficial attitude toward work, poor
knowledge of the situation in t1e localities, and a formal approach to analyzing
the work of party o¢ganizations.

Such shortcomings are especially palpable if they concern the work of the appara-
tus of a raykom. One of the most important elements of our party, the rayon
committee has the task, first of all, of being the direct organiser of party

work and of mobilizing the workers for the accomplishment of the tasks of econo-
mic and cultural construction.

However, in certain rsykoms an excessive masher of decrees are adopted and, more-
over, some of them'are not concrete, do not bind anyone to anything, and, in the
final analysis, bring no benefit and only distract the workers of the slall
raykom apparatus and hinder them from engaging in live organizational work.

On the other hand, frequently obkom sections, more from tradition than from
necessity, request from the gorkoms, raykoms, and, recently, from the primary
party organizations every possible kind of information, reference, and data,
which greatly increases the flow of paper.

Our position in this question has to be clear and absolutely definite: we have

to resolutely oppose those who produce excessive amounts of paper and accumulate
it "just in case."

I would like to call your attention to the following matter. As a result of the
expansion of the sphere of activity of the party committees, there has been an
appreciable increase in the flow of documents addressed to them: business papers,
information, work correspondence, and also various requests by organizations,
departments, and enterprises. In many cases there is no doubt about their use-
fulness. Major party and state issues are frequently raised in them, and they
contain valuable and necessary information.

At the same time, the creation of a large number of documents is explained by the
endeavour of certain leaders to shift the decision for purely economic questions
to higher party agencies and, thereby, remove from themselves the responsibility
for the work which can and should be carried out independently, without the
intervention of higher agencies.

The acuteness and importance of this problem was emphasised by comrade L. I. Brezhnev
at the December (1973) Plenum of the cc CPSU, and in his address at the conference

of party workers. Measures which have been taken recently by local party,
government, and economic agencies to bring order into the work with documents of

this kind have already produced palpable positive results.

Nevertheless, party committees still receive quite a few requests and telegrams
which testify to the helplessness and, sometimes, to the inactivity of certain
leaders. Such solicitations make work more difficult and distract the apparatus
from more important problems which really require the intervention of party
agencies.

IIHICHNHCIAI.IEHE(HULY
FINIC”WH(1A1.USE(MVLY

The endeavour of certain leaders to protect themselves with excess paper in
order to remove from themselves the responsibility for failures in work is s
clear manifestation of bureaucratism. And where there is bureaucratiem, there
immediately appears unnecessary papers. Instead of organisational work and of a
real struggle for the fulfillment of planning assignments, "objective" reasons
are thought up and dozens of requests are directed to various organizations.

The Central Co-ittee of the party constantly directs the efforts of party
committees and of all communists toward a resolute and uncompromising struggle
against this ugly phenomenon. Bureaucratism, unfortunately. is alive in our day
also. Under present conditions it cannot show itself to garishly, but its harm
is no less palpable because of this. It manifests itself in a disregard of the
essence of a matter for the sake of form, in an attempt to shift its own direct
responsibilities onto others, in an excessive over-insurance, and in an attempt
to d:own a vital matter in a flow of paper. And today bureaucratism also makes
itself felt in red-tape, a violation of the unity between word and dead, a
retreat from the solution of vitally important problems, and so forth.

The struggle against bureaucratism is a mnlti-level and manyqsided process. It
provides for organizational, administrative, educational, and other measures. I
want to emphasize that this is not a struggle against documents as such. 0n the
contrary, putting order in the work with documents is an effective means of
struggle against bureaucratism.

The workers of the party apparatus have to thoroughly and deeply analyze and
objectively and demandingly evaluate the usefulness of sending any document to a
party agency, must reduce unnecessary correspondence on questions which can be
efficiently resolved by means of personal contact, and so forth. An increased
responsibility for the slightest manifestations of bureaucratism and paper work
creation has to be developed in every party and government worker. This will

help to create a healthy atmosphere in work and will improve matters to a sub-
atantial degree.

In examining the many-sided problems of the work of the party apparatus through
the prism of the tasks which have been advanced by the 25th Congress, we should
put the questions of content. efficiency, and quality in the forefront. These
questions have the directest relationship not only to workers, kolkhoz workers,
and specialists, that is, to those who are directly employed in the sphere of
material production. Quality is a universal factor whose action is spread to all
of the aspects of the economic and political development of society.

The task of improving qualitative indicators, the turn toward the qualitative
side of things, and the party's ccurse aimed at intensive methods embrace all of
the aspects of the work of the party apparatus. work quality is the question

of questions for every party worker. No matter at what sector he may be and no
matter what he does, quality has to comprise the chief content and be the decisive
indicator and basic pivot of his work.

The turn toward the qualitative factors of all of our many-sided activities is
making greater demands upon performance supervision and verification.

16

mummmv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The effectiveness of the party apparatus-«one of the host important qualities of
its work-win impossible without well organized performance verification. Our party
is organically characterised by the unity of decision and execution. This is why
it is constantly concerned for an improvuent and perfection cf perfornance c611-
trol and verification. V. I. Lenin repeatedly aphasised the necessity that
"first place be taken by actual supervision over the act realization of the
decrees of the central authority and local institutions."

The party constantly teaches that an irresponsible attitude toward the execution
of the decisions and directives of leading agencies is a violation of party and
state discipline, the most harnrul manifestation of bureaucratisn. and it calls

upon us to struggle against this evil by neans of performce control and
verification.

At the present time new and deeper tasks are being moved to the forefront in

this work. And this is entirely natural. The reduction of control merely to inven-
torying the movement of docusnts and to the simple establishnent of the facts

of performance dates violations is no longer able to ensure satisfactory results.

A further improvement of the system of verification, the giving to it of the
necessary depth and nany-sidedness, and an increase in its effectiveness pre-
supposes a comprehensive strengthening of the planning principle in this work.
Otherwise, it will be impossible to get free of elements of spontaneity, to
provide for the necessary sequence of aessures and the most efficient distribu-
tion of forces, and to ensure the efficient coordination of the actions of the
party apparatus.

First of all, we are speaking about the fact that the very concept of super-
vision should receive a more concrete embodiment and materialization in practical
work. The process of the organization of supervision should be looked at sore
broadly; the chief thing here is to find the real reason for one or another
violation, to see to it that it is eliminated, and to work in such a way that

in the future there will be no such violations.

Conrades! The work with workers' letters found a deep reflection at the 25th
Congress.

During the course of the preparations for and the holding of the congress the
high political consciousness of Soviet people and the life-giving power of
socialist deaocracy was again denonstrated. Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev spoke

vividly and convincingly at the congress about letters: ”One of the important
forns of the connection between our party and its Central Cos-littee with the
nasses is workers' letters. The amber of then is steadily increasing, reflecting
the growing public activeness of Soviet people. Support for the party's policies
is expressed in them, and opinions are stated on easy of the fundamental issues
of the life of our party and state."5

The decree of the cc CPS!) "On a Further Improvement of Bork with Horkers' Letters
in the Light of the Decisions of the 25th CPS!) Congress" was a new expression of
the party's exceptional attention and concern for this sector of work. -

17

FOR OFFICIAL 15E ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What is the essence of this decision? the cc CPSD believes that with the con-
sistent development of socialist democracy and a strengthening of the ties

between the party and the masses a further improvement of work with letters and
a coeprehensive improvement of its forms and methods is acquiring ever greater

importance.

It is emphasized in the decree that in recent years significant changes have
occurred in the content and character of workers' letters. There has been an
increase in the number of letters in which questions which are of general party
and state importance are raised. Many of the proposals which were made by the
authors of the letters were used in preparing the Interisls of the congress and
found a reflection in its documents, and the most important counsels and consi-

derations are exasined in the CC CPS!) and taken account of in the practical work
of leading bodies. '

The decision of the cc CPSU gives a high evaluation to the work with workers'
letters which was performed during the period of the preparations for and holding
of the congress. Especial attention is being directed toward the necessity of

consolidating, dissainating, and developing the positi-vc work experience with
letters which was gained during the course of this work.

The task consists in taking guidance from this decree of the Central Comittee,
in raising the level of work with letters to a qualitatively new height.

The workers of the apparatus should analyse a bit more frequently the mail
which is received by party committees and give sole thought and consideration to
what kind of phenomenon this is in our life—letters from workers. why is the
quantity and character of the correspondence being received changing, what are
the reasons for the repeated solicitations of certain writers, and so forth.

with their thoughtful and conscientious work with workers' letters, as one of
the important channels of information, party apparatus workers have the task of
maintaining an exceptionally favorable atmosphere in society, in the state, and
in the party. Every person who addresses a party agency should be confident that
he will receive an accurate, clear, and friendly reply. A large number of the
letters which are now coming in to the CC and local party comittees testify
without doubt to an improvenent of the work with them. The expansion of the
circle of our correspondence speaks about the fact that ever more workers are
joining this great national cause. In their letters they seek the advice of the
party, share their innermost thoughts, and make suggestions. This kind of
constant coununication between a person and party agencies strengthens his faith
in the affairs and designs of the party, and deepens his trust in the Central
Committee. This is real and not imaginary democracy.

Of all of this, comrades, we have to be deeply conscious and free these positions
approach work with workers' letters. It must always be remembered that work

with letters is not the mechanical reading of them and the preparation of a reply.
This has to become a genuine laboratory, a system of creative work on a person's
reflections which have been set forth in letters. It must always be remembered

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IIHICHﬂﬂCJAl.USBlMVLY

that letters are an invaluable source of human thoughts and hopes, and are one
of the important forms of the party's connections with the masses.

In working with workers' letters the party worker must always remember that the
Soviet man is a very sensitive and proud one and that he demands attention and
respect for himself. If he has written a letter one or two times and has not
received a reply, then he will not write at all, or he will write about his
painful questions to superior agencies, which still often happens with us.
Practice shows that in many cases the reason for such solicitations to the CC

is the result of an inattentive attitude toward workers' letters by certain local
organizations and departments.

Many of the proposals and recommendations which are in workers' letters get a
practical embodinent. Thus, during 1975 and this year the Central Cosmittee
adopted a number of documents on party organizational, ideological, and mass
political work, economic construction. the foreign policy of the CPSU, and others.
In general, comrades, this is a very important and large matter. For this

reason we believe that correct action was taken by the Krasnodarskiy jraykom,

and also the Ivanovskiy, Kurskiy. Odesekiy,.bagestanskiy, Dsheskasganokiy.
Chimkentskiy and certain other party obkoms which held a wide and very detailed
discussion of the 118088 in work with letters at their plenums.

The very fact of a discussion of this question at the plenums of party neetings
increased the feeling of responsibility of every party organization for the
work with letters, for isproving all mass political work, for strengthening the
relations between party organizations and the masses, and for replies to all of
the questions which arise in Soviet people.

The workers of the party apparatus have to take ceasures in the near future for
the full realization of the decree of the CC CPSU on this issue. A program of
our action for the next few years has been defined in this important party
document.

It has to be especially emphasised that at all of the stages of work with letters
there have to be people involved who are sensitive, attentive, and who understand
the fact that behind every letter there is a living person with his thoughts,
cares, and hopes and that he expects not a formal, but a concrete and exhaustive
reply.

If it is not possible to satisfy the request of a declarant, and this does
happen, then it is necessary to reply not formally, but in such a way that the
author of the letter will understand that the issue which has been posed by him
has been studied and examined from every angle, but because of objective reasons
cannot be resolved postively.

It is important for every apparatus worker to understand that a letter has been
written not to him personally, but addressed to the party organisation, and he,
in his turn, in the name of the party organization and on its charge is working
with this letter. At the same time, he must clearly understand that the author
of the letter believes in the justice of the party organisation to which he

has turned and through it in the Justice of the decisions of our party.

19

F!“l(ﬂﬂﬂ€1Al.USEiMNLY
FIHROFFNJAL.USB(NVLY

Thus, only a sensitive in the wide meaning of this word attitude towards the
letters guarantees an improvement of all of this work. Bork has to be organized
in such a way that absolutely all party, government, and economic agencies which
receive letters directly or from party bodies regard this matter with great
responsibility. This is why the CC CPSD is setting the task of enlisting the
party and government aktiv more widely in the work with letters, systematically
verifying this work, and of making active use of the party press in this.

Comrades! The party organizations and labor collectives of the country are

at the onset of an important stage of the deep study, understanding, and practi-
cal embodiment of the Directives of the 25th Congress in real deeds; that is,
the basic and most responsible period has arrived, the period of the practical
accomplishment of the tasks which have been set by the congress for every
communist.

The frontiers which were taken by us during the years after the 24th Congress
have made it possible to evaluate snow the measure of the possible and necessary
in our work, and the prospects for further movement forward. The tasks which
follow from the decisions of the 25th Congress require a constant rise in the
level of activity of the party apparatus, and, this means, a constant creative
search for the achievement of qualitatively new indicators in its work.

An exceptional coolness, maximum mobilization readiness, and the highest respon-
sibility and conscientiousness in the big and in the small is being demanded
today from all of the apparatus workers. Without this kind of attitude toward
work and without the development in oneself of such qualities it is difficult

to count on success.

Everything positive that has been accumulated during the pre-congress period has
to be generalized, made maximum use of, and increased. This, comrades, is our
great possession and we have to regard it as owners and bring it to every worker
of the apparatus.

Concern for the introduction of positive experience cannot and must not be
reduced to passive waiting for one or another finished model to appear. The task
is for party workers to persistently and purposefully seek and create positive
models at all of the sectors of our work, to teach people on their basis, and,
thereby, to promote a further improvement of party work. Moreover, this does

not mean only experience on a wide scale: any, even the smallest grains of
positive experience, are valuable and precious.

It is important to also emphasize something else. Today, in order to take a
serious step forward along the path of a qualitative improvement of our work,
it is not sufficient merely to improve and perfect only individual aspects of
the work of the apparatus. It is important, basing ourselves on science and
advanced experience and with additional support in searches, to bring about the
introduction of the most efficient forms and methods which produce a maximum
return in the entire complex of our work.

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lilt¢ﬂﬂﬂ€hkllﬁ8£1ﬂﬂLY

The new tasks which have been advanced by the 25th CPSU Congress are also naking
new demands upon the training level of the party apparatus cadres. This is why
today for every worker a high responsibility for his work consists in his ability

to objectively evaluate the correspondence between his knowledge and his ability
and today's high demands.

Very good, Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev said in his speech at the Motor Vehicle Plant
imeni Likhachav: "To organize collective labor in a really effective way is an
enormous task which demands great attention not only from leaders. Contemporary
production demands that every worker have a clear idea of his place in the labor
process, know what he is doing and why and what de upon him, and feel that

his work is a necessary part of the general work.” This applies in equal measure
to the work of the apparatua.

Speaking about the efficiency of the work of the managerial apparatus, V. I. Lenin
recommended that "the true measure of the labor productivity of every given
institution be taken to be above all the degree of the real and urgent perforf
mance of all of the work items that pass through it."6 These demands are topical
today in the work of the apparatus of any party and state agency.

Vladimir Il'ich Lenin stated that the effectiveness of management and the success
of the appsratus's work depend upon the correct selection of people. He advised
here that workers be evaluated from the point of View of their conscientiousness,
politics, knowledge of their work, and organizational abilities. All of these
high qualities, taken together, signify a profound partiynost', and the readiness
and ability to selflessly labor in any sector with which the party has entrusted
a communist. In addition, V. I. Lenin emphasized that no amount of conscien-
tiousness and no amount of party authoritativeuess can substitute for what in

the given case is basic, namely, a knowledge of one's work.

he demanded insistently that the management of affairs remain always in the hands
of workers who were completely coapetent and who guaranteed the success of the
work, that at the decisive sectors there stood people who were not only unques-
tionably devoted, but really educated people, with enorlous potentialities,
talented people, and, comrades, with each passing day we have sore and lore of
such capable and talented people. Only they have to be skillfully selected,
placed, educated, and worked with.

There cannot be a mechanical shifting of jobs in the party apparatus, and the
selection of cadres has to be thought out and practical. In addition, it has to
be kept in mind that the demands upon workers always hear the features of their
time and these demands upon cadres are growing with each passing day.

The style of party work today is characterized by trust in and support for every
worker in his search for ways toward a better and efficient performance of his
work. Under these conditions, trust becones a great power. It inspires a person
and gives him self-confidence. And this engenders initiative, and an endeavour

to bring soeething new into work and to resolve questions creatively and more
boldly.

FOItOIlﬂC1Al.lEﬂE(HULY
F081)FFKJA1.USE(MNLY

Concern for and trust in workers does not have anything in common with a liberal
attitude toward those who violate discipline and order. Demandingness and
exactingness--these are also forms of trust and concern for cadres, concern for
their growth and education, for an observance of discipline, and for increasing
the responsibility of every worker for his work.

However, trust is not a formal act which confirms a worker's membership in the
party apparatus. Trust is won by one's attitude toward his work. Sensitivity
and concern for people-this has to be one of the chief components which defines
the good name of an apparatus worker who has gained complete trust in himself.

We know that to merit a good name among the people who surround you is not so
simple, while it can easily be lost. This is why this quality can be developed
and solidly preserved in the person when he is diligent in his work, faithful to
his duty, and demanding in everything toward himself and others, and when he
knows how to separate the chief matter from the secondary unnecessary matter
which hinders the creation of a good climate in the collective, and to organise
good work.

Indeed, comrades, it is impossible to work in the party apparatus without pro-
found and sincere trust. This is why this demand has to permeate the whole of
our life and work. -

In a conversation with a group of party workers L. I. Brezhnev said that we owe
our successes to the large and sincere trust in our cadres, in our party workers,
who hear the responsibility for the practical realisation of the tasks which'
have been defined by the Central Committee of the party. All of our cadres

work with great trust, which excludes elements of petty tutelage, and the pulling
ab ut of people with and without reason. With us everything is based, Leonid

11' h continued, on profound party trust in cadres and on freedom of action
withi the framework of the tasks which have been defined by the CC of the party
or by congress.

It is precisely this kind of attitude toward cadres that now penetrated the entire
life of the party and of the state and economic organisations of our country.
This, one of Lenin's basic demands, has been filled with a new content and has
become one of the principles of the work style of our party organizations. It

is precisely this that created the conditions for the diversity of the forms and
methods of party, state, and economic work and for the successful accomplishment
of the tasks facing the country and facing the party.

The atmosphere in our party is treating, healthy, and business-like. In recent
years our cadres have grown substantially and have been enriched with experience,
and they are now capable of any question and any task.

At the same time, there are still workers in the party apparatus who, relying on
their previous baggage, believe that they will be able to move matters forward

without any special strain. It is they who most often find themselves in a
difficult situation.

22

FIN!(HHﬂC1Al.USEIMNLY
There are also those workers who we do not criticise: there does not appear to
be any reason to. They do not pretend to "chief roles," they work within their
set limits. and they do the work under their charge, but don't ask anything else
from such workers. Such workers meet with their "guns'drawn" any living matter
which requires initiative, a new approach, and personal responsibility. And
they will do everything to get back as quickly as they can into the well-worn
rut of a calm and understood life. Persistent and painstaking work has to be
conducted with such people so as in the end to inculcate in them an interest and
a need for real creative work.

The large tasks which today are facing party workers are giving rise to the
necessity for a deep study and skillful employment of the entire very rich ex-
perience which has been built up by the party. The party's practical work and
its work style are for us invaluable riches and our very great possession. For
this reason, a profound mastery of Leninist work principles and style is the
chief condition for a further improvement of the work of the apparatus. Having
passed through the school of life, every party worker has the task of always

drawing knowledge and wisdom from the clear and clean source of Marxism-
Leninism.

Many years of experience shows that systematic studies and a collation of his
hours with Leninist time provides a party worker of any category not only with
an orientation point for a correct and errorless solution of the most important
questions of life, but also imparts strength and confidence to his decisions.
In the final analysis this helps to cultivate in the party apparatus worker

such qualities as modesty, obligatoriness, correctness. efficiency, and respon-
sibility.

Thus, the essence of the demands of today consist not only in the mastery to
perfection of an entire sum of knowledge, but also, and this is the chief
thing, the ability to apply all of this knowledge practically in life, in one'e

work. This is one of the mandatory conditions and demands upon party apparatus
workers.

Comrades! The decisions of the 25th Congress have armed the Soviet people with
a magnificent program of construction and have pointed out the only correct
road-the road of truth, the road of freedom, and the road of the people's
happiness. The realization of this program will demand great efforts from the
entire party and an increase in the results and quality of the work of all of
the elements of the party apparatus.

Speaking at the closed 25th Congress, comrade L. I. Brezhnev said: "The plans
which have been approved by the congress are difficult and strenuous plans. The
tasks which it has set are very serious tasks. But we are confident. comrades.
we are firmly confident in the fact that these plans will be realized and that
these tasks will be accoaplished."7

Communists, party organizations, and our entire party now see their duty above
all in ensuring the successful realisation of the historic decisions of the 23th

23

F03<NﬂﬂK1Al.USE(NVLY
FOOTNOTES
1. Brezhnev, L. 1., "Following Lenin's Course," V01 5, p 557.
2. Ibid., Vol 5, p 519.
3. Lenin, V. 1., "Complete Works," V01 37, p 366.
6. Brezhnev, L. I., op. cit., Vol 5, p 524.
5. Ibid., V01 6, p 10.
6. Lenin, V. I., op. cit., V01 54, pp 101-102.

7. Brezhnev, L. 1., op. cit., V01 5, p 556.

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAI, 1981

2959
C50: 1800/272
IMPROVE THE STYLE AND METHODS OF THE
PORK OF THE PARTY APPARATUS

From a Report at a Conference of
Party workers of Siberia and
the Far East, Krasnoyarsk
11 July 1978

[Text] Comrades! The time in which you and I have to come to meet is a truly
unusual time.

A little more than two years has passed since the 25th Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. The transforming power of its ideas is being felt
today as real in all of the spheres of the life of our society: in economic.
scientific, and cultural development, in improving the well-being of Soviet
people, and in the struggle for peace.

The past year of l977-the year of the 60th Anniversary of the Great October
Socialist Revolution and the year of the adoption of the new USSR Constitution--
has become a vivid page in the chronicle of our party and state. These historic
events have placed their stamp on all of the party's activities and on the work
of all of the country's public organizations.

The December (1977) Plenum of the CC took place. In the report by L. I. Brezhnev
at the Plenum a clear program of action for all party organizations is defined,
and the issues of party, state, and production discipline are posed sharply.

The letter of the CC CPSU, USSR Council of Ministers, All-Union Central Council
of Trade Unions, and the CC of the All-Union Leninist Young Communist League on
the development of a socialist competition for the fulfillment and overful-
fillment of the 1978 plan has been adopted. This document is an example of a
practical and constructive approach to existing problems and shortcomings.

Recently a plenum of the CC CPSU which discussed the question of the further
development of the country's agriculture finished its work. The July (1978)
Plenum of the CC has become yet another important landmark in the realization
of the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress. It pointed out the way for further

progress by agriculture-one of the most important economic branches of our
country.

It was emphasized at the plenum that the overall level of the development of
agriculture does not yet accord with the rapidly growing needs of society and
requires energetic efforts to further strengthen the material and technical

base and improve the organization of production so as to be able in the very

nearest future to much more fully satisfy the needs for food and for raw materials
for industry.

The report by the General Secretary of the CC CPSU comrade L. I. Brezhnev gives
a many-sided and profoundly scientific analysis of the party‘s policy and prac-

.. IN1R*0FINCIAI.IIHE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ticsl work to develop our socialist agriculture at the current stage, and it
defines the ways and concrete measures to its progress. This is an important
new page in our Leninist agrarian policy. For at all stages of the construction
of socialism agriculture has always been the affair of the entire party and the

entire people. And this was heard with especial eepressiveness at the July
Plenun of the CC CPSU.

The report by Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev is an enormous new contribution to the
Leninist teachings on the problems of agrarian policy. It is a model of the
combination of the theory and practice of socialist construction. It is a

substantiated, well-grounded program of movement to a higher stage in the develop-
ment of the country's economy.

The program which has been mapped out by the plenum is designed for the long
period. Now, comrades, it is a matter of realizing these plans of the party and
embodying them in life. And all of us are confident that our conunists and our
entire people will correctly perceive this new step by the party which is aimed
at the accomplishment of the general task of raising the material and cultural

levels of the workers of our country and of strengthening the might of our home-
land.

Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev emphasized at the plem- that a higher level of party
leadership and improved methods of work in the masses have to correspond to the
new stage of the struggle to advance agriculture.

Active organizational and ideological-political work by the party, as its entire
historical past testifies, is a weapon with which nothing can compare. With

its help the party has accomplished the most complicated tasks and has taken the
most difficult frontiers.

For this reason, our success today will depend to a large extent upon how deeply
and seriously in a party manner these most important party docuents are received
and their political pointedness understood and appreciated. It is important
that party workers and the party apparatus apprehend these docuents not only
with their minds, but also with their hearts. That they be understood first of
all in their general party and general political meaning, and not in a narrowly
departmental or purely professional sense. For the struggle to advance agri-
culture for conunists is a struggle not on different fronts: in field work,
animal husbandry, or land improvement. No, this is a struggle on a single,
party-political front where every leader and every co-unist has to be permeated
by a feeling of involvement and personal responsibility for the common task. ‘l'o
cultivate in the party worker precisely this kind of approach-«his is our task

today.
Recently the Secretariat of the CC CPSII examined the question: "0n Measures to

Realize the Decisions of the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU." The following
tasks have been placed before party organizations:

26

l-‘OROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOI(HHHCJAI.USBIMQLY

First, to bring the ideas and the meaning of the decisions of the plenum to the
entire party and to every communist. Toward this end, the results of the cc
Plenum have to be discussed everywhere at plenums of party committees or meetings
of the party aktiv. and also at meetings in the primary party organisations and
in the labor collectives.

It is important to ensure a profound explanation of the materials of the plenum
among the broad working masses. Leading party, government, and economic cadres
have the task of taking direct part in this work. Specialists, scientists,

production innovators. and the best propaganda forces also have to he enlisted
in it.

Secondly. the decisions of the plenum have to be secured by a large amount of
organizational work by party. government, and economic agencies. In working out
measures it is important to concentrate attention above all on improving the
leadership of agriculture and on eliminating shortcomings. Hatters have to be
organized in such a way that every communist and every Soviet toiler finds his
place in all of this work.

At the present time all of the organizational and political work of party and
government bodies has to be subordinated to the chief issues-the successful per-
formance of the harvest and the fulfillment of the plans and socialist commit-
ments to sell the state grain and other cropping and animal husbandry products,
and the organised completion of all agricultural work in 1978.

And thirdly, along with the accomplishment of current tasks, it is necessary to

develop future overall measures for the realization of the planus's decisions
over a period of many years into the future.

The Session of the USSR Supreme Soviet which recently concluded considered and

adopted a large number of laws. This Session can serve as a classical example

and as a model of the timeliness and fullness'of the fulfillment of the demands
of the new USSR Constitution.

It demonstrated convincingly that the Soviet state. proclaiming in its Constitu-
tion various theses. immediately puts them into practice. Moreover, this is
achieved not by semi-measures, but by effective measures which define the great
paths toward the further transformation of our country. It is precisely this
kind of example that has been shown to us by the Soviet Parliament which
examined and thoroughly discussed and adopted the Law on the USSR Council of
Ministers, the Law on the Procedure for Concluding, Carrying Out, and Denouncing
International USSR Agreements. and the Law on Elections to the USSR Supreme
Soviet.

The tasks which follow from the decisions of the CC Plenum and the Session of the
USSR Supreme Soviet oblige us to be ready for a large amount of strenuous work.

A new stage has begun in the party's and people's struggle for the fulfillment of
the last two years of the five-year plano-and it is a matter of honor for every
communist to take a place in the front ranks of this struggle.

27

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(MVLY
FOI:0I1IC1A1.US£{MNLY

Comrades! The party organizations of our krays and oblasts have been given

tasks of enormous importance in connection with the decree of the Politburo of
the CC CPSU, Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, and USSR Council of Ministers
on the results of the trip by L. I. Brezhnev to the areas of Siberia and the

Far East. The trip by L. I. Brezhnev is of great importance for the execution of
the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress on the overall mastery of the resources
and the development of the productive forces of Siberia and the Far East which
are of enormous importance for the economic development of our country.

A decisive role is being assigned to the local party, government, and economic
agencies in organizing the work to fulfill the planned program. Much will de-
pend upon the efficiency, maximum organization, and self-discipline of the party
committees and their apparatus and on the organization on the necessary level of
performance supervision and verification. And all of this has the most direct
and immediate relation to your work sector and will require from you additional

new efforts to search for and introduce more rational and effective forms and
methods.

Comrades! In Krasnoyarsk we are concluding a series of conferences which have
been held on a decision by the Central Committee of the CPSU. The materials of
our and other zonal conferences will be analyzed and studied. But already today
it is possible to say that these conferences have been successful.

Before my departure for Krasnoyarsk I met with Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev and
briefly informed him about the zonal conferences being held by us. He asked me
to convey his greetings to you and his best wishes for your.work and lives.

He also expressed regrets that this time he himself was not able to take part in
the work of the conferences. As is known. he has participated twice in such
conferences. At the same time, Leonid Il'ich asked us all to keep it in mind
that the advice and instructions given by hin at our previous meetings remain

in force.

Comrades! The first conclusion which suggests itself from an acquaintance with
the materials of all of the conferences which have been held, including ours in
Krasnoyarsk, is that they have once again shown how our cadres have grown, and
with what interest they approach the discussion and analysis of the forms, methods.
and devices of party work which ensure the successful accomplishment of the tasks
posed by the 25th CPSU Congress.

At the same time, there was not only an interest that was shown at the conferences,
but also the deep knowledge and high level of practical competence of all of the
participants.

I would like to emphasize as a positive and pleasant phenomenon in our work the
ability of the party workers who have spoken at these conferences to see our
everyday affairs against the background of the enormous tasks of the day of our
entire party and our entire country, and to tie them in with the practical solu-
tion of the problems which face individual organizations and enterprises.

28

FOI1NHHC1A1.USE(HNLY
If we were to put it briefly, the totality of the problems which were examined
during the course of the zonal conferences confirmed the indisputable truth
that a rise in the level of party leadership and an improvement of the work style

of the party apparatus is inseparably connected with an improvement of work with
documents.

Many of you know that at the All-Union Conference of Party workers in 1976, when
the many-sided problems of the work of party committees were examined through
the prism of the tasks which had been set by the 25th CPSU Congress. the issues

of the content, efficiency, and quality of our work were moved to the fore-
front.

The zonal conferences have convincingly demonstrated that during the post-congress
period a new step has been taken along the path of a further improvement of

work with documents and workers' letters, and that this work is now charac-
terized by a systematic and overall approach and is exercising a positive influ-
ence on the style, forms, and methods of the work of the party apparatus.

At the same time, we are able to convince ourselves today that the uniform
approach to work with documents which has developed in the party is being skill-
fully combined with a further development of creative principles and with the
introduction of positive experience. In this regard, one can refer to the work
of the party committees on whose basis the zonal conferences were held. Each

of them contains, as they say, its own special quality in work which merits
attention and a high appraisal.

But all of them--the CCs of the Commist Parties of the Ukraine, Kazakhstan,
and Uzbekistan and the Leningrad, Gor'kiy, and Rostov abkoms-are characterised
above all by a creative search for the most effective forms and methods for the
work of the party apparatus and for a rise in the standards of its work.

Diverse forms and methods of organisational and political work have also developed
in the Krasnoyarsk Kray party organisation in which the party committees are
persistently searching for the kinds of modes and methods which will exercise an

increasingly effective political influence on the development of the kray's
productive forces, economy, and culture.

For this reason, the task is being set of bringing the conclusions and recommen-
dations of the zonal conferences to all party committees and party workers, and
of defining the measures which will ensure a further improvement in the work of

the apparatus, the introduction of advanced experience, and the elimination of
shortcomings.

1 would like to call especial attention to the use of positive experience in
work. Unfortunately, there frequently occurs in this large and important matter

a definite gap between the popularization of advanced experience and its prac-
tical realization.

To actively propagandize advanced experience is only the first stage. The most
important thing is its universal practical introduction. It is precisely here

29
FINICHWHC1A1.USE1DNIS
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that painstaking organisational work is essential, since the process of intro-
duction itself is a very couple: and difficult nutter.

It is i-portant for the experience which you have studied to because the property
of all of the party sadness and of all cadres, to receive a practical develop-
ment, and to be the basis for inroving all of our work.

Conrsdes! I will tell you frankly that in preparing for the conference I
thought for a long tine about how best to conduct this conversation with you
and I cane to the following conclusion: Life and the practice of recent years
has been dictating with increasing persistence the necessity for defining the
concrete tasks of our work in relation to general party tasks. For this reason.
perhaps, our affairs should be spoken about against the background of certain
problans of general party work; for example, the role and place of the party
worker under present conditions and certain other questions.

Let us take such a question as the further inprovaent of the various aspects

of the work of the party apparatus in recent years. This work has acquired a
general party character and a general party importance. The very fact of the
participation in our zonal conferences of a group of leading party cadres which
includes embers of the Politburo and candidate members of the Politburo, and
secretaries of the 00s of the cmunist parties of the union republics, kraykoes,
and obkons is a living testinony to the importance of this netter. This atten-
tion and concern of the party about our work not only gratifies us, but above
all obliges us to work even better.

Membership in such a great party as ours whose creator and organizer was
Vladimir ll'ich Lenin is not only a great honor, but also a great responsibility.
And to be elected to a leading party body and to work in the party apparatus-
this is all the more honorable and responsible.

Many of you know with what sincere trepidation workers welcome a representative
of our party and state abroad, how much is expected from him, and with what
sincere warmth he is looked upon. And this is true first of all because the
authority and attractive force of the Commist Party of the Soviet Union are
great. People measure themselves against Soviet communists, take an exanple
from then, and study the experience of the CPS!) with the' profoundest attention
and interest.

I recently had occasion, on a charge fron the cc CPSU, to be in Greece, and for
this reason I still have fresh inpressions from my participation in the work of
the 10th Congress of -the Conunist Party of Greece and fron my meetings with
Greek communists who, after an interruption of lore than 30 years, held a legal
congress in Athens. Horn out by underground work and mined by prisons and
persecutions, they courageously endured, were hardened in struggle, and cane to
their congress united and faithful to the cause of Marxisn-Leninisn and prole-
tarian internationalism.

'And everybody with whom I had occasion to meet and talk during this journey—from
the General Secretary of the CC of the Oomnist Party comrade Florakis to rank-

30

MOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and-file communists: workers, peasants, and party veterans-~everybody spoke with
the profoundest conviction about his solidarity with the CPSU and with the
columnists of the Country of Soviets and was sincerely delighted by the great
historical experience of the party of Lenin, and by the courage, self-sacrifice,
and staunchness of the Soviet people.

The following episode has been inprinted in my neeory. At a neeting in one of
the provinces I was approached by an old coualnist, covered with wounds from his
participation in the partisan novenent during Horld Her II. he was holding a
modest bouquet of field flowers in his hand.

"This valley in which you and I are standing," he said with action, "is called
the Partisan Valley by us. Here weucreek patriots-«boulder no shoulder with
Russians who had escaped from concentration canps fought heroically and gave the
fascists a good beating. Quite a bit of Greek blood and of the blood of Soviet
people was spilled on this land, and these flowers are now growing on it. They
are more precious to us than any other flowers. Take thu as a gift. as a

symbol of our fraternal friendship which has been sealed by the blood we
spilled together!" ’ '

These are weighty words, conrades. They give rise to a heightened feeling of
enormous pride in our membership in the great Leninist party and in the great
Country of Soviets—the Homeland of October. At such moments you become con-
vinced again and again of the indisputable authority of our party as the pro-
ponent of the ideas of Marxism-Leninisn. In such a party, possessing a charge
from it and its trust, it is aieply impossible to work badly or to nake half
an effort.

"by an I speaking about this today? Above all, because it is only fro- these
positions that we are able to evaluate the work of any party worker, of any
comeunist. To cultivate pride in his native party, reaeebering at the sane
time that the authority and strength of the party has to be increased-«his is
the affair of every conunist. Just as the ocean is reflected in a drop of
water, so the qualities which are inherent in our entire Leninist party have to
find their personification in every co-mist and, especially. in every party
worker.

Our party can be presented, figuratively speaking, as a single, eighty, living
organise. The Central Coulittee of the UPS!) is bound by thousands of threads

to the party organisations and to the comnists who are in the front line of

the struggle, and through then to the working aasses. The Central Comittee gets
its life-giving experience froe these deep sources, generalizes it, and, enriching
it with new ideas, returns it again to the masses of people, to the party. This
is why it is so important that all of the calls of this living organist work with
a full return. And this depends upon every co-unist and upon every party leader.

Apropos of this, in recent years our writers, unfortunately, have been writing
little about party work and about the real party worker. But the depth of this

constructive work which is amazing in its content has to be revealed nore fre-
quently and more fully. I would say, elements of roeanticisa have to be brought

31

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into these concepts, and it is necessary to know how to see in the everyday
affairs of party workers who are on the front line of the struggle not only dry

statistics, but work with a living content which later develops into the general
constructive work of our party.

"hat is party work today? If this question were to be asked of the comrades who
are present here, in each one's nemory there would involuntarily arise a
kaleidoscope of cares and affairs and a large number of simple and couple:
questions which have to be resolved every day and every hour and to which tens
and hundreds, and,:sometimes, even thousands of people are waiting for a reply.
And all of this is labor, and, soreover. heavy and strenuous labor. At the same

tine. it is also the host noble labor because its highest and only goal is
service to the people.

Indeed, conrades, if you look attentively at a party worker you will notice
above all that his thoughts are always occupied with unresolved questions. This
is a person who always strives for the better, for the ideal.

If this is a real party worker, than his attitude toward all setters, large and
snall, is equally serious: He will prepare a party meeting, a conference, a
session of the bureau. or some other measure with his fullest energy. He thinks
not only about what is going to be discussed and how at the presumed bureau or
conference, but also about what meaning there will be from this discussion in the
future, and how what will be discussed can be embodied in concrete deeds. He
thinks about whether the chief link has been found in the accomplishment of a
general chain of tasks. And if it has been found, then how can all of the other
leaks be used more fully and effectively. In a word. he prepares himself for

any measure as if he were doing it for the first tile in his life. Be unfailing-
ly tries to find something new in his approach to the solution of a problem.

Here is how N. I. Kalinin spoke lovingly about the party worker: "The secretary
of the party connittee is the most responsible person at an enterprise, in an
institution, and in a rayon.

But what is required free a secretary of a party organization for him to have
actual influence on the masses, for the masses to listen to him, and for them to
believe him? . . . The party leader, propagandist, or agitator has to be a person
with an ideology who is deeply devoted to the conmunist party, and he has to

know, at least in general terms, the history of our party and understand the tasks
which our party is setting for the working class and the people. Hith regard to
the level of his political development, the party leader has to be in every case
no lower than others, and it would not hurt for him to have a definite general
cultural training. . . . It is necessary that the party leader not be prideful
and a snob. . . . The party leader has to be absolutely honest with other people.
The secretary of a party organization is the party eye."1 Said wonderfully

simply and aptly!

The party worker is always ready upon the party's call to go into the most
difficult and coaplex latter. He is always along people. his actions and his

32

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MVLY
FOIIOITWCIAI.USEGMVLY

deeds are evaluated by everybody. And this is the strictest evaluation and, ob-
viously, the truest one. People are either delighted with him and learn from
him. or they censure and criticize him. His life and work are an example for
imitation; and the youth and all those around him learn from him not only to

work, but also to live-such, comrades, is the kind of responsibility which lies
on every cmmmunist and on every party worker.

The task consists in having the remarkable qualities of the genuine leaders of

the masses he developed in every party member and in having such features forged
in them as selfless devotion to the ideas of the party, the use of all of one's
energies in work, a readiness to be at the chief direction, to be always and in

everything an example, and to do everything in such a way that words and deeds
never diverge from one another.

Party workers are not born, they become such. And they become party workers not
through their titles or positions, but through work.

In recent years the party committees have been entered by quite a few specialists
in the various branches of the economy, science, and culture who have behind

them a good school of production and public work in the labor collectives. And
this is good. ‘

But. this is still not sufficient to become a real party worker. That is only.

I would say. elementary school. But it is necessary to obtain university. if you
wish, academic training in the daily struggle for bread and steel and for the new
Man in order to become a genuinely political leader of the masses. This is a
very important and mandatory condition in our work.

The demands upon cadres are growing continuously. In the documents of the party
and its Central Committee, and in the works of comrade Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev

we find the most valuable statements about which qualities the party leader
today, under developed socialism. has to have. To put it briefly, this is

above all an alloy of political maturity, communist efficiency, and moral purity.

The make-up of the party worker is truly many-faceted. Even a simple enumeration
of the demands which are being advanced by life would occupy quite a bit of

time. But just as a skillful jeweler highlights the necessary facets on the stone,
so the party at every stage of communist construction advances to the forefront
those qualities which most fully and accurately respond to the tasks of the day.

L. l. Brezhnev emphasizes: "The contemporary leader has to organically unite

within himself partiynost' and a gsep competence, and discipline with initiatives
and a creative approach to work.”

It is in the cultivation of precisely these qualities-pertiynost' and compe-
tence, and high responsibility which unites strict discipline and creativity-
that the party today sees the key element of its cadre policy.

33

llﬂl(lﬂﬂ(1Al.U581MNLY
FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY

In our time, in the age cf technological progress, it is essential to increase
practical knowledge, I would say, to increase the class rating of every leader,

and to skillfully combine expertise with a high party responsibility for one's
work.

Thus, the task consists in every communist really becoming a political fighter
for the party's ideals, and in his activeness, and his clear political position
being materialized in the concrete deeds of communist construction, while every
party organisation is a fighting detachment of our party on the front line of
struggle for communism. A clear ideological thrust, efficiency, and practical
results-these are the criteria by which party work is now evaluated.

Comrades! “hen we speak about party and state work, in the broad sense of the
word, and about the management of the economy of our country we invariably turn
to that which the great Lenin bequeathed to us.

As far back as the dawn of the existence of the Soviet state, Vladimir Il'ich
Lenin, defining the role and place of the ruling party in the construction of
the new society, emphasized: " . . . it is precisely in the realisation of our
revolutionary tasks, precisely in the name of the idea that these tasks do not
remain a utopia, or an innocent desire, but really be transformed into reality--
he realized immediately,--it is precisely in the name of this goal that we must
now pose, as our first and most impgrtant task, precisely the practicality and
efficiency of organizational work." Through all of its history our party has
been worthily holding to loyalty to these Leninist behests.

The dimensions and complexity of the tasks of the social and economic program
which has been advanced by the 25th CPSU Congress are inseparably bound up with
the elevation of all organisational, political, and economic work to the level
of the demands which accord with the qualitative characteristics of developed
socialism. The ability to correctly dispose of existing possibilities, to
select the key problems which ensure the success of the entire matter. to

find efficient ways of solving them, and to mobilize the masses for the fulfill-
ment of what has been planned is acquiring an especially topical importance.

And this means that every leader and specialist is obliged to master the Leninist
style in work and the Leninist science of management.

The Leninist style is not a sum of finished all-purpose recipes for all of the
occasions of life; it is a living, creative method. And the party takes care to
see to it that in the process of constructive work all of its sides and facets
are developed.

when we speak about concrete examples--models of party work,--then, of course,
each of us turns first of all to the work of the Central Committee of the CPSU.
Of course, not all of the forms and methods in the work of the cc can be mecha-
nically transferred into another party organization, and it is not at all
necessary to copy measures being carried out by the Central Committee. But
there is, comrades, a main direction as it were in work, there is a style in
work, and there is the essence itself of the many-faceted affairs of this head-

34

INHICHHHCIA1.USE(MVLY
FOB1OFFKJA1.US£10NLX

quarters of our eighty party of many millions which have to constantly enter into
the life and work of any party organization.

The activities of the CC CPSO are on many levels, seething and strenuous. In
inseparable connection with local party agencies-obkoms, kraykoms, and the CCs of
the communist parties of the union republics,-it persistently and consistently
conducts a large amount of organizational work to realize the general line of

our party as defined by the 25th CPSD Congress.

Thus, all or almost all of the most important problems raised by the 25th party
Congress are exaained in the Politburo. And this is done above all for these
probleas to be, on the one hand, at the center of the party's attention and at
the center of the attention of the entire public, and, on the other, in order
for them to be transferred into the channel of a practical decision with regard
to time. place, and material and other resources. Such decisions were made
month after month during the last two years.

He frequently speak about dynamicness in work. But this concept is interpreted
in various ways. Some people regard dynamicness as a simple enueration of all
measures being taken. In-fact, this concept is considerably deeper.

Let us take, for exasple, the foreign policy actions of the Soviet Union and of
our party. He will easily convince ourselves that the Central Committee of the
CPSU proceeds from the thesis that one does not await peace. peace cannot be
served up to us as a gift, it has to be won, it has to be achieved. And, for
this reason, the constant struggle for peace which is being waged by our party
and its CC and personally by L. I. Brezhnev is a model of dynamic activity in
the field of foreign policy. All of the actions in this field represent the
gigantic path of the party's struggle for peace and for a relaxation of tensions.

In domestic policy, after the 25th Congress, the CC of the party concentrated its
attention on effectiveness and efficienc; in accomplishing the tasks which
followed from the decisions of the congress. The development of socialist compe-
tition may serve as an example. And although the problems of organising it are
not new to us, it is not difficult to become convinced of how nuch labor,
initiative, and creativity has been invested in recent years in its organization
and in the renewal of the forms and content of socialist competition.

After the congress, the Central Committee repeatedly discussed at its meetings
and approved the initiatives and new starts of workers; moreover, many of these
undertakings define tasks not only of the present day. These undertakings born
in collectives and approved by the CC of the party are becoming constantly opera-
ting factors in the improvement of work. Recall, for example, the initiative of
the Rostov workers-"To Hork Without Laggards"-or the Ipatov method of work.
These, comrades, are not only forms which speed up work or improve its quality,
but which change the moral principles of people, their views, their attitude
toward life and work and toward their every day, and so forth--in a word which
change the make-up of a man himself.

35

Ftﬂl(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lﬁﬂE(ﬂﬂLY
FINICHﬂﬂC1A1.USE{DNLY

0r another example: L. I. Brezhnev's trip through Siberia and the Far East. The
range of issues which were examined during the course of this trip teatif1es to it:
profound influence on all of the aspects of the life and work of the party, to

the close and indestructible connection between the party and the people, to the

Mention must also be made of such an important phenomenon in our lives and work
as L. I. Brezhnev's memoirs "Little Land" and "Rebirth." These works have_become
a rich possession of our party and people. and they are alive and in active opera-
tion. It is a source from which we extract and will for long years to come ex-
tract ideas and inspiration for creative work. Such books could only appear
under present conditions when a favorable climate has been created in our party
for the work of cadres. The truthful and sincere works of L. I. Brezhnev impel

us to reflect, to analyse, and to always actively strive to work for the glory

of the homeland. Everyone is deeply moved by the wealth of their ideationsl
content, their party penetration into the sources of the heroic military and

labor feats of our people, their deep judgments, generalization of phenomena,

and by their author's sincerity in his exposition of events and facts. These
books have become for us a rich textbook of political wisdom, and a treasure
house of party experience. They teach us to be active and conscious fighters for
the party, to give all of our strength and knowledge for the good of our homeland,
and to justify with dignity the lofty title of member-of a Leninist party. These
books carry a powerful charge of patriotic feelings, mobilize communists for a
model performance of their duty, and give a new impulse to the work of party
organisations.

Comrades! Given the strenuous and dynamic life and activities of the party,
great demands are being made upon the level, style, and methods of work of the
party apparatus which has an important role in increasing the effectiveness and
quality of party leadership.

It is the apparatus that is one of the chief links which connects the party
leadership with communists and with all of the workers, and which is an essential
instrument of the party direction of all of the affairs of society. Hith the
help of the apparatus, the party puts its political line into practice, realizes
plans, generalizes experience which has been gained, and exercises control over
the fulfillment of party decisions. Its tasks also consist in noticing problems
which are arising in time, evaluating them punctually and realistically, from
Leniniat positions, and being timely in making the solutions of leading party
agencies which are adopted to meet the essence of these problems a property of
all party organizations. The realization of the principles of party democracy
depends to a substantial degree upon the party apparatus.

The apparatus is merged with the party into a single whole. As the role of the

CPSU as the leading and directing force of our society grows, the role and im-
portance of the work of its apparatus also grows.

FIMR()FF1C1A1.lEﬂB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today the work of the party apparatus is characterized by many-sidednsss, a
diversity of forms. and a wealth of content. Performance supervision and verifi-
cation is one of the most important aspects of its work.

Careful attention to the organization of supervision was always characteristic
of the communist party. At the contemporary stage of communist construction
these questions belong to a category of especial importance. Today the state of
performance supervision and verification is a daily measure of the effectiveness

and quality of the work of party committees. their apparatus, and every party
worker.

It has already become an indisputable truth that supervision has to begin with

the creation of a document. Only a precise, clear, and concrete docuent provides
the preconditions for the organization of effective supervision. Supervision
must not be formal, just for the record; it has to be a component and inseparable
part of party work as a whole. The lack of the necessary supervision of the

execution of decisions has to be qualified as a lack of respect for the results
of one's own labor, one's own work.

In recent years forms of control (supervision) have undergone substantial
changes for the better. Control today is one of the forms of party work into
which above all the leaning of benevolence has been put. It is carried out, as
a rule, on the basis of a deep knowledge and consists of two main component
parts: first, from the functions of verification, and, second, from the func-
tions of providing assistance in the solution of various problems. The party
committees proceed in their practical work from the idea that control and the
organization of performance is a single process of political organizational work.

The role of collegial bodies has increased appreciably in the organization of
performance verification. Systematic control over the execution of decisions has
become the chief content of the work of the secretariats of the CCs of the
communist parties of the union republics, the kraykama, and many obkoms.

The party committees employ diverse forms of performance supervision (control)
and verification, and take an overall and systematic approach to their selection
and use. The questions of control over the execution of decisions which have
been made occupies one of the central places in the long-term and current work
plans of the bureaus, secretariats, and sections of the party committees.

A clear perspective, and the ability to single out the chief and decisive
element-~thsse are the special features in the organization of control which
today characterize the work of the party apparatus. This kind of approach makes
it possible to forestall shortcomings in time, to see new tendencies in the
realization of what has been planned in time, and to move from the registration
of omissions to the planned improvement of the work.

Meanwhile, there are still party committees in which the effectiveness of control
is poor, and performance verification has an episodic character and is not

connected with the organization of work, which leads to a failure to carry out
decisions.

y .

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USEIN§LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Frequently attention is given only to one side of controlwcompliance with per-
formance schedules. Here, the actual state of affairs is lost sight of.

Party coauitteea have to more resolutely come out in opposition to elements of
a formal approach and seek the absolute, full, and high quality execution of every
decision.

In the future also we need to crystallize all of the forms of control. Moreover,
it is always necessary tolproceed from the fact that control has to engender
more confidence in cadres and elicit a greater desire to solve problems in the
spirit of the demands of the party's CC.

Control of the present conditions is a concept, comrades, which is very bread.
The state of affairs needs to be controlled. At the same time, shortcomings need
to be eliminated. But control has to be organized in such a way that it is
possible to study and disseminate experience.

The chief task and the essence of performance verification consists in ensuring
the punctual realization of tasks, preventing the slightest deviations from the
norms of party life, and cultivating in cadres a responsibility for their work
and an endeavour, under any circumstances. to keep their word. It reaches this
goal only if it has a systematic, all-round principled character and includes
organizational work and the timely provision of practical assistance to executors.

Thus, the conclusion consists in the fact that performance control and verifica-
tion, like all party work, is a living, creative matter. The most diverse forms
and methods are in its arsenal. The situation, the conditions, and the character
of the tasks determine which of them are to be used in one or another case. But
it is important to remexﬁer that performance control and verification have to
embrace all of the sides of economic and public activity, and he an effective
means of party leadership.

Comrades! The Central Committee is constantly fixing the attention of party
committees on the problems of organization and efficiency in the work of the
apparatus.

Realizing L. I. Brezhnev's instructions, the party comaittees are taking measures
to decrease the master of meetings and conferences and to increase the effective-
ness with which they are held. Many of them have defined concrete days for the

performance of measures in party, government, and economic organizations, and for
the meetings of elective bodies. and the procedure for stunning leading workers.

However. in a mater of party organizations concreteness, clarity, and efficiency
in work are replaced by numerous conferences and by the evolution of various
measures. It cannot be regarded as normal when individual workers of the
apparatus, referring to overwork, do not appear in the primary organizations for
months, do not meet with people, and do not address them. But this is the most
important thing in work. To free a maximum amount of time for the party worker
for organizational and political work in the masses is one of the most important
tasks of party agencies.

38

FOIOH'ICIALIEEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comrades! The power of party leadership is in its collegiality. In combination
with personal responsibility, the collegiality of leadership is the fundamental
principle of Leniniat style on the basis of which the party and all of its
agencies improve their work. It is precisely collegiality that creates maximum
opportunities for producing on the basis of Marxist-Leninist theory,taking

account of the experience of the masses in strictly scientific party policy,

and its successful realization in life, and which guarantees against one-sidedness
and against the making of subjective decisions.

Collegiality can turn into simple formality if a situation of genuine efficiency,
creativeness, and principle is not created in the work of party agencies. This
kind of situation does not arise upon orders from instructions or prescriptions.
It is created in the process of live practical work, as a result of comradely
cooperation which is permeated with a general concern for the successful realiza-
tion of the party's plans.

The collegiality of party leadership presupposes a constant expansion and deepen-
ing of its connections with the masses. It is good to know the feelings and the
hopes of Soviet people and to have a clear idea of what the people's order is
today—-this is an immutable norm of the work of every party agency.

Connections with the masses is a many-leveled phenomenon. First of all, it is

a profound knowledge of life. On the other hand, it is a very important channel
through which the party influences the masses, educates them, and mobilizes them
for the accomplishment of tasks.

It has become a good tradition with us to discuss all important questions of
political, economic, social, and cultural life with the broad and immediate par-
ticipation of the workers. The national discussion of the draft of the new
USSR Constitution was a model of this truly Leninist approach.

Horkers' letters is one of the effective forms of connection between the party
and the masses. The Central Committee of our party, the Politburo, and the
Secretariat of the cc are constantly calling attention to the necessity for an
attentive and genuinely Leninist attitude toward this.

In 1977 more than 650,000 workers' letters and telegrams came to the CC CPSU. A
total of around two million letters and applications were considered in the 00s

of the communist parties of the union republics, the kraykoms, the obkoms, and
other party committees.

It can be said that there is no aspect of the life of our society and there are
no important issues of party, state, and economic construction which are not
touched upon to one extent or another in the letters. The wide horizon and

mature judgment of Soviet people and their active life positions are reflected in
these genuinely human documents.

The questions which are raised in workers' letters are constantly at the center
of the attention of the CC CPSU. A substantial number of them have received a

39

FKNICNﬂﬂCIA1.USB(MVLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

positive resolution and have been taken account of and made use of in preparing
and adopting the most important decrees connected with the realisation of the
tasks put forward by the 25th CPSU Congress.

The party committees have done a great deal to carry out the decree of the CC
CPSU "On a Further Improvement of Hork With Horkers' Letters in the Light of the
Decisions of the 25th CPS" Congress." It can be noted with satisfaction that the
examination of proposals, applications, and complaints is now organized on a

higher organizational level. Their discussion at the meetings of collegial party
bodies is widely practiced.

The positive tendencies in this work have to be further developed and secured.
This involves above all the qualitative side of the matter. the examination of
letters addressed to the essence of the problems raised in them.

Although the level of work with letters is constantly rising, its coefficient of
useful effect can and must he even greater. Unfortunately, there are shortcomings
in this matter, cases of formalism and bureaucratism.

To this day in certain places the letters of workers are looked upon as purely
personal solicitations. But, comrades, if a person complains, it is a matter,
as a rule, of a sincere desire to eliminate shortcomings, and of an intolerance
toward everything that goes counter to the norms of the life of our Soviet
people.

Daily and unremitting attention to every address and to every criticism and pro-
posal, and the satisfaction of the vital needs and requirements of the workers

continues to he one of the most important tasks of all party committees and
workers of their apparatus.

Comrades! In recent years party agencies have done a great deal to improve the
organization of intra-party information and to increase its importance as an
instrument of party leadership and as a means of education and control. It has
become more regular and systematic, and it makes it possible to more deeply
analyze the state of affairs in the localities and to better know the feelings
and needs of people. On its basis party practice is evaluated more objectively.
long-term and current plans are worked out, and more substantiated decisions
are taken.

Regular information for communists on the activities of superior party agencies
and on the work experience of the party committees of other oblasts. cities,

and rayona is widespread in party organisations. This kind of information makes
it possible to compare experience which has been gained and to constantly ex-
tract everything that is new and progressive. This has a positive effect upon
improving all of party work.

Our time is characterized by a colossal and constantly increasing amount of in-
formation. Hhat conclusion suggests itself from this? Either to be swept away
by a gigantic wave of information, or to learn how to skillfully manage it.

40

FORIOFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
F08‘0FFKJA1.USB¢DNLN

in order for intra-party infatuation to fully accord with its purpose. it has to
possess such qualities as reliability, currency, and fullness.

I would like to emphasize that infatuation is not a holiday report. It is a
political document in which a situation has to be characterized with max pre-

cision and party principle. "We need complete and truthful information,’ -
V. I. Lenin taught.

Unobjective information is capable of disorienting party agencies and pushing
them to take erroneous decisions. This has to be spoken about since. in pro-
viding information to superior agencies, certain gorkoms and raykoms see their
basic goal in reporting about successes, while shortcomings and that which was
not done is described in hurried meaningless words,or kept in complete silence.

Practice shows that information most fully fulfills its role when it is sub-
ordinated to the solution of those problems which are the chief ones for party
organ-zation and which have a determining importance for all of its work.

On the basis of the experience of the cc CPSU, many of the 66s of the communist
parties of the union republics. krsykoms and obkoms have analysed the quality of
the information materials which are presented to party agencies and have mapped
out measures to put order into directing them.

This work has to be performed very persistently in the future also, demands for
secondary reporting data, diverse inforaation. and other information materials
have to be reduced consistently and in a planned manner, and the quality of the
information which is presented has to be improved.

The flow of incoming information should be analysed deeply and systematically.
and its real necessity in practical work determined so that it does not turn
into an immovable property of many volumes. Of course, the measures whichaare

taken in this direction must not narrow the information available to party
committees.

Comrades! Party workers and all communists emphasise with satisfaction that in
recent years a creative and business-like atmosphere has been created in the
party and in the oountry. This is a great gain of ours and it has to be taken
care of and strengthened in every possible way. Of course, it is necessary
here for everyone to correctly understand what goes into forming this atmos-
phere.

Today we have a really calm working atmosphere in the party and the state which
completely excludes volumtarism and various kinds of willful decisions, far-
fetched reorganisations. and so forth which at one time created uncertainty in
the work of our cadres. Behind all of this a deeper meaning and a deeper con-
tent has to be seen.

You know, comrades, how exceptionally self-critical the report by L. I. Brezhnev
at the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU was. This is exactly the way our party

IND! OINWCIAI.II§E2(HVLY
FOI‘OFI1C1A1.USE¢MNLY

acts-it always speaks boldly and frankly with the people and never hides any-
thing f-om it. In this is the strength of our party, and in this is the strength
of criticism.

Or take such a concept as trust in cadres. But trust is not a weakness of the
truster, but an enornous power, and in this case the power of the party. This is
why the Central Connittee of the CPSU acts strictly in cases when certain leaders
understand this trust in a distorted manner.

In a word, a good, kind, and trusting atmosphere can exist when there is a high
responsibility in cadres for their work. And this in itself demands a high level
of maturity in cadres and an ability to correctly evaluate and understand this
trust. A great deal here depends upon their qualifications, practical training,
political naturity, and their ability to organize work.

0f the full totality of qualities which a party apparatus worker has to possess,
conpetence should be placed in one of the important places. Conpetence is the
chief thing that today determines the efficiency and quality of the work of the
party committee apparatus. It is precisely upon the extent to which a worker
knows his work, how capable he is of digging down to the essence of phenomena
and facts, and how he nobilizes people for the fulfillment of the party's
directives--it is precisely upon this that in a decisive degree the realisation
of our plans depends.

The party coemitteea have been consistently inplenenting a series of measures
aimed at a further rise in the theoretical ideological level and practical
qualifications of apparatus workers. It is necessary to continue improving work
in this direction. The theoretical level and practical thrust of all of the
forms of instruction for party apparatus workers has to be heightened, and

basic attention has to be concentrated on a deep study of Lenin's heritage, of
the issues of party construction, the assimilation of practical experience, and
the development of the ability in each concrete case to creatively realise tasks
which have been set.

To justify the party's high trust means to work to one's full strength, knowledge,
and experience, to constantly show a naxinum level of organization, self-control,

and high discipline and to persistently improve and refine the style and nethods
of one's work.

I think that I would be expressing the opinion of all of those present in saying
that for this noble cause we would not spare any efforts and in this way we
will justify the party's trust.

Comrades! In conclusion allow me to say several words outside of the topic of
our conference. I would like to address these words to the hosts of our con-
ference-the Krasnoysrsk workers.

First of all, we thank you again for your hospitality and well prepared
conference.

42

FIHICNﬂNCIAI.USE(NVLY
Ftﬂltﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.USElNVLY

Secondly, the fact is that I remember Krasnoyarsk of the 1930s, and Krasnoyarsk
before the war and at the beginning of the war. And now, more than 35 years
later, I have seen a city in which I worked and lived at one time. And if some-
thing similar has happened to anyone in his life, I think that he will believe
me and will understand my impression. And its essence is that this city on

the banks of a mighty Siberian river is a good illustration of how our country
has marched forward, of how full these years were, years of the construction of
a new life, years of the ascent to the heights of socialism and cumin.

We know many of our great compatriots, comrades, who have said good words about
Siberia, including Krasnoysrsk and the Yenisey. we know and remember the words
of Lomonoaov, Chekhov, Gor'kiy, Surikov, and others. He also know very clearly
that the light of our epoch, the contours of our future, and the answer to

what Russia should be and what'our party should he were born here, on the banks

of the Yenisey, in the first foundation-laying works of the great Lenin--the
organizer and leader of our party and state.

And it is quite symbolic, comrades, that the world's largest hydroelectric power

station is being built today next to the historic Shuahensk. This will be a
worthy memorial to Il'ich.

The remarkable plans of the great genius of our time were transformed into the
great energy of a people which accomplished a revolution and built socialism in
its country. It is precisely Lenin's ideas that gave us that mighty power which
is today possessed by the Country of Soviets. And this cannot but gratify all
of us. And, of course, make us very happy that we are not only the witnesses.
but also the participants in all of the achievements which are taking place
today in our country and under its influence in the entire world.

The city of Krasnoyarsk is only one of the cities of our iuense homeland, but,

as the sea is reflected in a drop of water. the gigantic stride of socialism is
reflected in it.

An exciting prospect is opening up before the city and the kray in the future.
Today Krasnoyarskiy Kray is an enormous construction site which stretches for
almost 3,000 kilometers. Sixty-nine large industrial objects which are of
enormous importance for our entire country are being built here.

This year Krasnoyarsk will mark its 350th anniversary. Permit me to ardently
and sincerely congratulate the people of Krasnoyarsk on this wonderful date and

to wish them new success in the further development and transformation of their
remarkable city and kray.

It gives me especial satisfaction to carry out a commission of the CC CPSU and
personally of comrade Leonid Il'ich Breahnev-to congratulate the people of
Krasnoyarsk upon their high government award. For the great services of the
workers of the city in the revolutionary movement, for their contribution in the
struggle against the German fascist invaders during the Great Patriotic Har, and
for the successes which have been achieved by them in economic and cultural

43

FOIiOFFHJA1.USE(HNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction. the Presidium of the USSR Suprae Soviet has awarded the city of
Krasnoyarek the Order of the October Revolution.

(Conrade K. U. Chernenko'a report wee listened to with great attention and
repeatedly interrupted by applause.)

was
1. H. I. Kalinin, "Advice to the Party worker," Hoacov, 1975, pp 185, 186, 187.
2. L. I. Brezhnev, "Following Lenin'e Course," Vol 5, p 528.

3. V. I. Lenin, "Couplete Dorks," Vol 36. p 159.
6. mm, Vol 56, p 446.

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT, 1981

2959
C80: 1800/272

FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY

A BIG “HARD TO OUR VAIDIWS pom GUARDS

Speech at a Gala ﬂeeting Devoted to the
Presentation of the Order of the Red
Banner to the Border Guard Detachment of
the Red Banner Eastern Border District on

16 August 1979

Dear comrades!

Re have gathered here to nark a great and joyous event in the life of a border
guard detachment-At is being presented today with the Order of the Red Banner.

Accept, comrades, the most heart-felt congratulations of the Central Committee
of our party, the Presidium of the 0883 Supreme Soviet, and personally of
conrade Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev.

For your great services in the defense of our socialist fatherland, and for
your duty successes in protecting the state border of the 0883, the homeland
has conferred a high combat award upon your border guard detachent.

I will tell you frankly, comrades, it is very pleasant for me to be together
with you on this holiday, and to speak to border guards. Por me, a former
border guard, today's event is doubly moving: it is precisely in your border

guard detachment that my military service began when I came here as a volunteer
in 1930.

The years of that difficult, anxious, and exciting service have been imprinted
forever in my memory; I always think of them with sincere warmth and gratitude.
It is just here that one of the great events of my life took place—I was
accepted into membership in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It was
here that the con-moist border guard: elected me secretary of their party organi-
zation. And since then the meaning and content of my entire life has been

party work. This is why this emission is so dear to me—to present the
homeland's award to you.

Of course, comrades, I do not intend to appear before you today with personal
reminiscences. Nevertheless, I would like to say a few words about that time.

45.

MWMWONLY
FOIIHHHCIAI.USE(HHLY

You know that for the Soviet country the beginning of the 1930s was a difficult
period; but its pathos consisted in an offensive by aocialisn along all of

the directions of state, economic, and cultural construction. The entire country
was seized by labor enthusiasn. Industrial giants were built in record tile-
Nagnitka. Dneproges, the Stalingrad and Khar'kov Tractor Plants, the Gor'kiy

and the Moscow Motor vehicle Plants, the city of youth Kossonol'sk-na-Anure, and
the Turkistan-Siberian Railroad Trunk Line. The conplete collectivisation of
agriculture was begun, and the construction of new sovkhores and machinery and
tractor stations was in progress. In all of the spheres of the spiritual life

of our society a new, socialist ideology was being established.

The country's international situation was difficult. The capitalist world not
only showered streams of slander and lies upon the Country of Soviets, placing
the reality of our plans in doubt, but did not stop before direct military pro-
vocations against us. There was no quiet on the Soviet borders. Attacks on
our Central Asian republics by Baa-sch bands were organised by inperialist
agents fros the territory of Afghanistan, Iran, and Sintszyan. In 1929 a con-
flict arose on the Chinese-Eastern Railroad. In an order of the USSR Revolu-
tionary Military Council on this occasion it was stated: "The conflict on

the Chinese-Eastern Railroad has been resolved. But we shall be on our guard,
and we shall vigilantly keep a watch on every sovenent by the imperialists.

Let the struggle in the Far East harden our ranks even more. and let us pour in
new strength for the further cosbat training of the Red Arny." This appeal was
absolutely justified. At the end of the 1930s the Japanese nilitarists engaged

in large military provocations, first in the area of Lake Rasan, and then at
Khalkhin-Gol.

The Leninist Konsonol was the party's fighting assistant in strengthening the
country's defense capacity and in educating fiery patriots of our honeland.
At that tine the lost popular professions for young people were the nilitary
professions of seamen, flyer, tank operator, and, of course, border guards.

During these years the posters sulloned: "Konsonol Henber-To the Airplane,
the Tank, the Battleship!"

Service on the border was the linit of our dreams, the Konaonol neubers of that
tine. And when this dress cane true, the youth strove to justify the high trust
and to perforn its duty honorably to the end.

Decades have passed since that tine, and such has changed. Today the border is
guarded by the grandsons of those who selflessly defended it during the stern
prewar and war years. There has been an inconparable growth in the conbat
readiness of the border forces; they are supplied with first-class equipment
and with the most nodern weapons. The people of the border the-selves have

grown-an indicator of this is the high educational, political, and professional
level of the border soldiers.

But I involuntarily search in the faces of today's border guards for the features
of the border sentries of the 1930s. And I see the courageous inspired faces of
soldiers who are boundlessly devoted to the cause of the party, to their

66

FIIICNWHC1A1.U&B(MVLY
FOROFHCIALUSEONLY

socialist fatherland. and to the cause of their fathers and grandfathers. In
this we have the continuity of the generations of border guards, and fidelity to
the heroic traditions of our glorious people and to the traditions of our border
guard forces. Alarm, details, and training-this is whit our border guarda'
every day was made of. and that is what it remains today. As for us, the border
soldiers of the 1930s, so for you to whom the protection of the country's borders
has been entrusted in the 1970s, the lost important thing was and remains
enormous responsibility, the highest self-control and vigilance. and a constant
readiness to protect the quiet of the border against any encroachments.

Comrades! Somewhat nore than three years have passed since the 25th CPSU
Congress. This was a period full of historic events. The celebration of the
60th anniversary of Great October, thr adoption of the new USSR Constitution,
and the elections to the USSR Supreme Sovietnall of this placed an inimitable
stanp upon the work of the party and upon the entire social and political life

of the country. and helped to give scope to the struggle for the fulfillment of
the decisions of the congress.

The party's chief domestic policy line and its general course is an improvement
of the well-being of the people. This course is consistently being turned into
practical deeds. In all of the directions of our social develop-ant during.the
three years of the five-year plan we have made substantial forward movement.

During this time the country's economic potential underwent substantial growth.
The industry of the USSR now produces more output than was produced in the
entire world in 1950. On the basis of an increase in the productivity of social
labor. during the years 1976-1978 four-fifths of the increase in national in-
come was obtained.

A large anount of work has been done by the party to carry out a long-term and
economically valid course which is aimed at the progress of agriculture. The
July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU is of fundamental importance in this.

He remember what the first fivevyear plan began with in the village: 27,000

tractors, 700 trucks, 2 (I) grain harvest combines—that was almost our entire
machinery arsenal in 1928.

Now there are working on the kolkhozes and sovkhoses more than 2,500,000 tractors,
700.000 grain harvesting combines, and more than 1.5 million freight trucks.
Agriculture's energy night in our time comes to 525 million horsepower. This is
25 times nore than in 1928.

Your rayon is convincing testimony to these changes. The rayon's kolkhnres and
sovkhozes have turned into large highly mechanized and energy-supplied farms
which are strengthened by qualified cadres of specialists. In 1978 the rayon's
rural workers sold the state a record mount of grain-more than 10 million
ponds. As a result of the large amount of work which is being performed by the

rayon party and government organizations and by all of the workers, the rayon
and an advanced kolkhoz have been awarded for their successes for the fourth

.47.

FOIOFFIGALISEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time with the Red Challenge Banners of the CC CPSU, USSR Council of Ministers,

the A11-Union Central Council of Trade Unions, and £he-CC.of the All-Union
Leninistzz. Conunist Youth League.

The successes in the country's economic construction have given rise to a
further improvement of the material and cultural level of the people. On the
basis of the-results of three years of the five-year plan. the assigments to
increase the population's monetary intone have been completely realised. In
1978 the average wages of workers and employees reached 160 rubles a month and,
in this way, was almost twice as high as the 1960 level. Thanks to the growth
of our social consuption funds. the possibilities are increasing in our country
for satisfying various social needs of Soviet people, such as obtaining an
education, health protection and rest. financial security in old age, and others.

Since the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan around 6.5 million new well-
appointed apartments with a total area of 323 million square meters have been
built and commissioned in the USSR. This' figure by itself is sufficiently
eloquent. But its dimensions will become even more graphic if it is recalled

that on the we of the Great Patriotic "er the entire city housing fund of our
country was slightly more than 620 million square meters. In three years

around 32 million Soviet people celebrated house-warmings. And, nevertheless,
there is still not enough housing. As yet not all Soviet people have the kind

of housing conditions they would like. But the scope of construction is mending,
and housing difficulties are diminishing.

Soviet people are working strenuously over the fulfillment of the plans of the
fourth year of the fivedyear plan. It is quite clear, comrades, that the ful-
fillment of the five-year plan as a whole will to a large extent depend upon
the results of this year. Hhile taking note of the indisputable achievements
of our economy, the party is at the same time calling attention to the diffi-
culties and shortcomings in our work and to unsolved problems.

Last winter and spring the weather served us quite a few surprises. And during
the sum-er months extensive areas of the European part of the Union suffered
from a drought. This is why it is so important now to mobilize ourselves and
to put all of our reserves into movement so as to provide normal food supplies
for the country's population.

The essential thing, of course, is not only to know about problems. The chief
thing is to draw the necessary conclusions for one's work, and to take the-correct
measures to eliminate shortcomings, without stopping half-way and without being
satisfied with individual successes. The party demands deeds, the consistent

and steady improvement of all of the elements of our state and economic mechanism,
and their qualitative improvement.

Recently the Central Comittee of the party and the Soviet government adopted the
decree "0n Improving Planning and Strengthening the Action of the Economic
Mechanism on Increasing Production Efficiency and Improving the Quality of Work."
This document is addressed not only to planning organizations and ministries and
departments; it is addressed to every Soviet person.

(08

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“WISEONLY

In this docuaent the party provides a resolute reminder of the inseparability of
planning and production, of managerial tasks and the moral climate in the
country. The economy of our country has grown immeasurably, and it has become
more complex not only quantitatively, by volume, but also qualitatively. Economic
relations have beco-e more complex. The scientific and technological revolution
is making increasingly greet demands upon us. Now the task. it is noted in

the decree of the CC CPSU and USSR Council of Ministers, consists in raising the
level of planning and economic managesent, bringing them into correspondence with
the requirements of the present stage-the stage of developed socialism,-and
achieving a substantial increase in the efficiency of social production, an
acceleration of scientific and technological progress and a rise in labor produc-
tivity, and an improvement of output quality and, on this basis, ensuring a

constant improvement of the country's economy and of the well-being of the
Soviet people.

In thinking about and weighing all of the sides of the tasks which follow from
this document, you understand that we shall probably still have to overcome
psychological barriers: inveterate habits, innertness, and indecisiveness in
taking the most operational measures in accordance with this decree.

This is why today in the party and country, where there is a wide discussion of
this decree, concrete measures are being worked out to realize it in every
collective. Re believe that every Soviet person will make a worthy contribution
to this cause of all of our people, that the level of our well-being will rise
even higher, and that the economic might of our homeland will grow even

greater. And the society of developed socialism will take one more step forward.

The tasks that face the country are enormous ones. and it is necessary for every
Soviet person to participate consciously and actively in their accosplishnent.
Our common successes are for-ed from the successes and achievements of every
labor collective and every individual worker. In a situation when the inter-
dependency of large collectives one upon the other has been growing immeasurably
from day to day, such qualities as reliability and obligatoriness become
especially iaportant. Frequently, comrades. besides our own conscience, we have
no controller over us. It is then that the life position of a person comes to
light-what he cherishes, in the name of what he works, and by what values he
orients himself.

But it is not only in our affairs and in work that we pass through a test for
reliability. In husan relationships, in the perception of events, and in their
evaluation each of us also is exasined for strength.

Obligatoriness is not simply fidelity to a word or a promise. Obligatoriness
demands from a person fidelity to his own ideals and convictions, and firmness

in the life position which has been chosen-in a word, that which we call a
sense of principle. And behind this there is always an ability for independent
thought, a heightened civic-mindedness, and the ability to struggle and to defend
one's point of view.

49

FOR‘OFFHJAI.UBEGMVLY
F03‘0FFKJAI.USE(M§LY

Everybody has his own measure of responsibility, but the neasure of his duty
to his homeland and to his people is a single one.

Each of us has to be ready at any monent to fulfill this duty to our homeland.
Everyone bears personal responsibility for the accomplishment of cannon tasks--
this is the essence of the matter.

The new USSR Constitution is permeated with the idea of people's power and of
the direct participation by Soviet man in the administration of the affairs of
society and in the creation and distribution of social goods and riches. First
of all, the authority and powers of the Soviets of People's Deputies at all
levels is strengthened and expanded. In their conposition and coverage they
represent practically all of the strata of the population, and with regard to
the number of deputies they are a very enormous democratic force. To have

the potential of the soviets go into fuller action in the interest of communist
construction, to resolve through the soviets questions which arise with more
initiative, without red-tape, and in a sore organised manner, and to respond to
the needs of the population-the Basic Law binds us to do this, the CPSU
ans-one us to this, and in this is one of the preconditions for our rapid for-
ward movement.

Comrades! Our people rightly connect all of our successes and achieve-eats in
the socio-econonic and social life of the country with the tireless work of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, its Central Committee, Politburo, and
personally of the General Secretary of the cc CPSU comrade Leonid ll'ich
Brezhnev.

The strength of our party, as was once again graphically demonstrated by the
recent elections to the USSR Supreme Soviet, is in its close connection with
the masses. It gets fron its indestructable unity with the people mighty energy
and an unshakable will and strength! In this unity is the guarantee of all of
our future successes and achievements.

All of us experience a feeling of legitimate pride in our party when we speak
about the positive changes on the international arena. Carrying out the deci-
sions of the 25th Party Congress, the CPSU and the Soviet state have been
increasing their efforts in favor of detente and ensuring peace on earth.

Recently there was a aeeting between comrade L. I. Brezhnev and the President
of the United States Jimmy Carter which governments and peoples followed with
the utmost attention. And this is understandable. 0n the agenda of the
negotiations were the key problems of the present day and, above sll, the
problem of restraining the arms race.

In Vienna the second Soviet-American treaty was signed on limiting strategic
offensive weapons for a period until 1985. Hhen it comes into force definite
barriers will be created for a further build-up of the most destructive and
most expensive types of weapons. Moreover, for the first time states will even
reduce somewhat the number of their strategic nissiles and other nuclear war-

50

IIHI(HHHCIA1.USEGMNLY
FOR10FFKJA1.USE(NVLY

head carriers and will commit themselves to show restraint in the development of
new strategic weapons systems.

The road to the treaty was a long one-it took almost seven years. Moreover, the
treaty itself might have been more perfect and more far-reaching. however, since
it accurately maintains the principles of equality and equal security, the Salt-II
Treaty in its present form can play a positive role both in relations between

the USSR and the United States and in efforts to improve the entire international
situation.

we hope that the Vienna meeting will have a beneficial influence on the whole of
the international situation which during the last two years has been very
contradictory. Now in one, and then in another point of the planet peace is
subjected to dangerous trials. The names of these "hotpoints" are well known.
They are the Near East, where under the umbrella of a separate deal between
Cairo and Tel Aviv the Israeli aggressors are continuing with their robbery,

and they are the south of Africa which has been enveloped by the flames of a
liberation struggle against racist and apartheid regimes.

Reaction finds it impossible to reconcile itself to the revolutionary aims of
the people of Afghanistan, and is organizing dangerous armed'diversions against
a neighboring and friendly country of ours.

A tense situation continues in Southeast Asia. The Beijing aggressors have
gotten out of the populated points of socialist Vietnam. However, as the first
two rounds of negotiations in Hanoi and Beijing have shown, the Chinese leader-
ship still has not drawn the correct conclusions from the failure of its
military adventure. It is attempting to dictate its conditions for a settle-
ment to Vietnam, to impose Maoist tendencies upon the Vietnamese in foreign
policy questions, and is attempting to teach Vietnam how to conduct its domes-
tic affairs.

Recently the Beijing leaders decided to halt the action of the Treaty on
Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Aid between the Soviet Union and the Chinese
People's Republic which was concluded in 1950. At the same time, the Chinese
leadership agreed to sit down at the negotiation table and discuss with us the
problems of Soviet-Chinese relations in order to improve them. The Soviet side
gave its Opinion of the denunciation of the treaty. It was obvious to everybody
that this was not an act of good neighborliness, and an action which is not
constructive in its thrust. As for the negotiations. the USSR repeatedly
favored halting them. This is a sensible way of eliminating difficulties and
disagreements. The future will show what is understood in Beijing by negotia-
tions and by an improvement of relations with the Soviet Union.

For now we shall proceed from the facts which show that the chauvinistic and
expansionist intoxication which was engendered by Maoism has not yet been dis-
pelled in Beijing. The Chinese leadership continues, in contact with imperialist
circles in the United States, Japan, and a number of other states, to weave in-
trigues against the socialist commonwealth, and against the progressive, revolu-

51

FOI<DFFKJA1.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tionary, liberation forces. More than that, China is counting on help from the
Heat in modernizing its armed forces. -

For this reason, we have to think about the strength of our eastern borders,
about maintaining the defense capacity of the Soviet state on the necessary
level, and about improving the material and technical base of our army and navy.
This is the concern of our entire country and entire people, a concern for our
peaceful today and calm tomorrow.

There is no doubt that in the future also we shall not submit to provocations
and attempts to draw us into hasty steps. Behind the at first glance minor
violations of the border conditions which are regularly done by the Chinese
side there may be a big political calculation, an endeavour to artificially
inflame the situation, and to heat up anti-Soviet passions among a section of
the Chinese population. We see this and take it into account.

Are there objective reasons for the tension on the Soviet-Chinese border? To
this we reply unambiguously-mo. A border between countries does not at all
have to remind one of the front line. It by no means has the task of disuniting
peoples. But for this to be the case a border has to be respected as a symbol
of a state's sovereignty, and as the frontier of national security.

‘ This, comrades, is the way the issue is put. The vital interests of our Soviet
state demand constant concern for the security of our borders.

After the 25th CPSU Congress a number of effective measures were taken in order
to further develop the border forces, and orientations and recommendations were
issued regarding the defense of the border and organizational and political
work among the soldiers.

The 60th Anniversary of the covered in glory Border Guards was celebrated in
our country as a big holiday. In connection with the anniversary, a number of
border detachments and other units, and also a large group of border soldiers
were awarded with high government. awards.

Our party strengthens its army not only by means of increasing the amount of
equipment and perfecting it, but also, as you know, the party devotes an enormous
amount of attention to the education of the personnel of the Soviet Army in
general and of the border forces in particular. All of these directions in the
work. of the party to strengthen the army are interconnected. Constant attention
to its army by the Central Oomittee and the Soviet government is an entirely
natural phenomenon. Soviet soldiers have been entrusted with a most important
sector of communist construction—the reliable defense of the socialist homeland
and of the peaceful labor of our people. The importance and complexity of the
tasks which are accomplished by the army and the navy increase with each passing
day.

Weapons and combat equipment are becoming increasingly complicated, and the
methods of their employment in combat are being perfected. And this means that

52

MOMMUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the demands upon the personnel are constantly growing. And in order to be equal
to these demands, a soldier needs to have not only deep technical knowledge and
skills, and not only good ideological political, will, and physical conditioning,
but also a lofty morality and a conscious attitude toward his duty.

Comrades, how has the border guard been preserved in my memory? Pirst of all,
he is an ideologically convinced fighter for our just Lsninist cause, he is a
brave and bold person who knows how to orient himself in any situation and
under any circumstances, a person who has formally defined his life positions
and his ideals and who is ready to defend our fatherland with his blood.

These and other components of the image of the border guard I have taken with
me throughout my whole life and I have become convinced that systematic studies
are necessary for this. In order for a border guard to be faithful to his
military oath and to the rules and regulations which define the essence of
military service, in order for this to be it is necessary to study, to study,
and again to study, to make a profound and comprehensive study of military

science, to improve one's political knowledge, and always to keep in.~step with
the events taking place in our country.

V. I. Lenin said that a revolution is worth something when it is able to defend
itself against its enemies. He, comrades, have what to defend, have what to
defend it with, and have the people to defend it.

Every page in the history of the border forces contains an enormous ideological
charge, and teaches fidelity, fearlessness, and selfless service to the homeland.
The history of the border forces is a history of struggle with ntnerous enemies,
secret and open, who have encroached on our sacred borders. The glorious
chronicle of the border forces is full of examples of the courage and valor of
our Chekist-soldiers and of their devotion to the comunist party and to its
great cause. The heroes of past years remain in our combat formation, march

the patrol paths with young soldiers, fill their hearts with courage, sharpen
their vigilance, help to win over difficulties, and to keep the border on a
strong lock.

when we say that the "border is on a lock," we mean that our entire enormous
border is in reliable hands. The party has always believed in this and it
believes in it now.

You all know very well, comrades, what great responsibility and what complicated
duties are shouldered in our day by the cos-land and political personnel, the
party and Komsomol organizations. and all of the soldiers of the border forces.
Given the existence of the most highly perfected equipment, success is ensured
by people, ideologically staunch and convinced of the rightness of the great
cause which they are defending. In order to be able to skillfully use modern
military equipment every border guard has to have broad knowledge and must
constantly add to it.

53

FOROI-TICIALUSBONLY
FOR¢HﬂﬂCLALIAHEONlY

The entire contemporary situation and the sharpness and difficultncss of the
struggle on the ideological front is making increased demands today upon
ideological educational and political work among the troops. Recently the
decree was adopted by the cc CPSU "On a Further Improvement of Ideological and
Political Bducational Bork" which sets a number of additional and new tasks for
the political agencies and party and Komsomol organisations of the border forces.

The qualities which are cultivated today during the period of military service--
a lofty consciousness of duty, organization. and selflessness-ere also needed
when a soldier returns after service to his labor collective. It is known to
everybody that those who have gone through the school of ailitary service,
especially border service, can be relied upon also in peaceful constructive
labor. This is being proven by your recent comrades-in-arms-now the young

builders of Ian. Kam‘l» the Sayano-Shushensk Hydroelectric Power Station, and
other great construction projects of our time.

Comrades! Today the Order of the Red Banner is being presented to your border
detachment. Behind this award is not only the strenuous military labor of border
soldiers to ensure the inviolsbility of our borders. but also the great pat-
riotic assistance which is given to them by the people's druzhinniki, the
workers of enterprises, kolkhozes, and sovkhozes. the detachments of young
friends of the border guards, and the entire border area population.

I should also mention the daily attention and concern for strengthening the

eastern borders of our country and for our border guards which is shown by the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of Kazakhstan, Kirghiziya, and

Tajikistan, the border obkoms and raykoms, the ispolkoms of the Soviets of People's
Deputies, and Komsomol organizations.

Permit me, dear comrades, to once again ardently congratulate you on your high
award from the homeland and to wish you large new successes in accomplishing the
difficult tasks of protecting the sacred frontiers of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. This award is not only the crown of your successes in the
past, but a hope for even greater successes in the future. Permit me in the name

of the CC CPSU and in my own name to express my firm confidence that the sol-
diers, sargeants,_ensigns, and officers of the detachment will continue their
model performance of their military duties and their vigilant protection of the
sacred frontiers of the Soviet state!

(The speech by comrade R. U. Chernenko was listened to with great attention and
repeatedly interrupted by stormy, prolonged applause.)

COPYRIGHT: POLITIZDAT, 1981

2959 -
CSO: 1800/272

54

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USB(NVLY
FYHICHﬂHCIAl.USE(MVLY

THE AHABD SUHIMB TO I!" ACHIEVEMENTS

Speech at a Gala Meeting Devoted to the
Presentation of the Order of Lenin to the
City of Chelyabinsk on
29 Hay 1980

[Text] Dear comrades!

I have been given the honorable and very pleasant mission of presenting today
the city of Chelyabinsk with the Order of Lenin.

On this gels and festive day permit me, dear comrades, on the charge of the
Central Committee of our party, the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the
Soviet govern-ant, and personally Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev, to offer my heart-felt

congratulations to you, all of the workers of the city, with this high and
deserved award. »

The very fact of the awarding of a state award is always a big and exciting
event, whether we are talking about the life of one person, of a labor
collective, or a city. For every time it testifies to the entire people's
recognition of the services of those who with their deeds are increasing the
might, honor, and glory of our socialist fatherland.

But the awarding of an honor which bears the name of the great Lenin is an event
of truly enormous importance. This is the highest award of the USSR. And to be

granted it is only possible for especially outstanding services to the Soviet
state and society. This is how the statute on the Order of Lenin reads.

The names of the best sons and daughters of the Soviet people are written in the
remarkable chronicle of those awarded with our homeland's most precious and
honored award. It has recorded in it advanced enterprises, military units,
cities and oblasts. and krays and republics. Henceforth the Order of Lenin will
also be on the standard which is enveloped with the revolutionary, combat, and
labor glory of your city, the city-toiler of Chelyabinsk.

Your city has been awarded in the year of the 50th anniversary of the instituting
of the Order of Lenin. Between these events there exists a profound symbolic

55-

FDRfﬂﬂﬂCIAI.USB(MVLY
FOIOII'II'ICIALUSEONLY

connection: the path which has been covered in 50 years-from the first five-
year plan to the 10th-is as it were summed up.

As we know, quite a few severe trials befall the city of Chelyabinsk on this path.And
1‘ is all the more joyful to know that the selfless labor of many generations

of Chelyabinsk workers has received a proper evaluation from the part1. and
the people.

Today's event is given especial meaning and significance by the fact that the
Order of Lenin is being presented to the city in a year when Soviet people and

all progressive mankind have co-emorated the 110th anniversary of the birth of
Vladimir Il'ich Lenin.

Time passes. And with each year that we live we become the more deeply aware of
the greatness of Lenin's ideas, feel with increasing vividness their influence on
the fate of the world, our country, and every Soviet person, and see more and
more clearly the embodiment in life of Lenin's designs.

V. I. Lenin today remains a participant in all of our deeds and accomplishments.
"Bis teachings," L. I. Brezhnev said, "will always be a call and a guide to

action, and the heroic feat of his life-an inspiring example for communists,
and for millions of people."1

There is no corner of our limitless homeland which was not touched by the
sagacious thought of Lenin and by his concern and attention. The rise and
rapid flourishing of the economy of the Urals, including Chelyabinsk, are
connected with the name of V. I. Lenin. It was determined by Lenin's plan of
the State Commission for the Electrification of Russia, and Lenin's idea of
creating the Uralo-Kurbsss. Taking note of the gigantic stocks of ore in the
Urals, V. I. Lenin wrote: "The exploitation of these natural resources with
modern equipment will provide the basis for unprecedented progress by the pro-
ductive forces."

Our party has and continues to do everything so that Lenin's plans are eabodied
in life. In different times the Central Committee has assigned many outstanding
party and government leaders to help the Chelyabinsk communists. Ya. N. Sverdlov
and N. I. Kalinin, and K. Ye. Voroshilov and G. K. 0rdzhonikidze invested part

of their strength. talent, and Bolshevik passion in the cause of socialist
construction in the South Urals. Their names are carefully preserved in the
grateful memory of Chelyabinsk workers.

Let us look in our mind's eye into the not-too-distant past. This kind of
action always creates the possibility of a deepened knowledge of history and
makes it possible to more fully understand the present day.

Here are a few lines from the portrait of Chelyaba at the beginning of the 20th
century: "In its external appearance the city resembles a big village. . . .
Ten factories and plants and lb churches. . . . The number of workers--233
people. The largest enterprises-a steam mill, a hulling mill, and a dis-
tillery. . . ."

56

FOR 0FF1CIA1.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The whole look of the once provincial city has changed beyond recognition during
the years of Soviet power. Here are a few figures for comparison. In 1913 the
enterprises of Chelyabinsk produced 5.5 million rubles worth of output, and in
l979—5.2 billion rubles. In a year the city consues six times more electric
energy than all of Tsarist kmsia did in 1913.

The city's housing fund in 1917 came to only 120,000 square meters. This is
almost 15 times less than what was built in Chelyabinsk in four years of the
10th Five-Year Plan. Before the revolution 87 percent of the population of
Chelyabinsk was illiterate. At the present time 87 percent of the city's workers
have a higher or secondary (complete or incomplete) education.

Today's Chelyabinsk with its more than one million people is onset the lat est
industrial and cultural centers of the country. It is .ong the first 10 c ties
of the Soviet Union for the amount of output it produces. It is a city of
science and vuses, palaces, moons and theaters, and a city of sports. Your
heart is gladdened when you become acquainted with its modern plants and
factories, cultural institutions, and well-built residential quarters.

Cities are created by people. . . . booking at your city you are involuntarily
amazed by the titanic force which was able in only a few decades to accomplish
truly fabulous transformations here. And all of this is the result of the
creative thought and selfless labor of workers, engineers, scientists, and of
all of the toilets led by the party of co-unists!

There are these lines in the proletarian poet V. V. liayakovsky: "Let our
cannon monument be socialise built in battles." Today‘s Chelyabinsk is a
living embodinent of the developed socialist society which has been constructed

in our country. It is a man-made mom-eat to its builders and, above all, to
the heroic working class.

Comrades! The history of Chelyabinsk is in many respects similar to the history
of dozens of others of our cities. Nevertheless, it has its own special and

inimitable fate. Its rapid jump into the 20th century began with a labor indus-
trial march.

Last year we took wide note of the 50th anniversary of the first Five-Year Plan.
It has become a symbol of the revolutionary transformation of reality, of high
rates of economic growth, and of the heroic labor feat of our people. Its

successful fulfillment ensured the creation of a solid material foundation for
the construction of a socialist society.

Today we speak with pride about the fact that among the first who laid this
unshakable foundation were the Chelyabinsk workers. It was precisely Chelyabinsk
that was granted the honorable and responsible role of being one of the basic
foreposta of the industrialization of the country.

During these years a nt-ber of enterprises of the new socialist industry went
into operation. He remember the birth of the Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant with ‘

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

especial emotion and pride. A giant of socialist industry, it was a very im-
portant technical base for the collectivization of agriculture. Its name
stands in a single rank with the other great construction projects of those
unforgettable years: the Dneproges and Hegnitka, the Uralmash and Turksib. the
Kuznetsk Hetellurgical (iodine and the Gor'kiy Motor Vehicle Plant. And the
brand name ChTz which is known to the entire country became as it were the
symbol of. the night of the tractor which was called among the people "the Ural
bogatyr.

0n 2 June 1933 N. I. Kalinin, who had come for the celebration in connection with
the start-up of the plant, esphasised, addressing the tractor builders: "Your
plant is in the public eye. . . . People in the whole world will be watching your
work. both your successes and your failures. . . . It is necessary . . . for
every person who works at the tractor plant, not only the engineer or the team
leader. but even the one who sweeps the floor, to feel the responsibility."3

The Chelyabinsk tractor builders replied with deeds to the call to master the
plant as rapidly as possible. On 7 Novewer 1933 the first 80v iet caterpiller
tractors passed across Red Square in lbscow, and in March 1960 the plant
collective won a remarkable victory: the 100,000th tractor cane off the main
conveyor. V. I. Lenin had dreamed about this number of tractors. The Chelyabinsk
workers realized Lenin' s dream, showing the entire world how the Oral Bolsheviks
know how to create powerful equipment!

The cadres of the builders of socialise were foreed in the crucible of the First
Five-Year Plan, and the character of a new Soviet man was forged. Yesterday's
peasants, day laborers, and skinless: workers became qualified specialists and
demonstrated models of high labor productiwity. Today, on this festive day,
while taking note of the great contribution of the workers of the city to the .
industrialization of the country. I would like to say sincere words of thanks
to those who with their labor created the foundations of the economic might of
our homeland. .

Here, in this hall, are the grey-haired representatives of the glorious galaxy
of heroes and shock workers of the first five-year plans. . . . It was your,
dear comrades, calloused hands which laid the first stones in the economic
foundation of socialisn. And the Order of Lenin which is being presented today
to the city—it is also your award!

Comrades! The labor feat of the Chelyabinsk workers which was performed by them
during the Great Patriotic Har will never be effaced from the people's memory.
During a grave hour of trial, when a mortal danger hung over our hoeelend, the
Urals was turned into the backbone of the country's defense, into a mighty
arsenal of the Red Army.

"Reap-To the Front!" These brief words made up the essence and meaning of
the life of the city during the war years. The restructuring of the entire

economy onto a war footing was accomplished in the briefest time. Under the
nost difficult circumstances 70 industrial enterprises which had been evacuated

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL WE ONLY

from the western areas of the country acquired a second life. New energy,
metallurgy, and machine building capacities were put into operation and existing
ones were expanded. The production of armaments, amnition, and military
equipnent grew continuously. For the workers of the rear the front line passed
by the blast furnaces, the rolling mills. and the conveyors.

One can say with complete justice that the front line passed through the heart
of the people.

In the terrible year of '61 a new and extraordinary alloy, netaphorically
speaking, was obtained in Chelyabinsk. Its "components" were three of the
country's large plantsuthe Chelyabinsk, Leningrad, and Khar'kov. In essence,
a city had arisen within a city, and the people gave it the severe and proud
use of Tankograd. This city was never named on a single geographical map.
But the newspapers of the war years wrote about it, Sovinfornbyuro mentioned

it in its surnaries, and it is discussed in the "history of the Great Patriotic
War of the Soviet Union."

Almost one-fifth of the tanks produced for the war were given to the front by
Tankograd. '-

Chelyabinsk tanks covered themselves with unfading glory in the battles around
Moscow and on the Volga, at the Kursk Arc, and during the Berlin operation. And
it is not only that brilliant technical thought had been put into their creation.
This glory was created by the best traditions of the Petersburg proletariat,

the high standard of precision machine building of the Khar'kov workers, and

the great practical experience of the Chelyabinsk tractor builders. And if you
were to multiply these qualities of the Tankograd workers by their great love
for their homeland and their sacred hatred of the anally, only then is it
possible to fully understand what the Chelyabinsk T-3-‘o was.

Among the nany awards of the tank builders there is one special one. It is the
Order of Kutusov First Degree. "The Order of Kutusov on the standard of a
plant," PRAVDA wrote in 1965, "n'eans that our state equates the outstanding work
of the military plants in the rear to a battle won on the front." '

During the war years the Chelyabinsk working class passed through a stern test

for strength. The words "thousander" and "front shock teal" became the banner
of the heroic labor days of the city.

But Chelyabinsk did not only forge weapons. Like the entire country, it sent
its best sons to the front. Tens of thousands of Chelyabinsk sen fought in tank
brigades, in " 000" battalions," and in paratroop detachments. Written for-
ever into the chronicle of glory are the conbat deeds of the 63rd Chelyabinsk
Volunteer Tank Brigade, the 96th Tank Brigade ineni the Chelyabinsk Komomol,
and nany other units which were for-ed in the city. On 9 Hey 19b3, in accor-
dance with an old Russian custoa, the people of Chelyabinsk saw off to'their
military heroic feats the fighters of the Urals Volunteer Tank Corps. The
words of the instructions with which the South Uralites addressed their volun-
teers at parting were stern and penetrating:

59

FOIOFI‘IQALUSEONLY
F03¢Hﬂﬂ€lkllﬁﬁiONLY

“Our dear sons and daughters, fathers and husbands!

Since ancient tines it has been with us in the Urals that in seeing our sons off
to war deeds, the Uralites gave the- their people's instructions. And the sons
of the Urals have never disobeyed the people's instructions. The Urels has
never blushed and never felt ashamed for the deeds of its sons. They have never
brought shame to its age-old Russian glory.

Seeing you off and blessing you for battle with the fierce enely of our Soviet
honeland, we also wish to address you in parting with our instructions. . . .
Do not forget: you and your nachines are a part of us, you are our blood, our
ancient Ural good glory. and our fiery hatred for the sue-y."

The tankers replied to the instructions which had been given to then with an
oath that was as fire as Ural granite. They rolled fromhthe wells of Oral to
the capitol of Czechoslovakia, increasing the glory of the white-haired Urals.
Their legendary T-34 was the first to break into Prague and froze forever on a
granite pedestal as a symbol of heroic labor, military valor. internationalisn,
and the friendship of peoples.

The further the years of the Great Patriotic Her nove fron us. the more vivid is
the consciousness of the greatness of the nilitary and labor feat achieved by.
the Soviet people. This feat has gone into history and will not grow dinner in
the centuries to cone.

Our entire country, and the workers of the fraternal socialist countries cele-
brated the 35th anniversary of the Great Victory. During this bright holiday
we bend our heads and honor the nenory of those who in the nortal skirnish with
fascism gave their lives in the name of the honor, freedon, and independence of
their homeland, in the name of peace and socialism, and in the nsne of life on
earth.

Special nention has to he made of our glorious women workers. A difficult bur-
den came down on their shoulders-to work for the-selves and for those who had
left for the front. They endured! And what a cup of sorrow and grief they had
to drink during the stern war period?!

A low bow to you, our dear women, for your labor feat, for your staunchness and
courage, and for your enormous contribution to the victory over the eneny.

Here in this hall are present the representatives of the heroic war years
generation of Chelyabinsk people. . . . It was with their sweet and blood that
victory was forged at the front and in the rear.

In taking note of the great contribution of the workers of the city to the defeat
of the Gernan fascist invaders during the Great Patriotic Her, we address you.
dear conrades, with words of the deepest thanks and sincere gratitude. And the
Order of Lenin which is being presented to the city today--it is your award!
Honor and glory to you!

60

FOR 0i1ﬂClAl.U§B(HVLY
FIHR(JFFIC1A1.IEHB(MKLY

Comrades! I would like to note with especial satisfaction that today also the
workers of Chelyabinsk are at the front lines of communist construction. They
are eaking a weighty contribution to strengthening the country's economy and to
realizing the plans of the 10th Five-Year Plan, and they are persistently
realizing the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress.

During four years of the five-year plan 128 nillion rubles worth of above-
plan output was sold. This, as you understand, is considerable. And it

is especially gratifying that the entire increase in production was obtained
through a rise in labor productivity.

Fixed productive capital has increased in the city by almost one-third. A
large amount of work has been carried out to reequip enterprises, renew the
products list of the products which are produced, and improve output quality.
There has been a narked increase in the production of consuer goods.

The social program which is stipulated by the long-term plans for the develop-
ment of the city for the years 1975-1980 is being consistently carried out. A
great deal is being done to turn Chelyabinsk into a city with a high stanlard
of production and a high level of culture in everyday life.

As you know, Chelyabinsk was acknowledged as victor in the All-Russian socialist
competition for an increase in production efficiency and an improvement of the
quality of work and for the successful fulfillment of the State Plan for the
economic and social development of the RSPSR for 1979 and was awarded the Red
Challenge Banner of the RSPSR Council of Ministers and the All-Union Council of
Trade Unions. This is a deserved and a worthy evaluation!

Today's Chelyabinsk is a whole constellation of enterprises which make up the
pride of Soviet industry. Many of them have been awarded for their 1979 results
with the Red Challenge Banners of the CC CPSU, USSR Council of Ministers; All-
Union Central Council of Trade Unions, and the CC of the All-Union Leninist
Communist Youth League, and have been entered on the Board of Honor of the
Exhibition of the Achievements of the Economy of the USSR. It is pleasant to
note that veteran-plants and young ones are here in a single formation.

The.output which is made by the hands of the descendants of the Ural craftsnen
is well-known not only in our country. It is sent to 66 countries of the world.
And this is not only a convincing certification of the Chelyabinsk brand name,
but a graphic characterisation of the breadth of our economic relations. It is
a graphic confirmation of the correctness of Lenin's words: "The bourgeois
countries have to trade with Russia: they know that without certain forms of
economic relationships the collapse in their countries will go further than it
has to date. . . ."4

You know, comrades. that today certain people on the other side of the ocean are
attempting to create the opposite, and are playing new variations on the old
theme of the use of "econonic sanctions" against the Soviet Union. I think that
here it would be proper to recall sons other words of Lenin's: "He have seen

61

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USB(MILY
IIHI(HﬂﬂCtALIJSEGMQLY

enough threats, and, moreover, more serious ones than the threats of s tradesmen
who is getting ready to slam the door. . . . And if it pleases you, gentlemen
representatives of the bourgeois state, to amuse yourselves and . . . notify the
entire world: 'He shall put Russia in the position of the subject of an experi-
ment,‘ then we will see who does what to whom. We have already been put to the

test, and put to the test not with words, not with trade, and not with the ruble,
but with the hilly club."s

Of course, we cannot force the foreign "strategists" to study the works of

V. l. Lenin. But it probably is worthwhile to remind some people another time
of the lessons of history. Incidentally, the workers of Chelyabinsk gave such
lessons.

Once, for example, some western companies attempted to put us in a difficult
situation by suddenly refusing to sell us large diameter steel pipes. And then
the Chelyabinsk pipe rollers had their weighty say. They mastered the produc-
tion of our own domestic pipes in record tine. proving to the capitalists what
Soviet Urals workers are capable of.

This lesson was given by Chelyabinsk workers more than 15 years-ago. Since then
a great deal has changed. Our economic and scientific and technological poten-
tial is not what is was, and our working class has grown up. Today it is
capable of accomplishing even greater tasks.

It is the working class which comprises. in Marx's figurative expression, the
backbone of the people, and it plays a leading and ever growing role in communist
construction. It is the main transforming force in all of the fields of social
development. be it the production of material values, ideology, or the socialist
way of life.

of course, this concerns first of all the industrial nucleus of the working
class which personifies the best features and qualities of the builders of the
new world. It is, as it were, the social and moral standard by which all of
the other detachments of the working class of our country orient themselves.

In seeking to comprehend the historic path which has been covered by the Soviet
working class. even if y0u take the last 15-20 years, you can clearly see the
colossal changes which have occurred in its quantitative and qualitative compo-
sition. and in its entire spiritual make-up. In essence, a new type of worker
has developed in whose work physical labor is being increasingly combined with
intellectual, engineering labor.

when we say "contemporary worker." we mean, of course, good professional training,
diverse knowledge, and a broad cultural outlook. But, above all, it is a high
level of class consciousness, collectivism, discipline and organization, and a
proprietary responsibility, and not only for one‘s own sector, but for the entire
country. For such a worker the ideals of communism, socialist patriotism, and

proletarisn internstionalism are the essence of his entire worldview and deter-
mine his active life position. -

62

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(MVLY
FIMl11FFICLAL lEiE¢HVLY

Today an army of more than 600,000 workers is laboring at the enterprises of
Chelyabinsk. They are distinguished by skillful hands, an ardent mind. and in-
exhaustible creative energy. This is one of the largest and most tested detach-
ments of the Soviet working class on which one can rely in any matter!

"Every new generation of people," L. I. Brezhnev emphasised, "is strong in that
it bases itself on the experience of the preceding generations and on the results
achieved by them."6 On such a day as today, you feel especially keenly that the
present generation of Chelyabinsk workers is worthily continuing the revolution-
ary, combat, and labor traditions of its predecessors.

Here, in this hall, are present these who with their deeds are increasing the
labor glory of the city. It is gratifying to see among them a considerable
number of representatives of the youth which is carrying forward the baton
which has been passed on to it with honor.

In taking note of the successes which have been achieved by the workers of
Chelyabinsk in economic and cultural construction, there is every ground for
stating: The Order of Lenin which is being presented today to the city--this
is also your order, dear comrades!

Special mention should be made of the fact that the inspirer and organizer of
the profound changes which have occurred in Chelyabinsk during the years of

Soviet power is the city party organization--a tested detachment of our Leninist
party.

Throughout their entire history the communists of the city have acted as coura-
geous and unbending fighters for'the people's happiness. Their leading role
manifested itself especially clearly during the most difficult, turning point.
periods of our life. With their fiery Bolshevik words and personal example they
raised the workers to a struggle for Soviet power and for the industrialization
of the country, and led them to labor and military feats during the Great
Patriotic war. And today the Chelyabinsk communists, like always, are in front,
at the most difficult and decisive sectors of communist construction.

The party organization of Chelyabinsk has always been, is, and will be a strong
support for the Central Committee of our party.

On this festive day I would like to wish the city colmittee of the party, and
all of the communists of the order-bearing city to continue to hold our revolu-
tionary Leninist banner high!

Comrades! All of you understand very well that we have not met here today only
to pay tribute to the glorious history of the city and to the successes and
achievements of its workers. On days of celebration, and on days of our victo.
rious moods, V. I. Lenin taught, we have to become permeated by that labor en-
thusiasm, that will to work, and stubbornness upon which our rapid forward
movement now depends.

63

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USBlﬂNLY
IKHICHHHC1A1.USB(NVLY

I think that we will be acting correctly if we concentrate our attention today
precisely on these questions. This year, as you know, is in many respects a
special year in the life of our party and people. It sums up the strenuous
labor to carry out the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress and the plans of

the lOth Five-Year Plan, and it is laying the foundation for the following five-
year plan. This is the year of the initiation of active preparations for the
26th Congress of our party.

In speaking about special characteristics, I would like above all to emphasize
the enormous measure of responsibility which the period now being lived through
by us is placing on every communist and on every Soviet person.

We have entered 1980 with clear work goals and prospects. The key tasks, and
the ways and methods of accomplishing them, have been formulated with exceeding
clarity in the decisions of the November (1979) Plenun of the CC CPSU and in
the speech at the Plenum by comrade L. I. Brezhnev. The party has put forward
a fighting slogan: Not only fulfill, but exceed the plan assignments and

turn the concluding year of the five-year plan into a year of shock work, of
work in the Leninist manner.

The party's summons found an ardent response in the hearts of millions upon
millions of Soviet people. The struggle for an absolute fulfillment of the
decisions of the November (1979) Plenum of the CC and of the plans and socialist
commitments has become the chief content of the work of labor collectives.

As is known, the word of communists and the word of a Soviet man does not diverge
from deeds. Our people are laboring inspiredly and strenuously, and that is
producing results. The four-months plan for output sales, production growth.

and a rise of labor productivity has been overfulfilled in industry.

During the days of Lenin's anniversary 7,000 enterprise and association collec-
tives, 235,000 teams, shops, and livestock sections, and more than 5 million
workers reported the advance conclusion of the five-year plan and assignments.
They all received the high praise of their homeland--they were awarded honorary
Lenin Certificates.

Host of the enterprises of Chelyabinsk have also begun 1980 well. Many of them
are working at the level of the control assignments of the five-year plan. The
city's workers have fulfilled the plans for the four months for all of the
basic econoeic indicators.

The first work results cannot but be gratifying. As they say among the people-
a good beginning is half the job. If the rates which have been taken are
maintained in the future, it can be said with certainty that the mapped out
frontiers will be taken.

At the same time. the optimism with which we look to the future by no means
provides grounds for complacency. In a masher of positions we have still not

succeeded in eliminating the shortcomings which were discussed at the November
(1979) Plenum of the CC.

64

FOIIOFFICLAL.USEINNLY
INJBIOIIHChAL lEﬂB(HVLY

I think, comrades, that I will not spoil your holiday mood if I say that in
your work also there still are, unfortunately, shortcomings and unutilized
reserves. For today it is especially important to concentrate our efforts on
unsolved problems, to make a detailed analysis of a situation, and to put all
existing economic and political potentialities into operation for the successful
conclusion of the five-year plan.

Individual enterprises of the city did not meet the assignments of the four
months for production volume and output sales. Chelyabinsk metallurgical
workers failed to give the country thousands of tons of iron, steel, and rolled
goods. A number of enterprises failed to fulfill delivery contracts. In some
places losses from defective goods continue to be great, and the number of
complaints is not being cut down.

I could have cited examples of the slow reorganisation of enterprises for the
production of modern equipment instead of machinery and mechanisms of obsolete
design which are inferior to the best domestic and foreign models in their
productivity and metal intensiveness.

At the November (1979) Plent- of the cc CPS!) L. I. Brezhnev made serious criti-
cisms of the technical level of the T-330 tractor which is produced by the
Cheboksary Tractor Plant. As you well know, this is also a reproach to the
Chelyabinsk designers who participated in the creation of the tractor. I would
say that it does not become Chelyabinsk workers to lower the prestige of their
brand name.

Sons of the city's enterprises are working below their possibilities to produce
consumer goods. Many articles in mass demand which could be produced locally
have to be inported into Chelyabinsk fros other oblasts and republics.

Not all of the enterprises of the city are as yet giving the necessary attention
to improving labor organization, the mechanization of labor intensive processes,
and a reduction of losses of working time. At the present time more than
90,000 workers are employed in manual labor in industry. Last year losses of

working time from truancies made up an enormous figure-more than 100,000 man-
days.

The situation in construction is slowly improving in the city. At individual
construction sites there has been a substantial lagging. The problem of housing
construction remains a sharp one for Chelyabinsk.

I am not setting myself the task, comrades, of revealing here the entire spec-
trum of your internal problems. Although, of course, it would be possible to

name shortcomings also in the work of transportation, trade, domestic services
for the public, and certain others.

The essence, as you understand, is not in the sire of this list. The main thing
is that we really do not have any right to lull ourselves with our achieved
successes.

6S

I!”l(ﬂﬂﬂ(1Al.lEﬂi(ﬂ'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It should be noted that it 13 precisely from these positions that the city party
organization approaches the evaluation of work results. As I was told, this
occasioned a sharp and principled conversation at the pleat-s and meetings of
the party aktiv to discuss their tasks in the light of the statements of

L. I. Brezhnev made by him at a meeting with the voters of the Bauman Election
District of the city of Moscow. ‘

It seems to us that the chief reason for the existing shortcomings is the fact
that the party gorkom and raykoms, the primary party organizations, and govern-
ment and economic agencies did not succeed in fully carrying out the planned
measures to increase production efficiency and improve the quality of work.

Unfortunately, the struggle for high final results and for the fullest utili-
zation of the effective factors of growth and of internal reserves has not yet
become the heart of the work of every labor collective. And it is precisely
here, in the labor collective, that the fate of the national economic plans is
in the last analysis decided. It is well known that the labor collective is
the basic and primary cell of our society. As the ocean is reflected in a drop
of water, so does the entire totality of socialist social relations find a
reflection in every labor collective.

The comaunist party and its Central committee attribute enormous importance to
increasing the organizational and educational role of labor collectives. The
new Soviet Constitution has fixed for them in law a wide complex of rights and
duties which ensure their effective participation in the discussion and deciding
of state, economic, and public matters and in the education of the workers.

I would like to especially emphasize the role of labor collectives in strengthening
discipline. It is not accidental that I am putting this question in first
place. An analysis of the reasons for shortcomings shows that their common

denominator is above all discipline: performance, labor, production, and
planning discipline.

The Central Committee of our party regards work on strengthening labor discipline
as one of the chief directions for increasing production efficiency. This is
clearly stated in the decree of the CC CPSU "On a Further Strengthening of

Labor Discipline and a Reduction of Labor Turnover in the Economy." The prac-
tical realization of the tasks posed in this has to becoae the daily concern

of every labor collective and of all workers.

Putting the issue this way is not the result of some kind of extraordinary
circumstances, but is an objective deaand of our progressive DOVEIGnt forward.
"The communist organization of social labor," V. I. Lenin stated, " is based
on, and the further it goes the more it will be based on the free and conscious
disciplirt of the workers themselves. . . ."7

I suppose that anybody sitting in the hall could cite more than one instructive
additional example of what today results from the damage from any violation of
labor, planning, or production discipline. The trouble is that words on this

66

FORCNHHK1A1.U§E(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

topic are still not always followed by painstaking daily organisational work,
clear perforunce verification, and a flexible well-conceived cadre policy.
Cases of lack of discipline still do not meet everywhere with a quick and sharp
reaction from labor collectives. .

Discipline is needed in this latter. I would emphasize-conscious discipline..
In showing concern for strengthening it, we thereby create a solid foundation for
the develop-ant of initiative and creativity--our eighty accelerators of

economic growth.

And here, conrades, aention has to be nade of the role which labor collectives
are called upon to play in the developaent of socialist competition and in the
dissemination of advanced fares and methods of work.

As is known, good initiatives are in need not only of praise, but also of
practical support. The Central Co-ittee of our party is constantly turning
to the experience of the workers, and it carefully studies and disseminates
the new and the valuable that is born in life and that helps to move things
forward more rapidly. The well-known decree of the CC CPS!) on the work of the
Chelyabinsk obkon on economizing ferrous metals at the enterprises and con-
struction sites of the oblast may serve as an example of this.

It can be noted with satisfaction that at any of the enterprises and con-
struction sites of the city a large amount of work has been done around this
decree and also the greetings of L. I. Brezhnev to the participants of the
seminar which was carried out on the basis of Chelyabinsk oblast. The socialist
comitnents to economize metal whichI-were adopted for the 10th Five-Year Plan
were fulfilled in four years, and (045,000 tons of ferrous metals were economised.
These tangible results graphically demonstrate how the party, expressing the
aspirations of the people itself, is directing its efforts to accomplish
practical tasks in the most effective way.

However, unfortunately, mtters do not stand like this everywhere, not in every
labor collective. In some places people are not averse to only "making a little
noise" about advanced experience and "voting" for it, but if you look, it is

not disseminated.

The reasons for this situation are well known. Pirst of all, insufficient
organizational work and poorly organized control.

Discipline and initiative-«hey are, as it were, the two sides of a single
medal. That which we call the conscientiousness and responsibility of a person
can in the final analysis be reduced to then.

There is the profoundest meaning in the sinple wordy-readiness to answer for
one's work with a clear conscience. Behind the: are the nobility of intentions,
the daily and full use of one's spiritual and physical energies, and an inflexi-
ble will to achieve a goal. It is precisely these qualities which in our -
country distinguish those who are ahead. It is not simple to cultivate then: in

67

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
FOI:OF1NC1A1.[EHE(HULY

oneself, since the task of leading others after oneself, speaking with Lenin's
words, "cannot be accomplished with a single heroic burst, but requires the
most prolonggd, the most stubborn, and the most difficult heroism of mass and
daily work."

The education of an honest attitude toward labor is the duty of every labor
collective. This duty doubles and triples when we are speaking about the edu-
cation of the youth. It is in the labor collectives that professional experi-
ence, expertise, and the habit of working conscientiously is passed on from
generation to generation. "It is precisely here," L. I. Brezhnev emphasised.
"from heart to heart-that the youth is given communist ideology, loyalty to
the cause of the party, and a readiness to always be in front, at the most
difficult and at the moat decisive sectors."9

The tutorehip movement is a vivid example of the continuity of the generations
of the working class in our country. The word "tutor" has always been used
with us to name those who gave their knowledge and experience to the youth,
"put them on the true path." There is enormous spiritual wealth and generosity
that wafte from this ancient Russian word.

Today this remarkable and noble movement has become the mighty lever which makes
it possible to raise to a new height the professional training and communist
education of the youth and its active access to the constructive work of the
working class and of our entire people. There are already more'than 2.5
million worker-teachers who, ordered by their souls and hearts, are teaching
young men and women industriousness and expertise and are educating them in
the heroic traditions of the working class, passing on to then, the labor baton
as if from the present to the future.

It is pleasant to note that among the initiators of the tutorehip movement who
were the first to be awarded the title of Hero of Socialist Labor is the Ursls
metallurgist Aleksey Leont'yevich Shatilin. And it is even more gratifying
that today we see among his followers more than 12.000 of the beat represen-
tatives of the working class of Chelyabinsk.

The labor collective, and its opinion and influence play, as a rule, a decisive
role in strengthening discipline and in the formation of an active life position.
Its role is no less important in production management and in the accomplishment
of the most important state affairs.

1 would like here to emphasize that the consistent development and perfection of
democratic forms and methods of leadership and management is one of the chief
tendencies of mature socialism. The realization of the broad rights granted by
the USSR Constitution to labor collectives makes it possible for millions of
Soviet people to join even more actively in the management of the economy and
in the work to supervise the activities of economic agencies. Large possibili-
ties in this regard are being opened up by the decrees of the CC CPSU and USSR
Council of Ministers on improving the planning and management of the economic
mechanism.

68

FOIiOFFﬂﬂA1.USE(MVLY
FINICIHﬂCJAl.USE(NVLY

The party organization has alwnys been, is, and will be the political nucleus

of the labor collective. He often compare the primary party organizations with
powerful roots with which the party goes into the very thick of the masses. And
this is understandable. Nourishing the party from the depths of the people's
life, they give it energy, experience, and a knowledge of the needs of social
development. 0n the other hand, the party carries out its policy directly
through the primary organizations and unites it with the living creative work
of the masses.

Under present conditions the center of the party's work is increasingly shifting
to the production section, teams, shifts, to those elements which comprise the
basis of the entire production organism. In this connection, the role of the
shop organizations and party groups has been constantly growing. For they are
closest of all to people and they operate in places where the large concepts

of politics and economics are translated into the language of practical work,
where their ideological positions, attitude toward labor, and moral qualities
are cultivated in the first place in people.

A communist is a political soldier of the party. His highest duty is to be an
example in labor and in the struggle for our great goals, and to demonstrate by
word and deed how, under concrete conditions, to build communism today.
"Comeunists," L. I. Brezhnev stated, " have no privileges except one-to give
more than others to our common cause, and to struggle and work better than
others for the sake of its trimph. Conunists do not have' any special riﬁhts
except one--to always be in the front, to be where it is more difficult."1

Of course, a special demand is made upon the communist leader. The moral at-
mosphere in a collective depends to a large extent upon his personal qualities
and personal actions.

The concept of the "qualification of an economic manager" includes, as is known,
not only the sum of his economic and technical knowledge; it is much broader.
A special feature of our day is that the organizational and technical side of
management is connected in the closest way with the socio-psychological,
pedagogical, and educational sides.

The fate of any matter is decided by people. And today the forefront is being
more and more occupied by the, so to speak, human factor, the ability to work
with people, to lead them after oneself. Without this it is impossible to be
a good and real leader.

I think that every worker, regardless of what position he occupies, should ex-
perience a constant aspiration to be closer to people, to know their feelings
and needs better, and to persistently learn the delicate art of co-unication
with the masses. The Central Committee of the party demands from party,
government, and economic agencies that they constantly study public opinion,
and be attentive to the criticisms and proposals, and the letters and oral
addresses of workers. This most valuable information from the point of view
of practical work serves at the same time as a concrete form of the direct and
mass participation by Soviet people in the management of society and the state.

69

INDI.0FF1C1Al.lEiE(MVLY
F(Hl(ﬂﬂﬂ(JAl.USIi(MVLY

I would like to emphasise in this connection that only through the wide enlist-
aent of the workers in management is it possible to accomplish the task of

the full and final eradication of elements of bureaucratiem which, unfortunately.
are still characteristic of some of our government and economic agencies.

“. . . There is one means against this," V. I. Lenin stated. "The development
of the consciousness and the activity of the working mass itself."11

Comrades! All of our life serves as a vivid testimony to the fact that the
policy of our party is truly the people's policy. It accumulates within itself
the collective mind and experience of all of our workers, communists, and non-
party people and fully and accurately expresses their thoughts and hopes and
aspirations. The supreme principles of the genuine humanism of comaunists who
have no other interests than the interests of the people and no other goals
than its good and happiness find an embodiment in it.

It is precisely this most high goal which unites the party and all Soviet people
in strong and inseparable ties. This is precisely why there are no limits to

the trust, love, and respect of the people for its party in which it sees the
mind, honor, and conscience of the age.

The monolithic unity and solidarity of the party and the people and of our
entire socialist society is our great possession and the living and inexhaus-
tible source of our strength and of all of our achievements. "And let our
enemies remember the lessons of history,” L. I. Brezhnev said. "Let them know
that the unity of Soviet people becomes especially strgng precisely when people
attempt to speak with us in the language of threats."1

It has to be said there are apparently some people today who not only do not
wish to reckon with the lessons of history, but are attempting to turn it back.
The situation in the world at the threshold of the present decade has becoas
much more complex.

It is frequently asserted in the West that the exacerbation of the international
situation has allegedly been caused by the Afghan or Iranian events. This is
not true. It was not today and not yesterday that the imperialist forces and
above all the United States adopted a course hostile to peace.

At a conference of the Political Consultative Committee of the participant
states in the Warsaw Pact which took place in May of this year in Harsaw a
consistent analysis was made of the current international situation and the
direct responsibility of the aggressive circles of the imperialist powers for
the increased threat to the peace and independence of peoples was demonstrated.
The current complication of the situation is a direct consequence of the im-
perialist policy of force, confrontation, and hegemonism. Imperialism is
attempting to regain its military superiority over the socialist countries and
to subordinate vast areas of the world to itself.

70
FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FIHICNﬂﬂM1A1.USE(MQLY

Is this not witnessed by the adoption in NATO two years ago of a program for
an extensive increase in military preparations designed until the year 2000;
and was this not the purpose of the leaders of the NATO bloc when, in reply to
our proposal to lessen the military danger in Europe, they adopted a decision
to place there a new American medium-range nuclear missile weapon aimed against
the Soviet Union? And the sabotage of the ratification of the Salt-II? The
opponents of detente, as we see, are not being idle.

The more limited the possibilities become for imperialism to subordinate to its
hegemony other countries and peoples and to pulp out their natural resources
without hinderance, the more ferocious the reaction to this of the imperialist
forces and, above all, of the United States of America.

Finding themselves face to face with very acute crisis phenomena, the most
aggressive United States forces are attempting, brandishing their swords and
threatening to institute economic sanctiona.to dictate their will to other
countries.

The decision of the Carter Administration to break diplomatic relations with
Iran, to institute an economic blockade against it, and to station a very large
formation of American naval forces in the Persian Gulf is an open escalation of
blackmail and pressure and of tensions in the Near and Middle East. ,

About Afghanistan. If our military contingent had not come there at the re-
quest of the Afghan government, the forces hostile to peace would have turned
this country into a staging ground from which they would threaten the southern
borders of the USSR, and they would drown the Afghan revolution in blood. Hell,
would this have strengthened detente? Of course, not. The Afghan government
has recently cone out with an initiative which envisages a political settlement
of the question. We support these proposals. But to date neither the United
States nor Pakistan support them. But it is precisely these countries which
together with China make up the power which is carrying out an invasion from
without of the territory of the independent, sovereign, and non-allied state

of Afghanistan. A political settlement in this area depends to a considerable
extent upon them.

Iran, Afghanistan, the Near East, and the Indian 0cean-all of these are links
in a single chain-a chain which is pulling toward increased military danger
for all states and people. The Chinese leaders who have taken the path of

a direct conspiracy with imperialism are harnessing themselves more and more
actively in a common harness with those who are attempting to drag the world
toward a dangerous development of events.

Remaining true to its wolf nature and wolf habits, trying, as in the well-known
fable by I. A. Krylov, "to make the thing look right," imperialism seeks every
pretext in order to justify its expansionist plans, adventurous "doctrines,"
and the inciting of a military psychosis. having equipped themselves with open
Goebbels methods of propaganda, the new-found proponents of the policy "from

a position of strength" are spreading the myth of a "Soviet military threat"
for all they are worth.

FORlOFilC1A1.lEHE(HULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The anti-Soviet hysteria which was recently raised by Carter and his entourage
is unprecedented in its malice. um is there not piled up around this.

"The 'Doctrine' of military hysteria and of a feverish arms race,” 1.. I. Brezhnev
said. "is opposed by us with the doctrine of a consistent struggle for peace

and security on earth. we are faithful to the Peace Pﬁgram which has been put
forward by the 24th end 25th Congresses of our party." The Soviet Union, as
in the past, consistently stands for a strengthening of detente, for a reduction
of armaments, end for closer relations and mutual understanding between peoples.
Our Leninist foreign policy is close and understandable to all who need and
cherish peace and who are struggling for the freedom and independence of

peoples and for social progress.

Together with the Soviet Union, all of the participant countries of the Harm
Pact are reliably standing guard over peace and socialism. During the quarter
century of its existence this organization has taken shape and it acts as a
reliable shield for our socialist gains, as a mighty factor in our joint

struggle for peace and international security, and as a source of the most
serious peace initiatives.

In Harsaw, at the conference of the Political Consultative Conittee. the
unanimously adopted Declaration and Statement put forward a clear program of
action for maintaining peace and contained new constructive proposals aimed

at a further development of detente on the European continent, the harnessing
of the_ arms race, and an inprovenent of the world political climate as a whole.

In reply to the intrigues of the imperialist forces, Soviet people are uniting
their ranks even more closely around the car-mist party and its Central
Conittee and are increasing their efforts in the name of strengthening the
economic and defense might of their beloved homeland.

Dear comrades! Allow me to make public the Ukaze of the-Presidiua of the USSR
Supreme Soviet on the awarding to the city of Chelyabinsk of the Order of Lenin
and to present this high award to the representatives of the city.

ME
OF THE PRESIDIUH 0? m USSR SUPREME SOVIET
0n the Award to the City of Chelyabinsk
of the Order of Lenin

For successes achieved by the workers of the city in economic and cultural con-
struction, and in recognition of their great contribution to the industrializa-
tion of the country and the defeat of the German fascist invaders during the
Great Patriotic War, the city of Chelyabinsk is awarded the Order of Lenin.

‘ 72.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chair-nan of the Presidium of the USSR
Suprene soviet
L. I. Brezhnev

Secretary of the Presidiul of the 1185!!
Supreme Soviet .
H. Georgadre
Koscow, The Kremlin. lo January 1980

Dear conrades! Permit us in conclusion to once again sincerely congratulate
you with your homeland's highest award!

I an convinced that today's happiness and holiday mood is rightfully being
shared with the Chelyabinsk workers by all of the workers of the oblast. For
this award has in it the labor of the netallurgista of Magnitogorsk and
Zlatoust, the labor of the liners of Kopeyask, and the labor of the farmers of
your area.

The Central Comittee of our party expresses its firn confidence that the

Order of Lenin on the city' a standard will always inspire the workers of
Chelyabinsk and Chelyabinskaya Oblaat to new accomplishments for the glory of

our socialist fatherland.
Pernit me, dear conrades, to wish you creative successes in your work, good
health, happiness and prosperity, and a worthy reception for the 26th Congress
of our dear Colnuniat Party of the Soviet Union.
(Comrade K. 0. Chernenko's speech was listened to with great attention and
repeatedly interrupted by prolonged applause.)
FOOTNOTES
1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Following Lenin's Course," Vol 2, p 566.
2. V. I. Lenin, "Complete HorkS." Vol 36, p 135.
3. H. I. Kalinin, "Selected Works," Vol 3. p 30.
4. V. I. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 65, p 3.
5. Ibid., pp 5-6.

6. L. I. Brezhnev, op.cit., Vol 1, p 156.

73.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. V. I. Lenin, op. c1:., Vol 39, p 14.
8. Ibid., Vol 39, pp 17-18.
. 9. L. I. Brezhnev, op. cit., Vol 6, p 331.
10. Ibid.. Vol 2. p 137.
11. V. I. Lenin. op. cit., Vol 62, p 11.
12. PRAVDA, 23 February 1980.
13. Ibid.
COPYRIGII‘I’: POLITIZDAT, 1981

2959
050: 1800/ 272

.3“).

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000500050007-4