FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRS L/ 10587
5 June 1982

USSR Report

POLITICAL AND' SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(Fouo‘ 19/82)

Speeches at 1981 All-Union Ideological Conference

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
'OF TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(3000 19/82)

SPEECHES AT mil—idioms IDEOLOGICAL 'coanREnc'E‘

Moscow '23 WSOKOYB KACEES‘I'VO I DBYS'I'VBNNOS’I" IDEOLOGICBBSKOY
mm in Russian 1901 (signed to press 28 Jul 81) pp 3-4, 35-328,
357-380, 394-414, 423-456, 470-473, 487-489, 563-576

[Poreword, speeches and table of contents of book “For the High
Quality and Efficacy of Ideological Work,“ edited by Ye. l4.
Tyazhel'nikov, Politizdat, 100,000 copies, 576 pages]

Commas

“mordOOOOCsooososscossoososoooooooesssocoooloos000.00.000.00oocosoossoss 1

be Priority Tasks of Ideological md Political Eduction Busting
Pros the Incision of the 26th 080 Congme and (bundle
L. I. Bnthncv's Depart
(“0 v. uwmm).00.0000.00.000.000.0000000000.00000000000COOCOOOOO 2

Inc 26th CPS!) Congress ad the Psrty's Boom-1c Policy in the Sphere
of Indutry and (instruction
(v. I. biw)00000ll.0COCOCOOOO0.00000000000000.0COOO...OOOOOCOOO ”

Urgent Questions of Agrarian Policy in the Liﬁnt of the nations
of the 26th 080 Congress
(".0 So “mmv)s0.00....ODOI.0..ODODOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOO00.0.0... $9

‘Ihe Mules of the 26th CPSU Cantos- snd Certain Questions of the
world (bl-mist Hovemnt
(BO “0 Pmouuv)00 ..... 0..OIODCOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0000000000000000 m

“26th (1’31! angle” and the Tab: of Cultural Building
(P. N. muwav).00.0.0{OOOOOIOOOOC0".CO0.00....0.000000000000000. 107

- a - [III - 0888 - 35 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. ...———__

Questions of Party Building in the Lidzt of the bdsions of due
26th (280 engress
(1. Vs uptmov)...‘COOOICCDOC-O‘COOOCOCOOOOOQOOOOOOOUIOOOCIOOOOOO

‘Jhe 26th (I’SU Congress on the bvelopnent of the World Socialist
System
(x. v. mov)COOOOCOOOOOOOOCOOOOIOOOCOD0.0...OCOOOOOOOCOOCCOOI...

me 26th CPSU Congress on a Further Rise in the Soviet People' a
Hell-Being
(v. “a my°V)OOOCCO0.0...OOCOOIIQCCO'OOOOOOOOO...OOOOOC'OOOOOOC.

Problen of the Acceleration of Scientific-nannies]. Progress
(6. B. mrch‘k)00|00OODOOODOOOOOOODIDOOOO...0'00OIOOOOOODOOOOOOOO.

me 26th CPS" Cmgreso' Creative Contribution to the lbvelopnent
of the 'lheory and Practice of Scientific Co-Inisn
(A. Go YesOKOV)..o...u..........u...n.t..o.......oo........o..c

'nle 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of an Improve-eat in the
Ideological-Political. Occupational and lbral Training of
Schoolchildren ‘

(“I A. Pmkof'yev).....o....o..........ooo....o...o........o..o...

1he 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of an Inprovenent in die
Student Youth's Ideological-Political. Occupational and lbral
Training
(V. Po Yelyutill)u.ooo.......o.o........o.......oo.........o...o.o

‘Ihe Subversive Activity of the Special Services and Ideological
Centers of the lnperislist States Against the (BSR
(s. K. nvigm)...‘.0000...'0ODD...OOOOQOOOOOOOOOOIOOIO00.0.0.0...

For the Topicality md Intelligibility of Infomtion

(s. A. IDBEV).....-.o...o........u....oo...c..............-......

'lhe 26th CPSU Congress and the Developnnt of Heuist-lcninist meory
(R. I. Kosolapov).................................................

Struggle for People's Life and Health-imbue Mission of Soviet

bdicine
(Ye. I. a‘azov)0000000OOOOOIOOOOOOOOOIODIOOOOOOOCOOOOOOCOOOOIOOOOO

1he Party Organisation's Firm Ties to the Maser-Guarantee of
Successful Ideological Uork
(A. H. lbganov)..

Conan-11st EducationnCOIprehensiveness and Purposefulness

(A. S. KBPCO)...o-..u.u.....o.......o:-.-....................n.

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

131

146

166

1&1

183

206

213

222

2 39

2102

2106

254

261
Increasing the ble of Propaganda and Agitation in llaalization of
the Dacisiona of the 26th CPSU Cmgreu '

(V. H. Boriaenkov)................................................

For the Closer (hity of Economic. Organizational and Ideological
Factors in Party Hort

(V. G. M‘mv)ooc00.0000cocoon-ooooooloaooaoooooooaoooooooooooao-

Ideological Work and the mvelopnant of Socialist Innocracy
(c. u. Y”‘*1du)000Coo-OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI0...;OOOOOOOOIOOOOOO

Certain Urgent Problem of Ideologcal Work
(I. A. human)...0.00.0.000.00....IOOOOO‘OOOOOOOO0.0.0.0....‘0

Infomtion on the "ark of the Seminar-Conference's Sections...........

Table of mutants

ma on-‘icuu. use ONLY

267

2 72

279
Foreword

[Text] An all-union seninar~conference of ideological workers in which mien
republic Co-Inist Party central co-ittee, hrayhon, obkon and okruzhkoa and a
nuaber of :gorkoa secretaries in charge of ideological questions, uorkers of the
political authorities of the Soviet Arned Forces, leaders of niniatries and
departunts, the AUCCTU and [maul Central Co-ittes, central press organs,
:elevision and radio, press agencies and creative unions and CPSU Central Con-

nlttee executives participated was held 20-25 April 1981 in the CPSU Central
Connittee in Moscow.

The sewer-conference was opened by NJ. Suslov. neuter of the Politburo and
secretary of the Central Condttee of the CPSU.

The paper "Priority Tasks of Ideological and Political Education Running Pron
the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and Conrado LI. Brezhnev's neport" was
delivered by CPSU Central Codttee Secretary 1M1. Zimnin.

The following read papers at the seminar-conference: H.S. Gorbachev, neaber
of the Politburo and secretary of the Central Co-ittee of the CPSU, 3.11.
Pononarev, candidate of the Politburo and secretary of the Central Co-ittee of
the CPSU, v.11. Denichev, candidate of the CPSU Central Cosmittee Politburo

and niniscer of culture of the USSR, and I.V. Kapitonov, VJ. Dolsilth and RN.
Rusakov. secretaries of the CPSU Central 00-ittee. The seiner-conference

was also addressed by VJI. Hakeyev and 6.1. Harchuk, deputy chair-en of the
USSR Council cf Ministers. Acadenician A.G. Yegorov, director of the CPSU Cen-
tral Cos-ittee's Institute of llarxisn-Leninisn, USSR ministers H.A. Porokof'yev
and V.!’. Yelyutin, A.A. Bulgahov, chairman of the USSR State Co-ittee for
Vocational-Technical Education, Marshal of the Soviet Union, N.V. Ozarkov, chief
of the Armed Porcea' General Staff and first deputy defense ninister of the
USSR, 5.x. 'l'svigun, first deputy chairman of the USSR KGB. and other conrades.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

At plenary sessions and in nine sections the participants in the seminar
thoroughly and critically discussed me course of the study and propaganda of
the CPS" Central Co-ittee Report and the documents of the 26th party congress
and the fulfill-eat of the CPS!) Central Col-ittee decree "A Further Improvenent
in Ideological and Political Education" and the ways to reorganize ideological
work in accordance with the directives of the party congress and the instruc-
tions of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPS!) Central Oo-ittee.
Meetings with scholars and leaders of the creative unions and ms infornation
and propaganda media were held.

The participants in the seninar-conference attended a ceremonial meeting de-
voted to the lllth anniversazy of the birth of v.1. Lenin, at which the report
"Comparing Ourselves With Lenin, Operating Lenin-Style" was delivered by K.U.
Chernenko. meaber of the Politburo and secretary of the Central Conittee of
the CPSU.

The participants in the seminarbconference expressed cordial gratitude to the
Leninist CPSU Central Comittee. Central Co-ittee Politburo and Conrade L.I.
Brezhnev for the constant attention to ideological work and the propaganda per-
sonnel. They assured the CPS!) Central Coalittee that the party committees
would raise the communists, Komsouol sewers and all working people even more
assertively and purposefully in a spirit of co-unism, Soviet patriotism, the
indestructible friendship of the USSR peoples, proletarian internationalisn
and inlacability toward bourgeois ideology, persistently iuprove ideological-
political, labor and moral training and ensure the successful inlenentation of
the historic decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the 11th Five-Year Plan
quotas.

This book publishes material of the all-union seminar-conference of ideological
workers.

" MN. Zimyanin, secretary of the CPSU Central Connittee: "The Priority Tasks
of Ideological and Political Education Ensuing From the Decisions of the 26th
CPSU Congress and Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's Report”

I

The results of the 26th CPSU Congress and the ideas and prOposals put forward

by Conrade I..I. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CPSU Central Co-ittee. in

the Central Couittee Report will determine the sociopolitical life of our nether-
land and have a big ispact on all world developnent. The 26th CPSU Congress
again confirmedconvincingly that the creative genius of the Soviet people, led

by the Lenin Party, is concentrated on the accoqlishnent of revolutionary-
creative tasks corresponding to the highest interests of Soviet society and

all people of our planet--the interests of peace and social progress.

The congress strikingly denonstrated the magnificence of our people's accomp-
lishments in communist building achieved under the leadership of the CPSU

and its Central Conittee headed by Comrade Leonid Il'ich Breshnev, the out-
standing continuer of the great Leninist cause.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Tho CPSU Central Comittee Report collated comprehensively and in depth the
multifaceted historical experience of the party and the people. "Evaluating
the path that has been trodden," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev declared. "it my be
firmly said that the 26th congress correctly determined the main treads and
directions of socialidevelopment. The party‘s Leniriat general line is being
confidently implemented; the take put forward at the previous congresshave,
on the whole, been tackled successfully."*

The CPSU Central Couittee Report is an outstanding Homist-Leninist docmnent
which suites a new creative contribution to the theory and practice of scien-
tific col-union. It determines the main tasks of the country's economic and
social development, a constant upsurge in the people's material and cultural
living standard and a strengthening of the country‘s defense might. Its
propositions are izbued with concern for the further strengthening of the party.
a refinement in the style and methods of party leadership, support for every-
thing new and progressive, the developmnt of criticism and self-criticism,

an improvenent in ideological and political education and the reorganization

of many of its areas and spheres with regard for the demands of the times.

The Peace Program drawn up by the 25th and 25th CPS“ congresses was organically
continued and further developed and cardinal proposals for the extension of de-
tente and a curbing of the arms race were put forward in the report. The
congress again ewhasized the CPSU's mshakable fidelity to its internationalist
policy and expressed exceptionally forcefully the scrupulousness. consistency
and farsightedness of the Leninist foreig: policy of the Soviet Union, which
marches in the vanguard of the forces of peace and socialism and has managed

to defend peace.

The 26th CPsU Congress and our entire party and people approved the CPSU Cen-
tral Comittee Report with trenendous enthusiasm as a codaat action program.
The ideas of the report and the decision of the 26th CPSU Congress have become
the property of the fraternal parties and peoples of the socialist countries,
the international commmist and wo'rkera' movement and all present-day revolu‘-
tionary, progressive and peace-loving forces, inspiring them in the liberation
struggle against imperialism and against all forces of reaction and aggression
and for peace and social progress. The 26th party congress gave clear answers
to the nest pertinent, burning issues of the present day. The congressvill

go down in the history of our motherland and all mankind as a most important
political event of our time.

Currently millions and millions of couunists and Soviet people are studying
and discussing the documents of the 26th CPSU Congress. The party and the peo-
ple are demonstrating their unshakahle unity and close cohesion around the
Leninist CPSU Central Co-ittee and Central Cat-ittee Politburo headed by
Comrade I..I. Brezhnev. They are expressing unanimous approval and support for
the decisions of the congress and profound respect, love and gratitude to Com-
rade L.I. Brezhnev for the constant fruitful activity for the good of our

 

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress, p 3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

notherland and the tremendous contribution to the development and inlementation
of the domestic and foreign policy of the CPSU and the Soviet state, the develop-
nent of Harxist-beninist theory and the struggle for the trimmh of peace and
cos-amisé.

Nationwide socialist competition for the successful fulfillnent and overfulfill-
ment of the plan of 1981 and the 11th Five-Year Plan as a shale has spread
throughout the country. Splendid initiative was displayed here by the ibscow
workers who were delegates to the congress and the working people of Moscow.
Leningrad and all the union reptblics. Over 15‘ million Soviet people parti-
cipated in the Lenin co-nmist voluntary Saturday work day on 18 April 1981.

Attaching paramount significance to the further development of socialist com-
petition and its increased role in the accomplishment of tasks of the country's
economic and social progress, the CPS" Central Co-ittee. USSR Council of
Ministers, AUCC'I'U and Konomol Central Comittee adopted, as is known, a joint
decree in which they called on all party. soviet. trade union. Komomol and
nanogenent authorities, taking advantage of the high labor and political en-
thusiasm of the nasses, to direct socialist competition toward the acconplish-
nent of the tasks put forward in the CPSU Central Comnittee Report to the 26th
party congress and the congress' decisions, the successful fulfillment and
overfulfillment of the 5-year plan quotas and a further growth of Soviet peo-
ple's well-being; The competition notto is "Rorking Efficiently and with High
Quality!

Thus the Soviet people have marked on realisation of the outlines of the 26th
CPSU Congress—our Len inist general course for the 1980' s. Consolidating and
developing the political enthusiasn and creative energy of the people's masses
and channeling them into the successful accoqlishment of the complex and cru-
cial tasks confronting our motherland at the new frontiers of col-mist build-
ing is a most important task of the party organizations. In the wake of party
activist meetings the primary party organizations and labor collectives are
everywhere discussing the results of the congress and determining and beginning
to implement measures for the successful fulfillnent and overfulfillment of

the plans of 1981 and the 5-year plan as a whole, the intensification of social
production and its increased efficiency and the further refinement of organiz-
ing and political work.

Paramount significance is now attached to the active development of organiza-
tional and propaganda measures for discussion and study of Comrade LJ. Brezh-
nev's report and other documents and material of the 26th CPSU Congress. The
CPSU Central Comnittee deems it essential that party-political work contribute
in every possible way to the imlenntation of the historic decisions of the

26th CPSU Congress, the increased consciousness and labor assertiveness of the
communists and all working people and the continued development of nationwide
socialist competition and the movement for a coal-mist attitude toward labor.

It is necessary to eqloy effective form and nethods corresponding to current
conditions in this important political work and to conduct propaganda concretely
and convincingly, tying it in with the tasks of the labor collectives. It

is necessary to strive in the sass information and propaganda nedia's illustra-
tion of cardinal questions of the theoiy and practice of. commist building

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and the foreign policy activity of the CPSU for a rise in the ideological level
and efficacy of the speeches and to raise burning questions for discussion more
boldly. It is essential that all this work be performed in organic connection
with the CPSU Central Co-ittee decree "A Purther Improvement in Ideological
and Political Education".

The task is to ensure that the work on explaining ondpropagandizing the docu-
ments and material of the 26th CPSU Congress proceed in inseparable unity with
all political,organizing and management activity with respect to iaplementation
of the congress' decisions. It is essential to include in it the entire ideo-
logical front, the system of party enlightenment and economic education, all
forms of mass-political work and the information and propaganda media. The
AUCCTU, all ministries and departments, the Romsomol Central Committee, the
Soviet Army and Navy Main Political Directorate. scientific organisations and
cultural-educational establishments and the creative unions must play an active
part in this work.

it is our task to help all the country's working people comprehend profoundly
and in depth the propositions of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report. the Main Direc-
tions of the USSR's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and the Period
Through 1990 and other documents of the congress and the entire content of

its work. It is necessary to strive to ensure that every Soviet individual
closely link his labor and his participation in social life with the life of
the whole party.

Explaining the decisions and documents of the 26th party congress means first
of all revealing to the people's masses, each Soviet intividual and the whole
world the great role of the CPSU-the collective political leader of our people
which is confidently leading them toward communism. This means arming Soviet
people with a profound understanding of the fact that for our party the good
of the people is higher than all else and that its every step is dictated by
boundless devotion to the people. The people respond to the party with the
profoundest trust and ardent support for its policy. Itisessential to con-
tinue to strengthen and develop this trust and support in every possible way
and constantly rally the people's masses around the party, being guided by the
motto: "In unity with the people lies the strength of the party! In unity
with the party and its leadership lies the strength of the people!"

He must develop and strengthen in Soviet people profound ideological conviction
in the historical rightness and invincibility of the great Leninist cause and

tirelessly propangandizethe essence,scientific substantiation and noble goals
of the CPSU's Leninist policy.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress continue and develop the political and
socioeconomic strategy formulated by the 26th and 25th party congresses.

The historic distinctiveness of the 26th party congress is the fact that two
decades--the path traversed by the country in the 1970's and the prospects of
its further development right up to l990--were essentially within its purview.
This made it possible on the basis of creative Marxissrleninism to reveal more
fully the regularities of mature socialism and the prospects of communist build-
ing and analyze in depth the content of the changes occurring in the world.

5

ETHICHWWCJAL USEIDNLN
roe omcm. use our

Our party, its Central Comaittee and the Central Committee Politburo headed
by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev cowine unshakable fidelity to the principles of
Marxism-Leninism and proletarian internationalism with the constant collective
developmt of revolutionary theory based on a coqrehensive analysis and con-
sideration of the regularities and trends of social life and the experience
of the revolutionary—constructive creativity and initiative of the people's
masses. 'lhis imparts to the CPSU's theoretical and practical activity the
powerful force of historical foresight.

Elaboration of the concept of developed socialism, which has armed the party
and the people with a clear understanding of the reqalaritiea of the current
stage of the Soviet society's development, is a lasting service of our party
and its Central Conittee. This concept is a brilliant example of the applica-
tion of the dialectical-materialist method in an analysis of the historical
process and new social phenomena. As L.I. Brezhnev observed, "taking this
concept as a basis. the party has specified and concretized the paths and spe-
cific times of the realization of our program goals and determined the strategy
and tactics for a lengthy historical period."* The new USSR Constitution, which
is rightly called the constitution of the era of developed socialism, was
created on this basis.

The 26th CPSU Congress took a further step forward in the develop-ant of the
teaching on developed socialism as a necessary. natural and historically lengthy
period of the development of the commist formation and on the most inortant
features of social relations at this stage. Comrade L.I. Brezhnev put forward
at the congress the important theoretical proposition that the development of

a class-free structure of society will occur by and large within the historical
framework of nature socialism. This preposition is of paramount significance
for the development and iaplementation of socioeconomic policy for many years
ahead.

The 26th CPSU Congress enriched Lenin's teaching on the party and its increas-
ing role in commiat building. 1he analysis of international problem con-
tained in the congress' material and the development of the Peace Program are
very iwortant in terms of theoretical content and political relevance.

The impending work on the preparation of changes and awlifications to the
current CPS“ Prograa, which the congress entrusted to the party Central Com-
mittee, is desimed to play a major part in the further, creative development
of Harrist-Leninist theory. The current program, which determines correctly,
as a whole, the regularities of social development and the goals and principal
tasks of the struggle of the party and the Soviet people for coamunism. should
reflect the wealth of historical experience accmulated in the last two decades
and the new theoretical generalizations based on a profound scientific analysis
of the objective changes in the country and abroad. this will make it possible
to determine the further paths and the most impor-snt tasks of commist build-
ing in our comtry.

________‘__..17————--

*"ﬂaterial of the 26th CPSU Congress, p 77.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 26th congress is of particular significance for the workers of the ideologi-
cal front.

The party hm posed the question of the need for an all-around qualitative in-
proveaent in all ideological and political education and the removal of the
existing shortconings therein. The main areas of the accomplishment of this

task were outlined in the CPSU Central Conittee decree "A Further lwrovenent in
Ideological and Political Education". The CPS!) Central Cnmittee Report to the
26th party congress analysed critically and in depth the most iaportant ques-
tions of ideological work and, further developed the fundamental propositions
concerning an iwroveaent in co-uniat education under the conditions of de-
veloped socialism enmeshed in recent years by Comrade I..I. Brezhnev in a nun-
ber of his speeches.

The reasons which pro-sated the party to raise the question of. a qualitative
ilprovenent are well known. They were discussed at the congress. They are the
changed historical conditions of our reality, the growth of Soviet people's
level of education, culture and intellectual require-eats and the expansion
of the arsenal and laterial-technical hue of our propaganda and, on the other
hand, the stimulation of the propaganda media of the class enemy and his in-
creased attempts to exert a corrupting influence on Soviet people's minds.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the congress: "Ia proper account being taken of
all these new phenomena and circumtancea't' Ia full use being made of the tre-
mendous possibilities of our propaganda? There can be only one answer to this
question: no, not yet.

"Proceeding from this, the party Central Comittee has fornulated tasks for
an iuprovcnent in ideological and political education. They are set forth in
the CPS!) Central Col-ittee decree of 26 April 1979. 1111s is a document of
long-tern significance.

"It is essentially a question of the reorganization—yea, it is not a slip of
the tongue. the reorganization—of any areas and spheres of ideological work.
we need to strive to ensure that its content be more relevant and that its forms
correspond to Soviet people's current requests and requiremts.”

“:0 years have elapsed since the appearance of the CPSU Central Comittee de-
cree "A Further lnprovenent in Ideological and Political Education". A certain
anotmt of work has been performed on its realization. The party organizations
and soviet and management personnel have begun to pay more attention to ideo-
logical activity. But we need to be clearly aware that only the first steps
have been taken in a refinement of ideological and lass-political work. 1“Inni-
fertations of a certain rupture fro. practice, a lag behind the course of
events. fornalisn, superficiality, ostentation and cliches, which have rightly
been criticized repeatedly and continue to be criticized, have yet to be aur-
Iaounted in its content and forms.

 

*"Haterial of the 26th CPS" Congress," 1) 75.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fundamental observations on the ways to realize the party's demands and over-

come the serious shortcomings in ideological work were expressed by M.A. Suslov
at the all-union conference of ideological workers. He recently observed once
again that "political-educational and propaganda work is not being reorganized

In developing the exceptionally responsible work on propaganda of the decisions
of the 26th CPSU Congress and mobilization of the working people for their prac-
tical implementation, which is gigantic in scale, the ideological personnel

and all party organizations must at the same time consistently and energetically
reorganize ideological. propaganda and agitation work on the basis of the in-
structions contained in the CPSU Central Committee Report to the congress. In

the accomplishment of the tasks of the party's donestic and foreign policy it
is essential to raise to a new. higher qualitative level the entire system of
the ideological~political, labor and moral training of the working people in
terms of depth, relevance of content and form of organization.

The good initiative of the Moscow Gorkon, which discussed the course of work
on implementation and propaganda of the documents of the 26th party congress,
merits support. The decision of the Moscow Gorkom revealed and analyzed the

The fact that Comrade L.I. Brezhnev paid great attention in the CPSU Central
Connittee Report to the 26th party congress to questions of ideological activ-
ity. expressed fundamental observations with respect to its key problems and
highlighted the changes in the life of the country, in the public mind and

in the international arena which demand of us work in a new style is of great
importance for ideological personnel and the entire party. Permit me on behalf
of all ideological workers to express cordial gratitude to L.I. Brezhnev for

ensuring an increase in every possible way in the efficacy of our work in the
principal areas of the CPSU's domestic and foreign policy indicated in the
historic decisions of its 26th congress.

*PARTIYNAYA ZHIZN' No 8. 1981, p 23.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In paving the general route of the country's onward novenent toward co-unisn
and putting forward the concrete goals and tasks of revolutionary-transforming
activity our party proceeds fro. the fact that they can be realized in prac-
tice only given the active support and creative participation of the masses.
As v.1. Lenin said. in tackling new social tasks "it is the preparation of
precisely the lasses which is what is most important from the political view-
point. *

Mobilization of the leases for inlenentation of the new plans of courunist
creation is a most ilportant goal of the CPSU's political education under cur-
rent conditions. "We wish," L.I. Brezhnev said, "to see party policy blend with
the activity of the masses...."** '

A central area of our political education is mobilization of the labor energy
of the nasses for inlenentation of the CPSU's econoanic policy. Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev pointed out in the CPS" Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th party
congress: "Leadership of the econoey is the core of the entire activity of
party and state. After all. it is precisely in the economic sphere that the
foundation of the acconplishnent of social tasks and the strengthening of the
country's defense capability and the foundation of an active foreign policy is
laid. It it precisely here that the necessary prerequisites of Soviet society's
successful movement toward communiss are created."*** Our propaganda and
agitation are called on to provide for the comprehensive, in-depth explanation
of the congress' decisions and to struggle actively for their practical imple-
mentation.

The basis of all ideological education with respect to implenentation of the
party's econoeic policy should be an explanation of its goals and tasks put
forward by the 26th CPS!) Congress and the ways to achieve then. As is know,
the main task of the 11th Five-Year Plan is securing a further growth of Soviet
people's veil-being based on the steady, ongoing development of the economy, an
acceleration of scientific-technical progress and the economy's transition to
an intensive path of development, mre rational use of the country's production
potential. the utmost savings of all types of resources and an improvement in
work quality. '

This capacious and precise formula contains the continuity and, at the same
tine, the further development of the basic line of the party's economic policy
formulated by the 26th and 25th CPSU congresses--that of the econony's more
profound switch to the diverse tasks connected with a rise in the people's well-
being. These tasks can only be tackled under current conditions thanks to an
appreciable growth of social labor productivity. "Hhence the congresses'
directive of an ewhatic transition to predoninantly intensive factors of

*V.I. Lenin. "Poln. sohr. soch." [Caplets Works], vol 42, p 217.
**"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 76.
“*Ibid., p 31.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON LY

economic growth--the directive of an upturn in the efficiency and quality of
all worlc, Such is the orientation of the CPSU's econonic policy for an extended
period."*

The CPSU Central Co-rlttee Report and the decisions of the 26th party congress
determine the main paths of production intensification. It is primarily a
quest ion- of making fuller and rare efficient. use of the powerful production
potential which has been created in the comtry and all the advantages of so-
cialism for the acconplishment of the new tasks in the sphere of the econony
and an acceleration of scientific-technical progress and science's integration
with production. It is also a question of an imprwement in the methods of
leadership of the econony, proportionality in the development of the national
economy based on a correct systen of priorities and of the'increased role of
the plan as the main instrument of the party's econonic policy.

The 26th CPSU Congress pointed out that an unconditional prerequisite of the
accomplishment of all national economic tasks—both production and social-~19
the development of heavy industry, particularly its base sectorsnfuel-energy,
metallurgy, engineering and others. Major tasks have to be tackled by the con-
struction and transport workers. There is no need, I believe, to esphasize
that propaganda should pay paramount attention to these sectors and also the
most important territorial-production complexes.

An increase in the efficiency of agricultural production ‘iaan urgent task of
the llth Five-Year Plan. The party and the state attach tremendous significance
to its further industrialization and material-technical provision and a rise

in the standard of farming and animal husbandry and are channeling big capital
Investments into this. At the same time the center of gravity of agrarian
policy is currently shifting to an increase in the return on the capital in-
vestments, the growth of agricultural productiveness and the extension and
streaalining of its relations with all sectors of the agrarian-industrial com-
plex. The problem of a steep upturn in anilal husbandry, which Conrade L.I.
Brezhnev termed "the shock front in the countryside,"** moves to the forefront.
This is the main prerequisite of the successful inplementation of the food.pro-
gram which is being drawn up and the satisfaction of the people's urgent living
requirements.

A characteristic feature of the development of the modern Soviet economy is the
increased role of the stbjective factor. Production intensification and a turn-
ubout toward efficiency and quality largely depend on the ideological-political
awareness, professional cowetence and moral-psychological qualities of the
workers, kolkhoz nembers, technicians, engineers and scientists.

Characterizing questions of leadership of the economy not merely as economic
but political and party questions, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev thasized that unbi-
lization of the creative potential of our entire society is necessary for their

marial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 31.
*Ibid., p 1.6.

10

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
solution. At the center and locally and in all cells of the economy there should
be increased understanding of the problems which arise and the better detection
and use of available potential. lbs party's entire political, organizing and
educational work is being geared to this currently. 'lhe propaganda front and

the mass intonation media are called on to ensure constant illustration of the
progress of the struggle for the realization of economic policy, the utmost
support for those who are the first to reach the highest frontiers. the props-
ganda and introduction of their progressive experience, an extensive demonstra-
tion of the new forms of the organization of labor and management and an empha-

tic struggle against everything which slows and holds back production intensi-
fication.

A powerful accelerator of our forward movement in all spheres of the economy

was and remains socialist competition. Having determined thegeneral economic
strategy and urgent national economic problem of the 11th Five-Year Plan, the
26th party congress thereby also pointed to the main spheres of application of
the people's creative forces and the main areas of socialist competition. What-
ever area of the party's economic policy we take, cmetition is now an effec-
tive means of the conhination of policy and the creativity of the msses every-
where. Policy goals are realized in the practical deeds of the labor collectives.

We have many splendid initiatives of the working class, kolkhoz peasantry and
the intelligentsia in socialist competition which demand attention and props-
ganda support. Thus many labor collectives have responded with concrete social-
ist pledges to the party's appeal for the utmst intensification of the prac-
tics of economies and an increase in the manufacture of the end product from
available resources. he need to disseminate mre extensively the experience

of the labor collectives of the Ukraine and Chelyabinskaya, Sverdlovskaya and
Kemerovskaya ohlasts of economies in metal and fuel-energy resources and the
compilation and realization of personal savings accounts and personal thrift
plans.

We have fine examples of the integration of science and production and the
creative cooperation of the scientists and production workers—the 211. in Hos-
cou, the mm and "Blektrosila" in Leningrad. the Institute imeni Ye.0. Paton
in Kiev and many others. he 26th CPSU Congress directed the scientists and
engineering-technical personnel toward the further development of this cooper-
ation and the joint realization of goal-oriented comprehensive program. The
propaganda workers should support and disseminate good experience to the ut-
most, the more so in that, as said at the congress, we still frequently en-
counter iwermissihle dilatoriness in the assimilation of promising develop-
ments.

Or to take such a key problem as an increase in work quality. ‘lhe 26th CPSU
Congress posed the question of ensuring that the manufactured product conform
to the best world and national Iodels. Practice suggests specific paths of
struggle for the accomplishment of this goal. It is necessary to continue
work on the dissemination and enrichmnt of the L'vov experience of product
quality control, the patriotic initiatives "The Official Sylizol of Quality on
Every New Product" and "High Quality—Prom the Plan Through the Product" and
the initiatives of the kolkhozes andsovkhozes of Krasnodarskiy Kray and
Dnepropetrovskaya Oblast for an inn-ovement in the quality of agricultural
products.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A number of factors comlicating economic develoth will be operating in the
1980's, as is known. One such is a decline in the rate of increase in labor
resources. In this connection iaportance is attached to the initiative of the
working people of Yaroslavskaya Oblast, which has been approved by the CPSU
Central Couittee, for the achievemnt ofan increase in industrial production
in the 11th Five-Year Plan without an increase in the number of workers. The
Shchekino and Diana methods of an increase in labor productivity, the brigade
contract and multiple mehine-tool servicing, which have been verified by prac-
tice, should be propagandized and introduced more energetically.

'lhe party and the state are exerting much effort to make man's labor not only
more productive but also meaningful, interesting and creative. The liquidation
of manual, unskilled and heavy physical labor is designed to play an ilportant
part here. But we still have millions of people employed in this. This is

not only an economic but also serious social problem. The implementation of
comprehensive programs for a reduction in manual labor and the comprehensive

use of local potential, small mechanization facilities and so forth is called

on to contribute to its soluticm. The movement "Manual Labor on Hachinery's
Shoulders," which has spread following the initiative of collectives of Zaporozh-
skaya Oblast, is aiud at this, for example. Ilplementation of all these initia~
tives-and they are of very high social significance—should constantly be
within the sights of our newspapers and journals, radio and television and all
ideological workers.

Such a splendid movement as the cowetition among related stbcontractors is
helping us to achieve the concerted operationof interconnected components of

the national economy. It is necessary to popularize more extensively the .
experience of cooperation of enterprises of the attractive and processing sec-
tors of industry, the labor collectives participating in the installation of
the Sayano-Shushmskaya and Nurek 685's, the Kama Truck Plant and the "Ate-ash"
Plant in accordance with the "Worker Relay" principle; the workers o.‘ the Lenin-
grad Transport Terminal on the precise interaction and coordination of the
activity of all form of transport; and the workers of agriculture and light,
textile and other sectors of industry in accordance with the "contract of
thousands".

Socialist cowetition is vital creativity of the masses themelvesa Its main
enemies are sluggishness, fomlism and show. The 26th CPSU Congress pointed
to the need for the further development of the democratic principles and exten-
sive publicity of competition. Fulfillment of this task is a vital concern
of propaganda and agitation and an important field of the application of their
tremendous powcr. Not only regular information on the course. and results of
competition but also the development of its creative spirit and the working
people's practical preparation for active participation in labor rivalry depend
on the level and drive of propaganda. The experience of the propagandists '
of Moscow and Ivanovsksya, Sverdlovskaya and other oblasts of rendering the
working people practical assistance in the development of counterplans, social-
ist pledges and personal saving accounts deserves to be disseminated in this
connection.

'l‘renendous experience of socialist cmetition has been accumulated in all the
country's union republics. Particular mention should be made of the role of

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
cometition in the struggle for grain in Kazakhstan and cotton and other agri-
cultural products in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan. These republics made a fitting
contribution to the people's labor accomplishnents in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

political work in this field is still in Iron perfection. This applies prin-

arily to such a most inortant question as the dissenination and introduction
of progressive experience.

Seminars and scientific-practical conferences are being conducted and schools
of progressive experience are being organized in nany republics, krays and
oblasts on the basis of collectives which are socialist carpetition winners,
including those which received greetings from Conrado I..I. Brezhnev. But
their activity isas yet being illustrated in insufficient depth in the press,
in television and radio broadcasts, in lectures and talks and at classes in
the economic education system.

In order for the record to becom the none and progressive experience to be-
cone con-3n property a simple description thereof is not enouyr, a comprehen-
sive system of work is needed. Such a systen has been created, for example,
in Donetskaya (blast. A unified systen of the plan-oriented study, collation
and dissenination of progressive experience has also been developed at pro-
greasive textile industry enterprises in lvanovskaya Oblast. These valuable
initiatives merit support.

A principal factor currently inpeding our further advance is the force of
inertia and the traditions and customs which took shape at the time when it

was not so such the qualitative as the quantitative aspect which was of paramount
importance in the economy. The intensification of social production requires

a fmdssental change in the acoustic thinking and the mentality of the produc-
tion workers and nnagers. A particular role in the realization of such a turn-
about in the public nind belongs to the system of economic education.

Real universal econonic education has been created in the country in recent
years. In the 10th Five-Year Plan approximately 31o million persons studied
problems of labor efficiency, and 21 million progressive production experience.
But for skillful nanagenent under current conditions the rudiments of econonic
learning are not enough. The system of economic education is now erbarking
on a qualitatively new stage of development. It is a question not only of the

organization of econonic studies for those who essentially lack primary eco-
music education (and there are approximately 20 million such people in the
country). The rain thing is raising appreciably the level of economic knowl-
edge of the main worker and specialist personnel and stressing the mastery of
concrete methods of the intensification of production and its increased effi-
ciency. The systen of economic education, as also the press and radio and
television broadcasts, describe pretty well what such intensification means,
but are as yet showing inadequately how to ilplenent it in practice. It is

propaganda .

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Onncern tor an increase in theoretical knowledge should be organically conbined
with the fostering of the scat important social attributes—diligence. a sense
of responsibility, a proprietorial attitude toward public property and an abil-
ity to make full and expedient use of all that the comtry possesses.

The party pays great attention to the strengthening of discipline: state. plan
and labor. The CPSU Central Couittee, USSR Supreme Soviet Preeidiun, USSR
Council of Ministers and AUCCTU decree "A Further Strengthening of Labor Dis-
cipline and a Reduction in Personnel Turnover in the Econosly," which is aimed
at securing high organization at all levels and in all areas of work, an in-
provenent in work conditions and the retention and best use of the personnel.
was adopted in 1980. A certain snout of work has been done to inplemnt the
measures it stipulates. But the scale and pace of this work are inadequate.

Breaches of discipline here are, unfortunately. still a frequent phenonenon.

He must strive for a perceptible breakthrough in public opinion's attitude
toward idlers and violators of production and plan discipline. And the mage-
nent, soviet and party leaders must, of course, set an example of responsibility
and an example of discipline. This directive of the 26th CPSU Congress mat be
inpleaented universally and constantly.

It needs to be elphasized more persistently in propaganda that the people's
well-being depends prinarily on the results of everyone's labor. Socialis-
creates the conditions for a new attitude toward labor. But they do not, of
course, set an exawle of responsibility and an ample of discipline. This
directive of the 26th 0780 Congress must be inpleented universally and con-
stantly.

It needs to be emphasized more persistently in propaganda that the peeple's
well-being depends prinarily on the results of everyone's labor. Socialisa
creates the conditions for a new attitude toward labor. But they do not, of
course, work of their own accord. automatically. It is inortant to show

in educational work that Ian's attitude toward labor detsrnines his position
and authority in our society. It is important to explain not only Ian's rights
to work and the choice of occupation but also actively hold an understanding of
the general obligatoriness of conscientious labor.

Labor-its quantity and quality-4s the min criterion of distribution under
socialise. It is important to increase the educational imact of the material
and noral incentives to labor. Conrade L.I. Brezhnev pointed out: ”It is
necessary to encourage conscientious workers in every possible way and leave
shirkers and those who do shoddy work no loopuoles for the good life while
perforuing :seless work. Hloever wishes to live better must work more and bet-
ters."* This fomla determines a lost iaportant directionof all ideologi-
cal education. /

The 26th party congress put forward a wide-ranging progran of a further up-
surge in the people's well-being. It enemasses an imrovenent in all aspects
of Soviet people's life-consultation and housing, culture and recreation and
work and social conditions. An appreciable growth in the social consumtion

"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress.“ p 59.

1k

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
funds is planned. The party is displaying particular concern for an improve-
ment in the material living conditions of the low-incom categories of working
people, pensioners and trainees, mthers and Great Patriotic Her veterans.
‘lhe 3PSU C . -ral Co-ittee and USSR Council of Ministers decrees "lhasures
To Yncrease State Assistance to Families Hith Children" and "ﬁssures To Fur-
ther lprove the Population's Social Security" are, inter alia, aimed at this.

The party's economic policy carries a tremendous ideological-educational,
Ioral charge. After all, it is from start to finish, as Comrade L.l. Brezh-
nev said a; the congress. "concrete concern for the concrete individual and
his needs and requirements...."* Explanation of its humanistic and profoundly
popular essence is an Mortant condition of every person's awareness of the
goal and purpose of the intensification of production and the need for inten-
sive work and a creative attitude toward labor.

1he efforts of the party cos-ittees, ideological establishmts, the entire
multimillion-strong army of ideological workers and all state and management
authorities should be geared to ensuring the fusion in one of the party's
economic policy and the creativity, initiative and energy of the masses and
the unswerving progress of our society along the path of the working people's
increased well-being and the creation of the “term-technical base of com-
munise.

III

A most important characteristic of the current stage of the Soviet society's
development is the increasingly close interconnection of the progress of the
economy and sociopolitical and spiritual progress. This proposition, which was
advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress, is of tremendous theoretical and practical
significance. Our economic achievements are being materialized in the socio-
political sphere, and the conditions are being created which contribute to

the strengthening of the socialist way of life and the all-around development
of the personality. lhe vital buttress of Marxist-Leninist ideology and con-
Iunist ideals is thereby taking even firmer shape and our positions in the
ideological struggle are being strengthened.

It is inortant to cowrehensively reveal the essence of the CPSU's social
policy in the process of ideological education, precisely tune the goals of
our propaganda and agitation with society's actual potential and not to become
divorced from the life of the-messes. Propaganda should take account of the
shifts in the social structure and in social relations. We should remember
that the very inementation of social policy depends to a decisive extent on
the awareness, organization and activeness of the masses, that is, on human,
subjective factors.

The historic significance of the 26th CPSU Congress is determined, in parti-
cular, by the fact that probless of social develop-eat under the condition of
mature socialism were examined at it so thoroughly, in such depth and so

"Material of the 26th crsu Congress," p 1.9.

15

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comprehensively for the first time. The entire CPSU Central Co-ittee Report
to the 26th party congress is ii>ued with the ideas of a scientifically sub-
stantiated and profoundly popular social policy. It examines the min social
issues and notes the social aspects of the development of the economy, science
and technology, education and culture and services and everyday life. And
everywhere there is enphasis on the profound interconnection of the party's
socioeconomic policy with the develop-ant of the consciousness of the noses,
the forpation of the new nan and with ideological education. The funds-entally
important proposition that "successful education is ensured only when it is
based on the firm foundation of socioeconomic policy“ was formulated. Conrado
LJ. Brezhncv's report and the Main Directions present the concrete, conpre-

hensive program of the party's social policy under the conditions of developed
socialise.

Ideological work connected with the inplemntation of this policy and the im-
portant decisions adopted by the 26th CPSU Congress is no easy matter. Many
questions are being raised forthe first time, which denands a quest for suit-
able forms and methods of work and high responsibility in the determination of
the ideological content of the appropriate propaganda speeches. After all, it
is a question of problem which affect the inediate interests of individual
people and whole social, professional and national groups, including aspects
of life in which there is still much incowlete business of all kinds.

All the evaluations, conclusions and reconnendations in complex issues of class
and national relations should conform precisely to the fundamental proposi-
tions of party documents, the decisions of party congresses and Conrade LI.
Brezhnev's instructions. Any inaccuracies, exaggerations or distortions are
impermissible here.

Fundamental significance from the viewpoint of theory. policy and education is
attached to the conclusion of the 26th CPSU Congress that the development of
a class-free structure of society will occur by and large within the histori-
cal franework of nature socialism. At the center of this process. as its
leading force, was and remains the working class, whose revolutionary ideology
and morality and collectivist mentality and whose interests and ideals are
now becoming the property of all strata of our society. mere ensues fro-
this the need for an increasingly profound and detailed analysis of society's
social structure and the planning and implementation of social policy. we
must now pay attention not only to intercilms relations but also intraclass
and other differences, a consideration of which is essential to ensure the
even greater strengthening of our society's ideological-political, social and
international cohesion and its novenent toward social honogeneousness.

1he 26th party congras observedwith satisfaction the unswerving strengthening
of the fraternal friendship of the peoples of our multinational mtherland and
the equalization of the levels of develop-cut of the Soviet republics and

showed that a task of historic ilportancen-liquidation of the economic back-
wardness of the national outlying areas--hsa been accomplished successfully.

*"Hnterial of the 26th CPSU Congress.” p 63.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"The unity of the Soviet nations is stronger today than ever," Comrade I..I.
Brezhnev said. "This does not mean, of course, that all questions in the
sphere of national relations have already been resolved. The dynamics of the
development of such a large multinational state as ours engender many problens
requiring the party's responsive attention."* And we nust spot these problems
in good time, dry the correct conclusions from then and take then into consid-
eration in our policy and ideological and cultural work.

let us take, for example, such a question as nigration of the population.
Millions of people change their place of residence annually, and any of them
move from one republic to another. All this gives rise not only to econosic
and social problems but also problems of the ideological, educational sphere.
1his is something for the ease infomtion media, propagandists, science and
arts figures and cultural workers to work on. A broad spectrum of problem

of patriotic and international education, primarily of the youth, is also
confronting us in connection with the ilplenentation of the large-scale pro-
grams of the lifting of the nonchernozen and the intensive industrial develop-
ment of areas of Siberia, the Par East and the North.

The friendship of the USSR peoples is a great sociopolitical conquest of
Soviet society. An all-Soviet. all-people patriotisn has been established

in the minds of Our people. It incorporates fidelity to revolutionary ideals,
service for the good of our great fatherland, an awareness of responsibility
for its future and selfless devotion to the great cause of the Communist Party.
We must do everything to contribute to the preservation and multiplication of
this priceless property. "Our country," Conrade L.l. Brezhnev said, "respects
the national sentinents and national dignity of each individual. The CPSU
has fought and always will fiat resolutely against such manifestations as
nationalisn or chauvinisn. which are alien to the nature of socialism. and
against all nationalist quirks, whether, say, anti-Senitisn or Zionism. We
oppose trends toward the artificial effacenent of national singularities. But
we consider their artificial exaggeration equally iwer-issible. It is the
party's sacred duty to raise the working people in a spirit of Soviet patrio-
tism and socialist internationalisn and a proud feeling of belonging to the
single great Soviet notherland."** A broad frant of ideological-political
work opens before us in connection with the approach of the 60th anniversary
of the formation of the USSR. This is a splendid reason to once again reveal
convincingly and in depth our achieve-ants and the fruits of Lenin's national-
ity policy and to stimulate activity even more with respect to the inculcation
of Soviet patriotisn and socialist internationalisn.

But in revealing the Soviet system's trenendous achievements in the social and
spiritual spheres it is necessary to look at things soberly and to show life

as it is, including its objective contradictions, difficulties of growth and
nistakes and inconplete business. We must develop extensively the struggle

't'mterial of the 26th cpsu Congress," p 56.
**Ibid., p 57.

17

I-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

against such negative phenomena as egoism and philistinism, graft, bureaucrat-
ism, indifference to the people's concerns and affairs, drunkenness, para-
sitism and bribe-taking and against a variety of infringements of the law and
all antisocial manifestations. Struggle against the antipodes of conunist
morals and the socialist way of life is a principal direction of the party's
social policy. ﬁne eradication of such negative phenomena depends to a deci-
sive extent on how seriously attention is paid to counting them, the further
strengthening of socialist legality and a refinement of social and, in parti-
cular, distributive relations, an objective and fair evaluation of each per-
son's labor and the closure of all channels of access to undeserved benefits.
It is clear that an active and very responsible role belongs to ideological
and political education in the accomplishment of this task. The mass informa-
tion media and the entire system of verbal agitation and propaganda Inst wage
a tireless struggle against negative phenomena. And it is necessary to wage
it constantly, displaying persistence, consistency and, if you wish, courage.

Another aspect of this problem is the formation from the first steps of man's
conscious life of his intelligent requirements and interests and his ability
to make his claims on society and his requests comsurate with his labor
contribution. Both the help of science and the high assertiveness of our
propaganda are required here.

The 26th CPSU Congress paid great attention to questions of the development

of the Soviet political system and socialist democracy on the basis of the
USSR Constitution, including the activity of the soviets of people‘s deputies.
people's control and the judicial, court, prosecutor's office and Soviet aili-
tia authorities. A high evaluation was made of the work of the state security
authorities.

The congress expressed confidence that our valorous armed forces, which are
distinguished by s hiyn degree of provision with equipment, military skill and
indestructible morale, would continue to reliably stand on guard of the Soviet
people's peaceful creative labor.

Conrade L.I. Brezhnev put forward new tasks of a refinement in the activity of
the Soviet trade unions and the Komsomol. concentrating their attention on

the need for even more active participation in communist building and the in-
culcation in Soviet citizens, particularly the younger generation, of communist
conviction, love of labor and the ability to work, Soviet patriotism and in-
remationalism and a readiness for defense of the mtherland. It is necessary
to continue to enrich and develop the heroic revolutionary, codnat and labor
traditions of the party and people in every possible way and raise the people
on the instances of heroisn and innovation which are being engendered con-
stantly in the course of communist building.

The Soviet press, television and radio, the publishing houses and all workers
of the ideological front wt in the light of the decisions of the 26th CPSU
Congress increase their attention to questions of the Soviet society's socio-
political and spiritual development and approach from consistently beninist
standpoints the accomplishment of the tasks of the party's social policy and
Soviet people's ideological-political, labor and moral training.

Among these tasks much importance is attached to the further upsurge of Soviet
science, education. health care, culture, literature and art.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 26th CPS!) Congress noted the successes of Soviet science. which occupies
leading positions in the most important branches of learning. Major dis-
coveries have been made in the fundamental and applied sciences, and the most
modern sectors of production have been developed and our ideas about the re-
gularities of social development have been extended with the help of science.
At the same time the congress also pointed directly to the shortcomings which
still exist in the organisation of scientific research, particularly in the
sphere of the practical use of scientific-technical achievements.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev set the task of science's close integration with pro-
duction and expressed confidence that the scientific and engineering-technical
personnel and the leaders of sectors and works would prove up to this demand.
This is now a most important area of our entire activity. It requires close
attention, leadership and supervision a! the part of the party committees

and the active participation of the use information media in propaganda of
the achievements of science and its tasks and the utmost contribution to the
introduction of its achievements in production.

The party attaches paramount significance to the developmnt of the social
sciences. The congress noted the achievements of the social sciences and

also drew attention to their shortcomings. A study of the new phenomena of

life is lacking, superficial works constructed mainly on a repetition of truism
are at times substituted for a study of the deep-lying processes of socio—
economic development and a penchant for scholasticism has yet to be overcome

in the social sciences. Proceeding from the urgent tasks of conunist building,
Comrade 1..I. Brezhnev drew social scientists' attention to the need for in-
creased attention to a study of problems connected with questions of an in-
crease in production efficiency and the social consequences of the scientific-
technical revolution and a more thorough, in-depth analysis of other phenomena
of economic and political life and to questions of the introduction of scien-
tific and technical achievements in the economy.

Social scientists. particularly those studying present-day Soviet society,

must comprehend the remarks address-d to them in depth and draw inediate
conclusions. At the same time we must give them practical assistance. It is
necessary to tie in social science studies more closely with the work of
management, soviet and ideological organizations and contribute to the develop-
ment of research which contains an in-depth comprehensive analysis of socio-
economic processes necessary for the adoption of political decisions.

The 1970's were marked by a qualitative leap forward in the development of
public education. Judge for yourselves: 83 million persons have acquired
complete secondary education altogether since the war, of whom 105 million.
that is. more than half. acquired such in the last two 5-year plans. The
problem of the quality of tuition and training and the strengthening of the
school's ties with practice is being moved to the forefront currently. The
overall indicators must not blmt the vigilance of the teachers and coununists
of the school. "The main thing now," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev observed, "is to

raise the quality of tuition and labor and rural training in the school,

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dispense with formalism in evaluating the results of the teachers' and students'
labor, 'strengthen tuition's practical ties to life and improve schoolchildren's
preparation for socially useful labor."*

The party organizations and mass infomtion and propaganda India mat in-
crease 'attention to ensuring that the serious shortcomings in the activity

of the school be overcome more quickly. The 26th CPSU Congress insistently
demanded the increased efficacy of the work on the youth's vocational guidance
and that the efficiency of the school's work be evaluated by proceeding from
the extent to which the students’ general education and moral-political train-
ing corresponds to the requirements of the society of developed socialism. The
26th CPSL' Congress emphasized, and this needs to be taken into consideration
in propaganda, that the decisive role in an improvement in the entire business
of the tuition and communist upbringing of the younger generation belongs to
the teacher and instructor, to whom special attention needs to be paid.

The congress put forward crucial new tasks in the sphere of a further refine-
ment in the system of vocational-technical education and an improvement in

the training of skilled workers. It is planned to considerably expand the
network of its educational institutions in 1981-1985 and increase the gradua-
tion of skilled workers to 13 million. Propaganda and information media work-
ers are called on to contribute actively to the further development of the
vocational-technical education system and the increased qualitative level of
its activity.

An ever increasing influence on the acceleration of scientific-technical pro-
gress is being exerted by the higher school. A further rise in the quality of
teaching and ideological-political training in the VUZ's, the strengthening
of their ties to production, science and the practice of con-smut building and
the fuller developsent'and use of scientific potential—such is our most im-
portant task in this sphere. It is essential to continue to perfect the edu-
cational process and actively sold in the student body a con-mist world out-
look and a sense of public duty. ‘lhe practice of comnist building today
requires skilled specialists with high Hartist-beninist training, who think
creatively and who are capable of participating actively in scientific-
technical progress and making and implementing the optimum scientific, engi-
neering and organizational decisions.

Literature and art occupy an important place in the system of the party's
ideological activity. We possess the unique, constantly growing potential of
the nultinational Soviet culture. This is the fruit of the labor and talent
of many generations. The 26th CPSU Congress set as a principal task the more
efficient use of this entire wealth in our ideological-political work, the
formation of public awareness and the assertion of cos-Innist ideals and moral
standards. The CPS!) proceeds here fron the objective fact of the growth of
people's intellectual requirements and the increased role of artistic culture
in the life of society. Soviet people's tremendous interest in artistic
creativity is a notable feature of our country's cultural life and one of its

leading gains.
“Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 60.

20

l-‘Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘l'he in-depth analysis of the state and develop-ant of the current literary-
artistic process contained in the report to the 26th CPSU Congress showed that
our art is faithfully reflecting the key problem of our tine. 1n L.l.
Brezhnev's evocative expression. "a new tidal wave is rising"* and my gifted
works, and in all republics, mreover. have been created therein. The all-
union writers', artists' and cmem' congresses and the writers' congresses
in the union republics which have been held strikingly attest the consolidation
of the Soviet creative intelligentsia and its cohesion around the party. The
his) evaluation of the activity of the artistic intelligentsia in the last
5-year period expressed at the 26th party congress has evoked in cultural
figures a new upsurge of social and creative activeness.

It is necessary to consolidate and nultiply all that is valuable and promising
that has been done in the artistic study of life and the establishment of
cos-mist ideals. The real achieve-eats of Soviet art are directly dependent
on how consistently it proceeds from such fundamental principles as party-
nindedness, popular spirit and a class approach to evaluations of life's
phenonena. lnaccuracy in ideological punctuation and a superficial or one-
sided illustration of the processes occurring in society are only capable of
damaging the artist's creativity.

Much depends on the social climte in the artistic intelligentsia environment.
It is a question of increased professional exactinyless and an intolerance of
vapidity and featurelessness in art. Criticism and the fiction and poetry
journals. which influence the content and thrust of creativity to a large
extent, are called on to adopt a are assertive position here. The party
organizations must improve ideological-political work among the creative in-
telligentsia in everypossible way and increase the world-outlook, methodologi-
cal arnanent of the masters of Soviet literature and art.

The 26th party congress directed the party authorities, cultural establish-
ments and creative unions toward the creation of a propitious atmosphere.

a sensitive, respectful attitude toward talent and, at the sane tine, ia-
placability toward all manifestations of a lack of progressive ideas, world-
outlook indiscriminateness and political lyopia. It is necessary to eaphasize
the great significance of the 26th party congress' instruction concerning the
need to react assertively and high-aindedly to the appearance of works dis-
crediting Soviet reality. here we lust be irreconcilable. The party has not
been nor can it be indifferent to the ideological thrust of our art.

It is also necessary to consider that in recent years reactionary imerialist
circles and foreign special services have been enploying increasingly insidious
methods of the corruption and bribery of certain politically and morally
unstable cultural workers, not stopping short at dirty provocations. high
vigilance and resolution are therefore particularly necessary now in the strug-
gle against the intrigues of the class may.

*-.’~:'ee "Material of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 6].

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The consistency of the beninist party line in cultural policy is ensuring new
successes in the develop-ant of the multinational Soviet culture, which is
exerting a tremendous influence on the developDent of all world culture.

IV

In his closing speech at the 26th CPSU Congress Comrade l..I. Brezhnev concisely
expressed the very essence of the revolutionary-transforming activity of the
Coll-unist Party and the Soviet people. "He intend to concentrate all our
forces," he said, "in two interconnected areas. One is comist creation,

the other the consolidation of peace."*

The USSR's foreign policy is a class-based and profoundly humane policy. It
expresses the Soviet people's vital interests. At the am tine its goals-

peace and the security of the peoples—correspond to the interests of all nan-
kind.

The work of our mass information nedia and the entire system of propaganda and
agitation should be geared to active explanation of the foreign policy of the
CPSU and the Soviet state and organized in a spirit of consistent struggle

for the inleaentation of this policy. The problm and proposals put forward
in the CPSU Central Comnittee Report to the 26th party congress and its evalua-
tion of the current stage of world development and the particular features

of the international situation should be at the center of attention.

The report showed convincingly the growth of the might, activeness and author-
i'.y of the Soviet Union and the entire socialist community; and the new vic-
tories won by the peoples in the struggle against imperialism and the forces
of reaction and the further intensification of the general crisis of capital-
isn. It revealed the coupler nature of world events and brought to light
with exhaustive clarity the reasons for the exacerbation of the international
situation on the eve and at the outset of thel980's brought about by U.S.
imperialist: and its accomplices, which are endeavoring to return the world

to the atmsphere of the "cold war" and speed up the ans race, attempting to
achieve military superiority over the USSR and the socialist conummity coun-
tries.

The CPSU is making consistent efforts to remove the threat of war, curb the
arms race and preserve and extend detente. This determined the-proposals put
forward by Comrade l..I. Brezhnev at the congress with respect to cardinal
questions of ensuring international and European security—~peace—loving pro-
posals which signpost the paths of a jurt solution of most inportant interna-
tional problem. They contain initiatives on reducing nuclear and convention-
al types of weapon and ground, naval and air forces and express a readiness
to continue talks with the United States on limiting strategic arms and re—
ducing them on the basis, of course, of equality and equal security. These
proposals reveal the prospects for the continuation and extension of inter-
national detente and an inprovemnt in the situation in Europe and the Near,
Riddle and Far East.

”Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 217.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 26th CPSU Congress proposed the creation of an authoritative international
connittee of prominent scientists which would show the vital need to prevent

a nuclear catastrophe. Tremendous importance is attached to the proposal for
the convening of a special UN Security Comcil session with the participation
of the top leaders of the council's members and also, if desired, the leaders
of other states for the purpose of searching for clues to an ilprovament in
the international situation and the prevention of war. The Soviet proposals
for strengthening international security and limiting the arms race put forward
earlier remain valid here.

Foreign politicians and mass information media have with good reason termed
these proposals the "program of a peace offensive". "All these proposals,"
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said, "are united by a single goal and our single

cornon aspiration—to do everything possible to extricate the peoples from the
threat of nuclear war and preserve peace in this world. They are, if you wish,
an organic continuation and developmt of our Peace Program as applied to

the most burning, urgent problem of international life in our day."*

The results of the 26th CPSU Congress and the general interest in the world

in the Soviet peace proposals demnstrate in reality once again that the
initiative in world politics remains, under the new, considerably complicated
conditions also, with the Soviet Union and the fraternal socialist countries.
The CPSU and the Soviet state will continue to pursue this high-minded policy,
at the same time rebuffing the aggressive aspirations of the forces of iner-
ialist reaction and war. It is essential to ruthlessly expose those apologies
for politicians and ideologists who attempt to attribute to our restraint and
readiness to negotiate virtually a fear of the "hard" line of the new Ameri-
can Administration. Everyone who is conversant with history knows that attewts
to talk to us in the language of threat and ultimatum have never succeeded

for anyone. The might of our great motherland is indestructible, and we can
stand up for ourselves and our friends.

From positions of unbending confidence in the historical rightness of our
cause and a profound interest in securing peaceful conditions for communist
creation and the strengthening of universal security the congress proclaimed:
'“l'here is now no more important task internationally for our party. our people
and all peoples of the world than the defense of peace."**

The creative energy and professional skill of our journalists, propagandists,
agitators and political informtion workers should be geared to a contrasting
juxtaposition of the two opposite directions in world politics: the con-
sistently peace-loving policy of the USSR and its allies and the aggressive
pnlicy of reactionary imperialist circles, primarily in the United States,
and also their accomplices in Beijing, who are possessed by malicious anti-
Sovietism and great-power-chauvinist, expansionist aspirations.

*"Naterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," pp 30-31.
**lbid., p 31.

23
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary to pay constant and unremitting attention to an explanation of
the Soviet Union's political course in respect of the socialist comtries,
which 'is aimed at the strengthening and cohesion of the fraternal peoples,
parties and states. the further inrovemsnt and development of their all-
around cooperation. the joint solution of problem arising in the course of
socialist and communist building and the attenuatening of the socialist com-
munity's defense capability and international positions. Friendship, coopera-
Lion and mutual understanding with the socialist countries has always been, is
now and will remain the cornerstone of Soviet foreign policy.

It is further necessary to show our party's high-minded policy of the develop-
ment of the USSR's cooperation with the emergent countries and the consolida-
tion of the alliance of world socialism and the national liberation Invemnt.
As the CPS" Central Comaittee Report to the 26th party congress observed,
"these countries differ greatly. Following liberation, some of them esbarked
on the revolutionary-demcratic path. In others capitalist relations were
established. Some of them are pursuing a genuinely independent policy, others
are today following in the channel of the policy of imperialism. In a word,
it is quite a motley picture."* An attentive attitude toward different Asian,
African and Latin American countries. considered appraisals of the changes
occurring in them and accuracy and realism in the illustration of their policy
from Handst—Ieninist, class standpoints are required of propaganda workers.

An important task of party propaganda is the portrayal of our country's
invariable aspiration to the development of relations of peace and cooperation
with capitalist states on the basis of Lenin's principles of peaceful coexis-
tence and at the same time a firm rebuff of ilperialism's aggressive intrigues.
'lhe corroboration of this constructive line by the 26th .CPSU Congress and

the general tone of its work, which contrmted sharply with the fiercely
militarist, inflammatory statements of the Washington Administration, have
exerted a profound influence on people's minds in all parts of the world.

'lhc congress also armed our propaganda and agitation with clear-cut ideological-
political principles in such an ilportant area of the CPSU's international

act ivity as the further extension and intensification of all-around cooperation
with the world's columnist and workers' parties. The CPSU is channeling efforts
toward the cohesion of the world communist movement on the basis of the prin-
ciples of Handsm-Leninism and proletariat: internationalism and toward cooper-
ation with all progressive forces advocating peace and demcracy and defense

of the working people's interests. Comrade L.I. Brezhnev termed as a great
unifying principle and a powerful factor of the further cohesion and growth

of the authority of the world communist movement the commists' struggle for
peace and against the aggressive policy of inerialism and the arms race,

which threatens the peoples with nuclear catastrophe.“

Our party's honest and high-minded line in questions of internatimsl politics
has encountered mderstanding and broad support worldwide. "The CPSU Congress,"

*"Material of the 26th crsu Congress," p 11.
**1bid., p 18.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
II. rues said in his speech at a German Communist Party Board plenum, "is a
tremendous school of proletarian internationalisa and a source of inspiration
for the entire international cal-mist and workers' mvsment.... The USSR's
proposals correspond to the interests of all peoples, including the PRC peo—
ple."

Our party has always organised and continues to organize the business of con-
munist education inside the country in an inseparable connection with the
struggle against bourgeois, petit bourgeois, reformist and revisionist ideo-
logy in the international arena. The need for the organic unity of these two
aspects of the party's ideological activity is particularly obvious in our
day, under the conditions of the sharp exacerbation of the ideological strug-

gle and when imperialist reaction is conducting real "psychological warfare"
against the socialist countries.

Ve must constantly remember that questions are currently at the center of the
ideological confrontation which have been posed by real socialism for the first
time. mass are questions of social Justice and political democracy, man's
social liberation and spiritual emancipation and the use of the achievements
of scientifirtechnical progress in the interests of working mankind, the
liquidation of all forms of national and racial oppression and the planet's
salvation fron the threat of a thermonuclear catastrophe.

1he strategic initiative in the present-day ideological struggle is firmly

in the hands of the international working class and its political vanguard.
Armed with the teaching of Marxism-leninism, the communists see more profoundly
and correctly than anyone else the essence and prospects of the processes
occurring in the world and are drawing the correct conclusions from this for
their struggle for the interests of the working class and the working people

of all countries and for democracy, peace and socialism. The positive ex-
ample of socialist and col-unis: building and the historic achievements of

the peoples of the socialist countries is of tremendous magnetic force.

"But our successes," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said in his Prague speech at the
16th Czechoslovak Communist Party Congress, "are giving our class enemies no
rest. They are trying to do everything to impede socialism's forward movemnt
and erode it from within. All means—economic pressure and blackmail, false
propaganda, flattery and demagoy, the support and encouragement of counter-
revolutionary forces—where they still exist-and various acts of subversion
-.1re being set in motion for this.“

It would be an unforgiveable mistake to underestimte the influence of the
Ideology and propaganda of iwerialisn, the midlt -of its propaganda machinery
and its endeavor to utilize increasingly new means in the struggle against
socialism. Historical experience shows that ilperialist ideologists are
incapable of putting forward progressive social ideas. But bourgeois ideology
and propaganda rely on the actual political and economic domination of the
monopolies in the capitalist countries and the official apparatus of

Jﬁwm 8 April 1981.

s-

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFF-THAI. USE ONLY

He nust discern in practice and actively support and-idevelop forts of propaganda
and agitation which help us place at the center of attention topical questions
which are of interest to people, afford freedom for them to express their
judgments or exchange opinions, enrich people's thinking, foster in them an
awareness of their duty to society and help convert words into real deeds.

These are the forts which we should seek, verify in practice and then intro-
duce extensively. It is now particularly important to support forms of mass-
political work which, actively intruding in the economy, stimulate people to
work better and direct agitators toward a struggle for the strengthening 'of
labor discipline and economies and thrift at each place of work.

Political work in the masses should not be enclosed within the walls of an
enterprise, establishment or educational institution. It must also be con-
ducted at the population's place of residence and, of course, in its specific
forms. There are many examples of the good organization of such work. but
there is not as yet a precise, concerted system. It is at people's place

of residence that political agitation is in many places performed only occa-
sionally. 'lhe party organizations, local soviets and trade union and Komsonol
organizations of the labor collectives must tackle the solution of these ques-
tions in earnest. we need to convert the residential neighborhoods and centers
of population into zones where agitation and cultural-educational work are
actively codained. Attention should be paid primrily to an imrovement
therein in the youth hostels.

The measure for an improvement in ideological work also preswpose a refine-
ment of atheistic education. The facts testify that there has been a pronounced
increase in foreign anti-Soviet clerical propaganda. In a number of places
clergyman and sectarisns are attewting to increase their influence on believers
and extend it to children and young people. Individual fanatics and extrem-
ists are making me of illegal methods here. It is essential to perform
atheistic work persistently and patiently, propsgandize a materialist world
outlook and communist morality among all groups of the working people and in-
troduce socialist traditions and rituals in people's life and practice.

Cultural-educational establishments and sports societies and organizations are
called on to make their contribution to ideological activity. A great deal of,
as a whole, fruitful work has been performed recently on the centralization

of clubs and libraries and the creation of cultural cospleres in urban areas
and in the countryside. However, certain questions in this sphere have not

yet been solved. ‘lhe quality of the training of specialists working in rural
cultural establish-cuts remains low. A considerable proportion of the clubs
and libraries is poorly provided with amenities. The network of club estab-
lishments in the Far North regions is inadequate.

The physical training of a considerable proportion of the population lags
markedly behind the demands of modern production and the very rhythm of con-
temporary life. It is disturbing that general educational school graduates
frequently have had posture. diminished vision and primary forms of hyperten-
sion. Physical culture and sport can and should he an important factor of a
person's all-around development.

26

FOR OFHCML USE ONLY
suppression. The nonopoly bourgeoisie channels part of the superprofits into
bribing whole social strata, creating the illusion of their familiarization with

its way of life. It eqloys all possibilities of the spiritual stupefaction of
the nasses.

The director of the concerted system of manipulation of the mass consciousness
is American imperialisn. The United States is currently responsible for 37 per-
cent of the capitalist countries' industrial production. At the same time,
Hestern specialists calculate, the United States controls the bulk of the
intonation circulating in these countries.

The class essence of bourgeois ideology and policy is being manifested parti-
cularly distinctly in the current situation. Re are dealing with imperialisn,
which today seem more than ever ”reaction all along the line."* In V.I.
Lenin's words, the bourgeoisie rants and raves, vainly atteapting to halt the
course of history.

The rain stream of imperialist propaganda is channeled against the USSR and
the other socialist comnlnity countries. 0.8. imperialist circles have ener-
cised particular ingenuity recently in unbridled slander of the Soviet Union.
The new U.S. Adninistration has attewted to level at our country the nontrous
charge of "international terrorism." which has been rebuffed by all the world's
progressive forces. The inerialists and their accolplices are setting in
motion an entire system of means aimed at subverting the socialist world and
are systematically conducting hostile «amigos against the fraternal coun-
tries. attemting to turn people away fron socialism. "Recent events," the
CPSU Central Conittee Report to the 26th party congress points out, "confir-
again and again that our class enemies are learning from their defeats. They
are operating increasingly subtlely and insidiously against the socialist
countries."**

The events in Poland serve as a graphic example of this. Both internal poli-
ticsl factors and the provocative, insidious subversive activity of imrialism
are at the basis of the crisis which has arisen there. The mistakes and ais-
calculations of the previous PZPR leadership in socioeconomic policy were used
by the enemies of socialise, with the support of outside reactionary forces,
for attacks on the party and the state for the purpose of disorganizing the
entire life of the country. inlanting anarchy and sdasequently seizing power.

The country's true patriots, headed by the PZPR, are waging a strenuous poli-
tical struggle to overcone the crisis situation and strengthen the positions
of socialisn in Poland. Expressing the will of the peoples of the fraternal
socialist countries, Conrade L.I. Brezhnev declared fro. our congress' platform:

"...we will not leave socialist Poland, fraternal Poland in the lurch and will
see that no harl comes to itl"***

_____________.______..—-———
*See V.I. Lenin,'"Poln. sobr. soch." [Cowlete Works], vol 27, p 419.
**"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 9.

***Ibid., pp 9-10.

27

FOR ONO“. USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

The viability of our social systen, the historical truth and invincible force
of Harxiat-leninist ideology and Soviet people‘s ideological conviction are
counter-posed to the bitter attacks of hostile propaganda. At the seas tine
high vigilance and active struggle against ideological currents hostile to
socialism and against ilperialist ideological diversions are essential.

The nain area of realization of this require-ant is a further increase in

the efficiency and quality of our propaganda and its increued aggressiveness.
A special, counter-propaganda, aspect also'has to be taken into consideration
here. 'After all, it is no secret that certain people, particularly among the
politically inexperienced part of the youth, sonsti-ss still lack, unfortunate-
1y, vigilance and a critical, class-based approach to sources of bourgeois
propaganda, whose assertiveness is, as is known, increasing. It is necessary
to inculcate more consistently and persistently a steady irreconcilability
with hostile propaganda. starting at an early age, when a person is bein.
prepared for independent life. The schools, vocational-technical schools,
tekhnikuns and VUZ's must have their say here. It is necessary in one's youth-
ful years even to begin to cultivate the skills of evaluating social processes
from class standpoints and to hold a scientific, co-nist world outlook and
unshakable ideological and moral stanchness.

It is also essential to continue to develop and perfect work on exposing and
cutting short inperialisn's ideological diversions, organise the broader train-
ing of propaganda personnel for problems of the ideological struggle and in-
crease the depth and cogency of the criticisn of inerialisn's antipopular
essence and its ideology and policy in lecture series in the social sciences

in the WZ's and tekhnik'm. It is a question'Of fostering an ability to conduct
an ideological polenic and defend one's views and an ability to persuade.

Hany of the country's party organizations have accumlated interesting exper-
ience in recent years in the sphere of counterpropaganda and criticism of
bourgeois and reforaist ideology which merits study and dissemination.

Our uses information and propaganda media have extended considerably the
informational content of their international uterial and increased their
innediacy. TASS now trans-its approximately 300 reports daily. The television
programs "The World Today," "Studio 9" and "International Answers," "Interna-
tional Diary" and "From the TASS Tape" are of great interest.

The historic decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the far-reaching program
of comnunist creation and struggle for peace ensure the necessary conditions
for the further developnent of cocialisn's ideological offensive. We must
display greater aggressiveness in the ideological struggle, not allow the en-
emy any respite and convey our words of truth, in spite of all the barriers,
to the working people in all parts of the world. As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev
said, "we are struggling for the just cause of peace and the peoples' secur-
ity and the interests of the people of labor. The truth of Marxist-beninist
teaching is on our side. Unity and cohesion is our strength."

M
O

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress, p 10.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V

Political work in the masses is the main sphere of our party's ideological
work. It is geared to fostering the high wareness of the working people and
all citizens, explaining to then the CPSU's domestic and foreign policy and
shaping a scientific co-Iunist world outlook. v.1. Lenin regarded the develop-
ment of the consciousness of the masses as "the basis and main content of

our entire work."* Progressive ptblic consciousness is a great advantage of
real socialism and a most inortant factor of the building of the commiat
society.

Man's conunist education in our society is a multifaceted process. Man is
raised in the labor collective, the home, the school, the tekhnikum and the
V02. lie is raised by the laws and traditions of society, workable social re-

lations, the mass intonation and propaganda media, political training and
literature and-art. All these are the ingredients of col-mist education and
society's sociopolitical, ideological and moral influence on the personality.

Despite the entire cowlexity, scale and responsibility of the tasks being
tackled by the party, it is precisely sun which was and remains at the center
of its attention and its policy. Concern for man iiaues all the decisions
of the 26th CPS" Congress and our entire ideological activity.

Ideological work is an inortant, inalienable component of the party's ties
to the masses and a powerful means of an upsurge of their creative activeness
in the process of the buildingxf communism and the realization of our domestic
and foreign policy. It is a most inortant means of Soviet people's educa-
tion in a spirit of the unity of all classes and social strata. nations and
nationalities and all generations of the Soviet people and their cohesion
around the Lenin Party.

The force of our propaganda is well known, and even our most mlicious ideolo-
gical adversaries have been forced to acknowledge it. 'ihe CPSU constructs
its entire ideological work on the firm and permanent foundation of Marxism-
Leninisn. We have traditions of Bol'shevist propaganda and the Leninist
principles of its organization proven by decades of struggle and creative
labor. These principles, experience and traditions have also been the basis
of the ramified system of ideological influence of the masses and political
education in the masses.

As a live, developing system, it cannot fail to respond to the changes in the
life of society. This is axiomtic. Every new frontier in the development
of the general and political culture and social assertiveness of the muses
increases accordingly their demands on the content, methods and forms of
organization of ideological work. he 26th CPSU Congress took this fully into
account, setting the task of the-reorganization of many areas and spheres of
ideological work.

‘*See v.1. Lenin, "Complete works." vol 13, p 376.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR Uﬂ'ﬂ'lAl. use. ONLY

Proceeding fro: the directives of the CPSU Central Com-ittee Report to the
26th party congress on questions of ideological and political education and
the 26 'April 1979 CPS!) Central Col-ittee decree, it would seen necessary to
highlight an iaprovement in the content of our propaganda and agitation as
being of prise ilportance. As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev ewhasized, it should be
more topical and correspond to the tasks of current policy and people's inter
ests. Our party pays particular attention here to ensuring the high scienti-
fic, ideological-theoretical level of propaganda and agitation, promotion of
the key problem of the CPSU's current domestic and international policy to
the center of propaganda and the suffusion of propaganda with serious analy-
tical material on the most inportant processes of the development of Soviet
society and also world develop-ent.

It is necessary to reveal to the working people daily in form corresponding
to their requirements the essence and concrete content of the CPSU's doasstic
and foreign policy and to give proQt, cogent answers to questions troubling
people, however acute they may be. It is essential to make extensive use of
the mass information nedia for a frank and constructive discussion of urgent
problem of social life, organizing here regular speeches by party, soviet

and management executives to the working people via various propaganda chan-
nels.

We must constantly perfect the forms and nethods of propaganda and agitation
and rid ourselves of cliches and manifestations of formlisn and verbal blather
just for show. The replacemnt of outmoded forms and the extended application
of Earns corresponding to current conditions and an increase in the demands nade
on the skill of the propaganda personnel is a very urgent task.

All ideological work should be idmed with the Leninist spirit of unity of
ideological-theoretical. political-educational, organizing and aanagenent
work. The great significance of such mity was again euphasized by the 26th
CPSU Congress. This presupposes a further increase in the role of propaganda
in the inculcation of Soviet people's social assertiveness, the practical
nccowlishment of tasks of economic and cultural building and the running of
state and public affairs .-

Of course, the accoaplishment of increasingly nlnerous and critical tasks of
ideological work requires an inrovenent in every possible way in the style
of party leadership thereof. Conrad: L.I. Brezhnev's report put forward ideas
which require a purposeful search for new solutions in the organization of
ideological work and the reorganization of its content and forms, which is
inconceivable without an imaginative, truly creative approach. Life itself
insistently dictates that we advance more rapidly and energetically in this
matter. taking advantage of the experience of the party organizations, the
best. enterprising ideological workers and the possibilities of science and
social control and organically linking a refineIent in ideological work with
the struggle for the accolplishnent of the socioecononic tasks of the llth
Five-Year Plan and the further develop-eat of socialist denocracy.

what is needed is not the semblance of reorganization but reorganization in
practice, ensuring a qualitative rise in the level of ideological work.

1)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Reorganization should not he understood as some kind of break and total re-
working of our entire ideological property. It is necessary to approach every-
thing valuable and the positive experience of the party organizations as
solicitously as possible. Ideological education should take account both of
the new phenomena of life and the party's very rich traditions and experience
in this sphere of activity.

Such are certain considerations concerning reorganization. What are the con-
crete tasks which arise in this connection in the main areas of ideological
and political education?

Let us begin with the uses information nedia. Soviet journalists received
with a feeling of profound gratitude to the party and its Central Comittee
and Comrade l..l. Brezhnev personally the high evaluation of their labor in the
CPS!) Central Committee Report to the 26th party congress. There is no doubt
that they will continue to be the party's coabat assistants, respond with
glorious new deeds to the appeal for a display of high social activeness and
responsibility and be guided by the Leninist principles and traditions of
party journalism.

It may be noted with satisfaction that Comrade l..l. Brezhnev's instructions
and the 26 April 1979 CPSU Central Co-ittee decree have become for the jour-
nalist collectives an effective stilulus to an all-around improveaent in their
activity. The editions of printed publications are increasing, the skill of
the journalist personnel is growing and the material of the newspapers and
journals, television and radio broadcasts and agency reports is becoming lore
topical and inediate and contains fuller information, and its theoretical

and creative level is rising.

The mass information and propaganda media have begun to speak more frequently
on the najor, fnandanantal questions of social life, socioeconomic development
and socialist denocracy and at the same tine are paying more attention to what
are at first sight routine problem. but which, affecting the interests of
millions of people, ultimtely acquire sociopolitical significance. There
has been an increase in the role of the mass information and propaganda media
in the dissemination of progressive experience and the propaganda of economic
and scientific-technical knowledge. Mass forms of work of the editorial
staffs have cone to be developed nore actively. The efficacy of the critical
articles of the press, particularly the central press, has increased somewhat.

At the sane time it has to be said that we have only just made a start in
tackling the big tasks of an imrovemnt in the activity of the ma infome-
tion and propaganda media in accordance with current requirements; As in
other areas of ideological work, the party lakes questions of the content of
the publications, an increase in the ideological significance of the material
and a deepening of the scientific level of journalism the cornerstone. ”Every
article in a newspaper or journal and every television or radio broadcast,"
Comrade l..l. Brezhnev said, "should be regarded as a serious conversation with
people, who expect not only a truthful and prowt exposition of the facts but
also an in-depth analysis of them and serious generalizations.”
________________‘.————-—

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress,‘ p 76.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For this it is essential that the journalist have solid specialized knowledge
of the issues with which he is dealing, constantly consult workers, peasants,
scientists. cultural figures and specialists and continuously inprove his
theoretical training. The work of the press is collective, but here also the
sore extensive specialization of the personnel is needed. In accordance with
the 26 .April 1979 CPS!) Central Co-nittee decree, it is necessary to increase
the press' responsibility for a strict and objective approach to an illustra-
tion of the facts and the substantiation of positive and critical evaluations.

A particularly hid! sense of responsibility is required of collectives and .
individual workers of the sass infornation media in our tine. Unfortunately,
it is being displayed far fron everywhere. Inaccuracies or aistakes and sons-
tines views alien to our world outlook even still frequently slip through in
our press. Not very discrininating literary workers and adnirers of "hot
facts" and dubious subjects. fro. the intimate sides of the life of the tsar's
court through "God-seeking," are still with us, particularly in certain jour-
nals. Nor has due order been brought to bear in the selection of works of
foreign authors for their translation into Russian and other languages of the
USSR peoples. As a result translated magazine publications or books-of dub-
ious and, sonetines, hateful content and those seasoned with obscenity even

appear .

An inportant aspect of the activity of the press. television and radio is the
struggle against negative phenomena and shortcomings in our life and work.
The party opposes as enphatically as can be demnstrative noise and the var-
nishing of reality. Re are for the press, radio and television revealing

di f ficulties. unsolved problees and shortcomings candidly and waging an
implacable struggle against all instances of antisocial behavior and ideology
and norality hostile to our systen, not forgetting for a minute that a criti-
cal attitude toward shortconings lust be codined with a fire confidence in
the historic advantages of our systen. But nanifestations of a demonstra-
tive approach and the avoidance of probless and difficulties which disturb
people have yet to be eradicated-~all this, of course. is noted by the readers
and viewers and the audience and evokes their justified complaints.

Of course, commist education should be constructed prinarily on the basis
or positive examle; showing the very essence of the life and activity of
Soviet society and its gradual approximation to the communist ideal is the
pernanent basis of our propaganda. But this must in no event lead to an
underestination of the social significance of criticise and self-criticism.
We need to continue to develop it, coabating all attempts to suppress criti-
cisn, a disregard for critical observations and proposals and a forual atti-
tude toward the working people's letters.

‘mere is also a palpable need for reorganization in respect of the style and
language of the seas infornation and propaganda nedia. It is very inportant
that we rid ourselves nore rapidly of meaningless prattle, bureaucratic lan-
guage. cliches and outmded form of work. This is no sinple matter. After
all, many stock phrases were introduced long since and with good reason.
Abandoning then is not a nechanical weeding out of newspaper column but a
wide-ranging creative quest for a style and language corresponding to present-
day conditions and the new level of Soviet people's culture and education. If
the journalist wishes to be the chronicler of the era. he mt be on top of
the demands of the tine fron the viewpoint both of ideological level and pro-
fessional skill.

32
non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Unfortunately, even following the criticism at the 26th CPSU Congress of the
shortcomings in ideological work, any of our mass information organs are
continuing to work in the old way, on propaganda of the congress' decisions
included, frequently employing stock phrases instead of the serious, profound
and critical approach about which the congress spoke. High-sounding rubrics
and headings are sometimes inserted, but beneath them it is petty facts and
secondary and, sometimes, incidental material which is carried. Convincing-
ness and cogency is often lacking in the presentation and illustration of the
problems put forward by the congress.

It is clear that all these questions cannot be tackled in a single day. A
carefully considered system of organizational measures, educational work with
the journalists theuelves, an increase in their qualifications and the bold
promotion and active moral and material stimlation of those who work gifted-
ly, assiduously and with the greatest results for the party's cause are needed
here.

The rich potential of the press, television, radio and book publishing may be
displayed in full only when skillful party leadership contributes to this and
they perceive the support of the party comittees. Great attention to the
work of the mass infomtion and propaganda media is being paid by the Moscow
Gorkom, the Ukrainian and Moldavian Communist Party central comittees and a
mater of other party committees. They direct their press organs toward
active participation in the solution of fundamental problems of economic and
social development, regularly support the most interesting initiatives of the
editorial collectives and encourage the hidi-minded formulation of questions.

But there are many examples of another sort, when the party co-ittees call
their newspaper, journal or publishing house to mind only in connection with
a mistake that has been made or a misprint. Certain local workers put pres-
sure on the journalists, ineding the publication of critical material. Of
course, we must not turn a blind eye to such facts. Zealous defenders of
local or selfish departmental interests need to be called to order. As a
whole. it is inortant to direct the work of the press correctly, and we will
then undorbtedly have less need to correct it.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev emphmized' that we are all concerned to ensure that our
mass information and propaganda media be a genuine tribune of party, nation-
wide public opinion. Constant concern for this should iabue the activity

of the press, radio and television—the entire thousands-strong army of
journalists.

Permit me to also express a few considerations with respect to questions of
party training and mass-political work.

11.2 26th CPSU Congress observed that much attention had been paid in the period
under review to questions of party training. It would have been possible to
add others also to the examples of the creative organization of this work in
Moscow, Leningrad, Sverdlovsk, the Donbass and Novosibirsk which were cited
at the congress. However, it is now more important to note the serious short-
comings to which Comrade L.I. Brezhnev pointed in the CPSU Central Cosmittee

33
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report to the 26th party congress and outline measures to do away with then.
Manifestations of foraalism and pedantry have yet to be eliminated in party
education, and theoretical training is tied in insufficiently with people's
interests and questions of social and production life which concern then.

We should all give a good deal of thouﬂlt to the causes of and ways to sur-
mount these by no means new shortcomings in order to decisively increase the
quality of party training, its ideological level and methods of organization,
striving for greater interest on the part of the students and not their pas-
sive attendance to the propagandist but their active participation in the
classes and what is called live dialogue.

The current system of the co-unists' ideological-theoretical training took
shape in its main features in our party long ago. It proceeds from the need
for the counnists' consistent assimilation of the theory and methodology of
Marxism and party history and policy. But, as is lmown, the system of party
training has been reorganized repeatedly in accordance with the demands of the
time. There is a need for a certain reorganization today also.

He see, for example, that we have not succeeded in backing up the rapid growth
in the masher of students of the party education network with a corresponding
increase in the ranks of highly qualified propagandist personnel. He cannot,
of course, fail to he heartened by the increased interest of nonparty working
people in political studies. We need to continue to develop this. But in
such a way that the overall theoretical level of party training not decline
but rise, not forgetting here that the Iain task of the system of party train-
ing is the ideological conditioning of the columnists and the molding in them,
in leading personnel included, of the skills of political work in the nasses.
As in all others, in questions of political training the conducts must pro-
ceed ahead of the masses and carry the noses with then. And the system of
party education must facilitate this to the maximum extent.

As we can see, many problem in our ideological work are born in the process
of the development of processes which are positive in nature and thrust, but
when we fail to find the optima, timely solutions, certain difficulties arise.

In accordance with the instructions of the 26th party congress, the CPSU Cen-
tral Committee sets new concrete tasks in the sphere of a further inroveaent
in the commists' Marxist-Leninist training. The basis of these is concern
for in-depth study of the theoretical inheritance of K. Marx, P. mgels and
v.1. Lenin, history and policy of the CPS!) mad its most important documents
and the works of L.I. Brezhnev and other party leaders. It is essential to
continue in all forms of party education the further study of Lenin's prin-
ciples of the building and activity of our party and its struggle for the
purity of Marxism-leninisn and against all varieties of the ideology of ex-
ploiters and opportmists. We must display concern to ensure a further
increase in the quality and efficacy of the training, continuity and consis-
tency in the assimilation of Marxist-beninist science, the organic connection
of the study of CPSU theory and practice with the solution of urgent social
and production probleas and the fuller consideration of the enhanced level of
the students' political and general culture.

310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It has to he seemed that for the future also the main form of Marxist-Lenin-
ist education will be the comists' independent studies, and various forms
of party education should undoubtedly be of a more active nature. It needs
to be eaphasized once again that the choice of forms of political study is a
voluntary matter. but that in-depth, conscientious study of party theory and
policy by every conunist is mandatory. In the face of the large-scale and
coqlex tasks of col-mist building and the exacerbation of the ideological
struggle in the world arena we must provide for the constant growth of the
comists' theoretical knowledge and their party activenesa, ideological-
political conditioning and high political vigilance.

1hua, as the 26th CPSU Congress teaches us, the mat inortant thing in party
education is to make questions of the efficacy and fruitfulnass of the com-
munists' political training the cornerstone.

his is well understood by the propagandists themselves, to which a letter pub-
blished in the journal POLITICHESKOYE SAMOOBRAZOVANIYE from propagandists who
were delegates to the 26th party congress, which was imbued with sincere con-
cern for the increased authority and efficacy of party training, testifies.

At the same time it is essential to improve the organization of all mass-poli-
tical work in every possible way. A principal direction here is, I believe,
the creation of a wide-ranging, differentiated political propaganda system
which would afford great masses of the working people an opportunity to acquire
systematic knowledge with respect to the most ilportant questions of Marxist-
Leninist theory and party policy and to replenish it constantly. It is neces-
sary for this purpose to make more active use of the people's universities,
schools of cmmist labor and television and radio broadcasting.

It is impossible today to conceive of the sociopolitical life of our cities and
villages and labor collectives without agitation-mass and lecture work. It
embraces tens of nillions of people and serves as a mat important means of
the party organizations' direct ties to the masses and their ideological-
political influence on the masses. Millions of people work as political agita-
tors and information workers, lecturers and rapporteura. These volunteers
constitute the bulk of the army of our ideological activists. Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev expressed gratitude to them at the congress for conveying the party's
thoughts and explaining its policy to the masses.

And now, following the congress, the party organizations are enlisting the
broadest personnel of the ideological aktiv everywhere in their organizing
and political-educational work on propaganda of L.I. Brezhnev's report and the
decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the organization of their implementa-
tion and on the development of nationwide socialist competition for the suc-
cessful fulfillment of the 1981 plan and the 11th Five-Year Plan as a whole.
Where this work is being performed in planned and purposeful manner, gratify-
ingly good results are produced.

However, nor is everything as it should be everywhere in this area of ideolo-
gical work either. In many instances agitation-propaganda work among the

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

working people on the job and, particularly, at the place of residence is being
performed insufficiently systematically and does not yet extend to a consider-
able proportion of the working people. And, what is Inst important. serious
shortcomings in its content have yet to be overcome; the agitators' and poli-
tical information workers' speeches are frequently uninteresting and insuf-
ficient’ly pertinent. Superficial, prinitive agitation and information with a
mechanical repetition of general truths is now simply intolerable.

With good reason Comrade L.I. Brezhnev put the question at the congress: "Have
not the forms of mass-political work here become unduly stagnant? After all,
it is one thing when people were still insufficiently trained and uneducated.
But addressing contemporary Soviet man is quite another. We surely need to
think and think thoroughly about this. Hho if not ideoloucal workers should
be characterized to the highest degree by a feeling for what is new."*

He are obliged to develop in greater depth the theory and analyze and collate
better the practice of mass-political work under current conditions and form-
ulate measures for its more profound and differentiated planning and its
increased innediacy and the utmost strengthening of its ties to practice and
the accomlishnent of the most important economic-political tasks. It is
essential to improve the training, ideological armment and briefing of the
ideological personnel operating in the field of mass-political work.

The "Znaniye" Society recently conducted a public certification“ its lectur-

ers, as a result of which approximately 200 .000 members of the society failed

to win the right to public speaking. ﬂow can we fail to recall here: "Better
fewer, but better!"

Much work has to be done to perfect the very forms of political agitation.
This is of considerable importance since the content and nature of the tasks
confronting us are to a large extent new. As v.1. Lenin observed, the under-
development and infirmity of form does not afford an opportunity for taking the
most serious steps in the development of content, causes stagnation and leads
to the squandering of forces and discrepancy between word and deed.**

mm: kind of. form shoud we look for today and where? he answer to the

first part of the question-"where?"-is sirple: in life and in the practice
of ideological work. Concerning the forms themselves, it may be said that
they should attract people and help them better resolve the fundamental prob-
lem of political work in the Isssesnorganically linking the idea and inter-
est and developing the assertiveness of the masses. As far as agitation proper
is concerned, it should conbine the systematic nature of work on a mass scale
and. simultaneously, an individual approach to the working people. he whole
point is to painstakingly organize and direct the activity of the agitators.
This currently makes greater demands than ever on the agitator collectives and,
of course, the party committees directing them.

 

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 76.
MSee v.1. benin, "Complete Works," vol 8, p 378.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The solution of the diverse questionsof the working people's communist educa-
tion depends primarily onthe level of party leadership and the directing and
organizing role of the union republic Communist Party central co-Iittees,
kraykoms, obkoms, gorkons and raykonm in ideological work.

The selection and assignment of ideological personnel and constant attention to
them, the planning and coordination of ideological work in inseparable unity
with all political, organizing and managemt activity, supervision of the
fulfillment of adopted decisions, the further strengthening of the material-
technical base of propaganda and agitation-ad the better use of available
resource—these are the proven means which enable us to successfully tackle
the big tasks put forward by the 26th CPSU Congress.

Questions of the compilation and realization of plans of ideological work con-
nected with inlementation of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congmss--both
current and long-term plans—are now part of the priority concerns of the party
committees and newspaper, television and publishing house editorial staffs.
The plans must, of course, be carefully thought out, account being taken of
the specific features of the concrete tasks being tackled in all areas of
connunist building. 'me goal-oriented program of ideological support for
major economic tasks and sociopolitical camaigns and comrehensive long-

term plans of the working people's commist education gave a good account of
themselves in past years. Use must be made of all this valuable experience.
At the same time the main attention Inst be paid to the practical organization
of matters, direct ideological-political work in the masses and supervision of
adopted decisions and scheduled plans being impleunted consistently.

We must constantly be guided in ideological work by a Leninist requirement:
finding forms of its organization which with the least expenditure produce
the greatest and more lasting results. And this means that in the light of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress it is necessary:

first, to carefully check out all components of the political propaganda and
agitation system to ensure that not one run idle;

second, to skillfully coordinate and unite the educational efforts of all
propaganda media and all detachments of the ideological workers, making the
maximum use of the strongest aspects of each of them; and

third, to eqhatically oppose departmentalism, which impedes the rational
use of the material base of cultural-mass and sports work and our publishing.

Ideological work is a vital, creative business. Much valuable, interesting
experience is born in the process thereof. And this experience needs to be
constantly studied, carefully weighed on the strict scales of practice and
disseminated extensively. A reason for its slow dissemination is, evidently,
the fact that frequently there is no clear idea of whose experience and in
respect of which problems ouyzt to become public property. It is necessary

to conduct a careful stock-taking of the best experience of ideological work,
particularly that of all-party significance, and strive persistently for

its universal introduction. It is evidently necessary to make mnre active use

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the mterial and recomendations of all-union theoretical and scientific-
practical conferences on problems of connist education. The proposal for
the publication of annual collections which would illustrate all that is best
in the practice of ideological work also merits attention.

It has to be emphasized once again that the key eleaent in ideological work is
the personnel. The party has splendid ideological personnel. Currently prac-
tically all ideological workers of the party coinittees have higher education,
approximately one-third of them have party-political education and my have
degrees. However, the dennds on the personnel are growing constantly, and

in order that they be up to these demds they must have constant party con-
cem, attention and support. A great deal of serious work has to be done on
the retraining of the ideological personnel, particularly of the local level.
I would like to pay special attention to the training of party organization

deputy secretaries for ideological work and other ideological activists in
the labor collectives.

Of course, no course will help the ideological worker which systenatically fails
to enhance his political education and cultural level, does not follow liter-
sture and fails to display inquisitiveness and a lively interest in the new
experience of ideological education and the achievenents of modern science.
There should be no room in ideological-political work for people who are in-
different and who perform their duties in a bureaucratic mnner. Discipline
and performance efficiency should be organically coﬁined, as the CPSU Central

Comittee Report to the 26th party congress said, with a creative attitude
toward matters.

Life convinces us that we can no longer perform ideological work successfully
now by relying solely on past experience and our own intuition. Even less

can it be constructed with an orientation toward indicators which, although
easily recorded and good for comparison, do not reveal and, somtimes, siaply
distort the essence of the matter. I refer to that "propaganda gross” which
frequently generates exaggerated figures and formalis- and stimulates a race
for the growth of quantitative indicators to the detrdaent of work quality and
contrary to the interests of the cause. It is well known to what this leads.
And if reminders have to be given of this again, it is only because this prac-
tice has yet to be eradicated. '

We must keep a sober eye. as V.I. Lenin eqhasized, on the actual state of
awareness and training of all working people (and not only their progressive
section) and spot both positive and negative phenomena in good time. And the
results of this work need to be judged in accordance with the degree of poli-
tical knowledgeability, ideological-theoretical training and social activeness
of the working people.

The fact that the scientific basis of educational practice has been reinforced
considerably in recent years is a cause for satisfaction. Practically all

the republic, kray and oblast party conmittees systematically conduct socio-
logical studies and public opinion polls in the preparation of crucial deci-
sions. Social experiments are also ewloyed in a nuwer of instances. I
would like to mention particularly the work of the Ukrainian, Latvian and
Belorussian Columnist Party central con-ittees and Moscow, Leningrad and

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Sverdlovsk in this field. Interesting experience of the study and forecast-
ing of the ideological situation has been acclntlated by the Georgian and
Estonian Co-unist Party central comaittees. Scientific-practical conferences
have beoone a useful form miting the efforts of theorists and practitioners in
the sphere of columnist education.

Nonetheless, there is still Ilch incomplete work here. Our sociology, pedagogi-
cal science and psychology are not turning quickly enough to a study of ques-
tions of the comist education of the working people and propaganda. I
believe that the USSR Acadeny of Sciences' Presidium Social Science Department
and the leadership of the USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences will draw the
appropriate conclusions and devote sore attention to the study of these prob-
lems. The CPSU Central Couittee Academy of Social Sciences is also called on
to make its contribution to this aatter.

The development of organizational structures providing for the flexible, two-
way comication of ideological practice and social science should be an
inportant area of the reorganization of our ideological and ideological-educa-
tional work.

Our country has entered the 1980's as a great. powerful socialist power. It
represents in the eyes of the peoples of the whole world a bastion of peace,

a true defender of frecdon, desecration and humanisn and a nodel of a society
of social justice and the fraternity of the working people. The 26th CPS!)
Congress arned the party and the people with an inspiring action program which
will lead our country to new frontiers of con-mist creation. Under the banner
of Harxisn-Leninisn we will strengthen even more the motherland's political,
economic and defense night and its international authority and influence and
the positions of world socialisn. ‘lhe high calling of the party’s ideological
activists is to arm'each Soviet individual with a profound understanding of the
noble goals and the content of the tasks put forward by the 26th party con-
gress and help each person determine his place in their accolplishnent.

He will work constantly on the further cohesion of the people's masses around
the party and its Leninist Central Comittee headed by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev
and strengthen the indestructible unity of party and people. There is no

doubt that, faithful to the glorious revolutionary traditions of the CPSU, the
ideological cadres will cope with this lofty and responsible task and show their
worth as the Lenin Party's colbat activists in full.

VJ. Dolgikh, secretary of the CPSU Central Conittee: "The 26th CPSU Congress
and the Party's Economic Policy in the Sphere of Industry and Construction"

I

Work is developing actively in the party and the country on ilplcnentaticn of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. The party, soviet, trade union and
Komoml organizations and the labor collectives are determining their specific
tasks and increasing their efforts for the successful fulfillment of the pro-
gram of socioeconomic develop-eat outlined by the congress.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL USE ONIY

The 26th CPS“ Cong: as was a historic event not only in the life of our coun-
try but also in the development of the entire world revolutionary movement.

-It marks a new boundary in Soviet society's progress along the path toward com-
munism. Conrade L.I. Brezhnev's report "CPSU Central Connittee Report to the
26th CPS!) Congress and the Party's Priority Tasks in the Sphere of Domestic
and Foreign Policy," this outstanding doc‘nent of creative llarxisn-heninism,
made most important generalizations and drew conclusions with respect to
fundamental problem of the international situation, the party's economic and
social policy and an inrovensnt in the political systa of the Soviet society,
party building and ideological education at the current stage. This is a pro-
gram document which is a major I contribution to the theory and practice of
scientific com-unism.

Expressing the will of the party and the entire people, the congress wholly
and fully approved the Leninist course and practical activity of the CPSU
Central Cousittee and its report and proposed that all party organizations

be guided by the propositions and tasks it put forward. Having confirmed the
Main Directions of the USSR's Economic and Social Developnent in 1981-1985 and
the Period Through 1990, the congress emphasized that the inleuntation of
this program is a most important economico-political task.

The congress made an in-depth analysis of the results of economic building in
the 1970's and the initial economic basis by reliance on which it is necessary
to determine the key problem and bottlenecks and tackle new large-scale

tasks of the development of social production and a rise in the people's well-
being. Our country advanced appreciably in the last decade in all directions
of the creation of coununism's material-technical base. The production forces
reached a qualitatively new level. fixed production capital more than doubled
and there was an acceleration of the progress of science and technology. The
policy of an increase in the efficiency of the econony was pursued consistent-
ly, and social labor productivity increased by a factor of almost 1.5. Na-
tional incone used for consumption and accumulation-die most amt-y indicator
of economic growth--increased 55 percent. ‘lhe buildup of the country's in-
dustrial night continued. Industrial production increased by a factor of

1.8. A considerable growth in the production of the most inortant products
was achieved, and the proportion of progressive types thereof increased.

The following data. for example, eloquently attest the dimensions of our coun-
try's economic growth: almst 5 billion tons of oil (with gas condensate)

were produced in the last decade. which was considerably more than in the en-
tire preceding 100 years of the development of the national oil industry.

National economic tasks of significance for the development of the economy over
the long term are being tackled successfully. The natural resources of
western Siberia are being developed at an accelerated pace, the laykal-Amur
Main Railroad is being installed and territorial-production complexes in the
European part of the country, the Urals, Bast Siberia, the Far East and in
Kazakhstan and Tajikistan are being formed. Large-scale measures are being
implemented to strengthen agriculture's material-technical base. A large
amount of capital construction has been performed. More than BL] trillion of
capital investments were channeled into the development of the national econ-
omy in the last decade. which was almost twice as much as the resources

. (.0.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
assimilated in the previous decade. Approximately 3,200 major state industrial
enterprises were co-issioned.

The dynamic developmnt of social production made it possible in the 1970's to
implement a wide-ranging program of a rise in the Soviet people's well-being.
Real income per capita increased 66 percent, and payments and allowances

from the social consuwtion fmds almat twofold. The consumption of food pro-
ducts and families' provision with cultural-everyday durablea increased marked-
ly. Apartment houses with a total area of 1,075,000,000 square meters were
built and 107 million Soviet people inrovsd their housing conditions in this

period. Health care, culture, trade and consmr services were further de-
veloped.

As Comrade l..I. Brezhnev observed at the congress, the sociopolitical meaning
of these results is that the entire system of social reLations and the social-
ist way of life continued to improve and our motherland became stronger and
wealthier on the basis of the steady upsurge of the economy, which convincing-
ly corroborates the correctness of the party's economic strategy.

The successes scored are the result of the creative selfless labor of tens of
millions of people, the active work of the party, soviet, trade union and
Konsomol organizations and the extensive scale of socialist cowetition. The
CPSU Central Conittee and the Soviet Government evaluated highly the labor
contribution of the foremost collectives and production innovators. The com-
petition winners were awarded USSR orders and medals and CPS!) Central Co-Iit-
tee, USSR Council of Ministers, AUCCTU and Konomol Central Com-ittee chal-
lenge red banners.

Wile noting the achieveunts of the country's economic and social develop-
ments at their worth the CPS!) Central (Jo-ittee also sees distinctly the short-
comings and msolved questions. The period that has elapsed was not easy. Cer-
tain difficulties in economic development were caused by unfavorable weather
conditions. There is an appreciable amount of unfinished work in the accomp-
lishment of the tasks of an increase in production efficiency and won: quality.
The scheduled labor productivity growth was not achieved and the dispersal

of capital investment has not been overcome. The unsatisfactory operation of
transport also caused many couplications.

Concentrating attention on the unsolved problem and the removal of short-
comings in economic building are an indispensable condition and important pro-
requisite of further progress and the more efficient use of the production
potential that has been created in the country. Therefore while propagandiz-
ing the successes in the development of the economy it is essential to mobilize
the working people for struggle against gaps in work, reveal the presence of
reserves on the basis of concrete erasples and facts and stimulate their active
use. It is necessary to explain extensively and cosprehsnsibly the party's
economic policy and actively assist the party organizations and labor col-
lm-tives in translating it into the channel ,.of practical deeds.

- ’01
FOR OFﬂClAl. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II

As a most important component of the theory and practice of col—mist build-
ing the ‘party's econonic policy and strategy proceeds from Marxist-Leninist
teaching and the objective regularities of social development and expresses
the Soviet people's fundamental interests. It incorporates the advancsnnt
of long-item, fundamental goals of an econonic and social nature and deter-in-
ation of the ways and means of achieving then with regard for the singulari-
ties of _the specific historical period.

The singularities of the current period amount prinarily to the fact that under
the conditions of developed socialisa the economy is characterized increasing-
ly by the unity of the national economic comlex, which ei>races all compo-
nents of production and consuqation. The economy has assumed huge dimensions,
and cooperation and intersectorial and intrasectorial econonic relations have
expanded. The country's unified power system, gas-supply and transportation

systems and very big territorial-production couplers have been created and
continue to develop.

Appreciable changes in the location of the production forces and the increas-
ingly extensive involvement in national economic turnover of the natural and
raw naterial resources of the comtry's eastern and northern regions, where
the bulk of all the prospected coal, oil and gas reserves, a considerable-
quantity of ferrous and nonferrous metal ores and other minerals are con-
centrated, are also a characteristic feature of the current stage. Major
outlays on the creation of extractive capacity, transport, cosmunicavions and
the corresponding infrastructure are required for the development of these
regions.

The impact of the scientific-technical revolution on the development of the
economy has increased sharply and become more profound, and scisnce's ties
to production have been strengthened. The technical level of the producer
goods is rising. highly efficient materials are being created and automated
control systems are being introduced increasingly extensively.

The significance of the accelerated replacement of fixed production capital is
growing. Many of the large-scale enterprises installed in the first 5-year
plans require fundamental modernization. Serious efforts are needed in this
area in order for us not to lag behind the world level.

Uhereas earlier extensive factors played a significant part in the creation of
production potential, they have now been largely exhamted. This news that
it is necessary to provide for the continued growth of national income thanks
to increased social production efficiency. This more profitable, but at the
same till: lore complex path requires a considerable reorganization not only
of management and operational nethods but also of the thinking of our per-
sonnel.

Nor can we fail to take account of such a circunstance as the constant in-
crease in the national economic value of raw asterial and fuel-energy resources.
The country's need for raw materials is growing continuously, but their extrat-
tion is becoming increasingly costly. Expenditure on environmental protection
is also increasing sharply.

.l.2..

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The ecommy has to be developed dynamically and steadily under the conditions
of exacerbation of the problem of labor resources. The rate of growth of the
population of able-bodied age will decline considerably in the llth Five-Year
Plan. This conditions the need for no less than 85-90 percent of the national
income increase to be obtained thanks to increased social labor productivity.

Such a factor as the constant expansion of foreign economic relations and the
development and intensification of socialist economic integration with the

cm comtries is also very imrtmt. The significance of the cowetitive-
ness of the domatic product and the high efficiency of economic and scientific-
technical cooperation increases sharply mder these conditions.

The said singularities of the present stage of the economy's development will

largely determine not only the social production growth rate in the llth Five-
Year Plan but also the nature of the national economic tasks and the ways and

means of tackling then.

A tremendous contribution to the development of economic policy at the stage
of mature socialism was made by the 26th CPSU Congress. It acquired concen-
trated expression in the wording of the min task of the llth Five-Year Plan,
which "is to secure the further growth of Soviet people's well-being on the
basis of the steady, ongoing develop-ant of the national economy, the acceler-
ation of scientific-technical progress and the economy's transfer to an inten-
sive path of development, the more rational use of the country's production
potential, the utmost economies in all resources and an improvement in work
quality.”*

The congress stressed the continuity of the party's economic strategy and its
orientation toward a rise in the people's well-being, the dependence of the
solution of social questions on the efficiency and quality of work and the
need for the greatest results from the use of all that our country possesses.
With regard for the singularities of the l9m's economic policy provides for
a further improvement in the proportions in the developmt of the national
economy and structural changes geared to the accowlishment of the main task.
that do these consist of?

First, in the national income the proportion of the consumption fund will in-
crease from 75.3 percent in 19” to 77.3 percent in 1985. This will increase
the resources of consulption considerably.

Second, an appreciable change in the proportions of industrial development is
scheduled. As distinct from the 10th Five-Year Plan. the preferential growth
of the manufacture of consumer item (group "3") compared with producer goods

(group "A") is envisaged. The heavy industry sectors will be enlisted more
extensively in the manufacnureof consumer goods.

*"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 139.

~43

ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (INLY

Third, the growth rate of capital investments in 1981-1985 will decline some-
what and he for the first time in the practice of our economics been deter-
mined at a level (12-15 percent) lower than the national income growth rate.
This Igans that the plan contains tough demands on the efficiency of the use
of capital investments.

Fourth,- the preferential growth of national economic end results compared with
the increase in material and labor expenditure is envisaged in the 11th Five-
Year Plan. Thanks to the more rational use of resources, it is planned to

have saved 160-170 million tons of standard fuel, tens of millions of tons of

metal and a considerable quantity of other materials in 1985 compared with
1980. '

The said structural singularities have a clearly expressed orientation prim-
arily toward the successful accowlishment of social tasks and an increase in
every possible way in social production efficiency. here lies their economic
and political importance.

The Main Directions envisage for the 11th Five-Year Plan the ongoing develop-
ment of all sectors of the economy. The growth rate of the economy will in-
crease cowared with the 10th Five-Year Plan. It is planned that industrial
production will increase 26-28 percent compared with 24 percent. The absolute
increase in the national income and nterial production will increase also.

It is planned to inlement a wide-ranging system of measures to enhance the
people's material and cultural living standard. Real income per capita will
increase 16-18 percent. A routine increase in the minim wage, a’further
improvement in housing conditions, the development of the health service,
public education, culture. trade and consumer services and other social mea-
sures are scheduled.

An inortant element of the party's economic policy is the particular emphasis
on the 'decisive areas of economic building. As Comrade 1.1. Brezhnev empha-
sized at the congress, an unconditional prerequisite of the accomplishment of
all national economic tasks-both production and socia1--is the development
of heavy industry. It has been set large-scale and complex tasks. to whose
solution it is necessary to pay constant attention. This applies primarily
to the development of the fuel-energy complex and dependable coverage of the
country's increasing fuel and energy requirements. The 11th Five-Year Plan
will be the first stage of realization of the energy program being drawn up
on the initiative of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev. It is planned to have increased
power generation to l.55-l.6 billion kilowatt-hours in 1985 and the production
of oil. (with gas condensate) t0620-665 millicm tons. gas to 600-650 billion
cubic meters and coal to 770-800 million tons. The adduced figures testify
that our country, possessing the world's biggest fuel-energy complex, is not
reducing its efforts in this most imortant area of economic development.

'lhc problem of an improvement in the structure of the fuel-energy balance by
way of a reduction therein in the proportion of oil and petrolem products

and their replacement with gas and coal is becoming increasingly urgent.
This is important because in recent 5-year plans the quantity of oil and

- M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
petroleum products used as fuel has reached considerable magnitudes. But
oil is, as is known, a most valuable rm: material for the chemical industry,
and reserves thereof are limited and finite and need to be used more ration-

ally. Such a policy was determined by the Main Directions which were adopted
by the congress.

In this connection the increase in power generation will be secured mainly
thanks to nuclear fuel and hydropower and the use of coal in the eastern re-
gions of the country. For this it is necessary to introduce at the ABS 24-25
million kilowatts of new capacity and build large-scale CBS in Siberia, Cen-
tral Asia and the Par East and also large-scale heat and electric power plants
on the basis of cheap strip-mined coal.

Great national economic significance is attached to the creation of the materb
ial-technical base for ensuring the opti-nm level of oil production in the
country guaranteed for the distant long term. This is a very important aspect
of technical policy. The developmt of the oil industry is now switching to

.1 more coqlex stage, when the bulk of oil production is shifting to the eastern
and northern regions, mining and geological production conditions are becoming
more coaplicated and the old deposits which dozens of years ago were the pride
of the oil industry are being worked out. It will be necessary in the llth
Five-Year Plan to activate a number of new wells of practically equal capacity
to that which the country possesses at the present time. Oil will be a central
problem in the foreseeable future. Everything connected with its solution is

s most important matter for the ministries and departments and party coalit-
tees. Intensive work has to he done on increasing oil production primarily

in Hestern Siberia, maintaining the level of production that has been achieved
in the oil regions and accelerating the development of the oil and gas re-
sources of the sea and ocean shelf zones.

As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev ewhasized at the congress, the rapid increase in

the production of Siberian gas is a task of paramount economic and political
importance. The program of the accelerated development of the gas industry must
be a most important cowonent of the llth and 12th five-year plans. It is
essential to provide for a big increase in gas production and commission tens

of thousands of kilometers of gas Iains, including the building of several

gas mains from western Siberia to the central and western regions of the coun—
try in the current 5-year plan. This is the first time that we have had to
tackle tasks of such a scale.

Major potential for the replenishment of fuel resources is the accelerated
development of strip mining for coal, which is particularly inportant con-
sldering its economical nature and the availability in our country of large
reserves suitable for mining by this method. The prime costs of coal are four-
five times lower at the collieries than in the mines. For this reason it is
planned to increase strip mining considerably in the Kartsko-Achinsk, Ekibastuz,
Kuznetsk and Yuzho-Yakutsk basins.

Together with the buildup of the production of the traditional types of energy
resources it is essential to increase the attention paid to the development
of problems connected with the use of renewable energy sources, including solar,

~65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

geothermal and others. Work in the sphere of synfuels needs to be put on a
practical footing, and the creation of “perinatal industrial plants based
on Kansi'lw-Achinsk coal should be created.

The CPSU has always attached tremendous significance to the development of
metallurgy. And in the 11th Five-Year Plan also great attention will be paid
to catering for the national economy's ferrous and nonferrom metal require-

stocks accumulated in the country, that is, Intel edodied in producer goods
and consumer items which, as it is used. is reincorporated in turnover in the
form of secondary resources. The level of Intel sulting which has been
achieved in the USSR provides for a rapid increase in metal stocks--they

have practically doubled in the last 10 years. This means that the economy's
metal product requiremnts can be satisfied with comparatively mll increases
in the total amomt of metal smelting thanks to a considerable increase in
its quality and more rational use. rural quality and strength also largely
determine the volume of its consumption and the technical level of machinery,
instruments and products.

In accordance with the directives of the 26th CPSU Congress, it is intended in
the 11th Five-Year Plan to increase the manufacture of the main types of
progressive metal products by a factor of 1.5-2 and ensure the more rational
expenditure thereof in the metal-conning sectors, particularly in engineer-
ing. Inplementation of these measures will enable us to save 14-15 million
tons of ferrous metal in 1985 compared with 1980, having expended half as much
in the way of capital investments than for the corresponding increase in the
production of. metal products.

Scientific-technical progress and production intensification are inconceivable
without developed and progressive engineering. The CPS!) Central Couittee Re-
port to the 26th party congress set large—scale tasks for this sector, which
is called on to cater for the retooling of the ecmomy, manufacture highly
productive equipment and machinery system and raise equipment's reliability
and working life. Acceleration of the production of new machinery, equipment
and instrument designs making it possible to use efficient and energy- and
material—saving technology and also production mechanization and automation
means on a broad scale requires particular attention. In the current 5-year
plan we have to begin a considerable reorganization of engineering in connec-
tion with the implementation of the following progran put forward by the
congress: food, fuel-energy and consumer goods' production.

A big role in the development of the country's economy belongs to chemical
industry. Chemistry today means fertilizer, new materials with predetermined
properties, synthetic fibers, fuel and lubricants and Inch else. A big new
step forward will be taken in the 11th Five-Year Plan in the further chemi—
calization of the economy and the use of chemical products and chemical engi-
neering in all its sectors. Considerable work needs to be done to increase
the production of mineral fertilisers to 150-155 million tons (in standard
units) and considerably expand the production of synthetic fibers and polymer
and other materials for their use in engineering, construction and light
industry.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Along the tasks for the coming decade an iqortant place is occupied by
expansion of consumer goods' production. Para-amt significance is attached
to this problen for an upsurge of the people's well-being. Together with the
further development-of light and food industry the Hain Directions also deter-
mined upgraded quota for the production of cultural-everyday and household
comodities for other sectors also. Special attention should be paid to an

increase in the quality and consumer properties and the renewed selection of
consumer goods.

These priority direction of industrial developunt are an integral part of
the party's econosdc stratec and should occupy a central place in the work
of the ministries and departments and party, soviet and magenent authorities.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnel expressed confidence in his closing speech at the 26th
CPSU Congress that all opportunities would be realised in order for the sched-
led plans of economic development not only to be fulfilled but also overful-
filled. This is very important for Soviet people's increased well-being de-
pends directly on the growth rate of naterial and national income. And this
rate must be hidzer than the level at Ihich the ilplementation of new social
measures is possible. For this reason the llth Five-Year Plan quotas for

the manufacture of products, increased production efficiency and labor pro-
ductivity growth should be regarded as the minim of what has to be done,
and sectors, enterprises, construction sites and all working people should be
oriented toward the quest for resources for their overfulfillmsnt.

A big role in the accomplishment of this nost ilportent task belongs to the
workers of the ideological front. Propaganda and political work is called on
to aim for the utnost develop-eat of socialist competition, stimulate the
workers' and specialists' display of initiative and a creative approach to a
solution of production questions, nobilize the labor collectives for the strug-
gle for an increase in output with the least expenditure and inculcate a high
sense of responsibility for the assigned work. It is necessary to explain
extensively and conprehensively that material and spiritual values are cre-
ated by labor, that it alone is the source of the mltiplicstion of national
wealth and that high labor productivity and quality are a decisive condition
of the successful realization of the social progran outlined by the 26th CPSU

Congress.
III

The pivot of the party's econosic strategy is the transition to a predominant-
ly intensive path of social production development. "The intensification of
the economy and its increased efficiency, to transpose this formula into the
language of practical deeds," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized, "consist prim-
arily in ensuring that the results of production grow more rapidly than ex-
penditure thereon and that it be possible to achieve more while involving com—
paratively fewer resources in production."*

*"Hsterial of the 26th CPSU Congress,“ p 100.

.47.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ON! Y

Intensification of the economy is a mltifaceted problem incorporating the
concentration of production and a reduction in its cycle, an increase in out-
put nanufacture per unit of production capital, a rise in the technical level
and dependability of the products, their reduced labor-intensiveness and prise
costs, the fuller, comprehensive use of national economic resources and other
factors. It presupposes the fullest possible use of the econonic potential
that has been created in the- country and the rational expenditure of all that
the national econow possesses and produces.

"hat is the essence of the party's economic policy in the sphere of increased
production efficiency? what distinguishes the 11th Five-Year Plan in this

respect?

The ewhasis is put primarily on the increased role of qualitative factors in
an upsurge in the economy. It is planned to obtain over 90 percent of the
output increase in industry thanks to increased labor productivity, which is
considerably more than in the 10th Five-Year Plan; and more than 90 percent
of the increased volume of construction and installation in construction.

Questions connected with an increase in production efficiency will be tackled
comprehensively. The nain attention is being paid not to the development of
individual measures but to a system thereof. A policy has been adopted of
the qualitative reorganisation of the material-technical base, liquidation of
the appreciable differences in the provision of the sectors with equipment
and the extensive introductim of technology saving and facilitating mn's
labor.

Heasures with respect .u increased production efficiency affect all sectors
and all levels of the economy and estrace all the ingredients of efficiency.

Under the conditions where tremendous economic potential has been created

in the country ever increasing significance should be attached to the
efficient use of fixed production capital, which constitutes the lost important
part of national wealth. Its value has risen to more than [11.1 trillion, and
new capital commissioned 'in the last 10 years accounts for slmst two-thirds

of this amount, furthermore. It consists of nodern enterprises and capacity
for the production of products neeting present-day requirements.

“any of the country's enterprises have already acculmlated positive exper-
ience of work on the use of equipment, machinery and mechanism. mese include
the Moscow Auto Plant imeni Likhachev, the Nizhnekamk Petrochemical Works,
the Zapadno-Sibirskiy Foundry, the Mine ineni Kostenko in Kazakhstan, the
Ivanov Worsted Cloth Works and other enterprises. It is mortant to strive
for the naximum yield from each machine tool, unit and nachine. And the
achievements of the foremost collectives and production innovators, who are
providing an object lesson of how equipment should be mastered and what large-
scale resources may be put to the service of the national economy, should be
the criterion here. Thus in the coal industry 1,000-tonner brigade leaders
are striving for almost twice as much coal per day per mechanized complex than
in the sector as a whole. The spinner V.Ye. Lokteva and the weaver NJ.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Grigor'yeva fulfilled personal quotas of the first year of the 11th Five-Year
Plan in 3-1/2 months. They were cordially congratulated on this splendid
achievement by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev. There are si-ilar nodels of work in
every sector and every republic, kray and oblast. And they must be adopted
more actively.

This is all the more necessary in that there has been a decline in the output-
capital ratio in many sectors of industry and in associations and at enter-
prises recently. This entails big losses inasmuch as every kopeck of the re-
turn on capital on a countrywide scale constitutes several billion rubles of
industrial output annually. Of course. factors of an objective nature exert
a certain influence on theoutput-capital ratio. Mineral deposits which are
difficult of access and more conplex in a Inning-geological respect have to
be developed in the extractive sectors of industry. The product's capital-
intensivenesa is increasing in the processing sectors in connection with the
rise in the technical level and complexity oftheproducts. The proportion
of the part of fixed capital intended for the creation of normal work condi-
tions on the job is increasing.

At the same time full use is not yet being made of available production capital
at many enterprises, and much equipment idle time is permitted as a result of
a variety of organizational-technical maladjustments. This applies to the
enterprises of engineering, ferrous metallurgy, chemical and pulp and paper
industry and other sectors. The shift-work coefficient is still low.

Great attention will be paid in the 11th Five-Year Plan to a streamlining of
the structure of production capital. The level of the output-capital ratio
depends on the share therein of the active part--the machinery and equipment
by means of which the product is created. However, the relative significance
of this part of capital in industry is not growing quickly enough. Buildings
and installations, which are frequently made unduly large and costly, account
for a considerable proportion.

The problem of an improvement in the use of fixed capital should be tackled
along a broad front encompassing all components of production--from the place
of work through the ministry. Specificityand efficiency and an ability to
strive consistently for an increaseinthe return on capital in each area of
work are essential here.

The acceleration of the economy's transition to the path of intensive develop-
ment is daternined at the present time toan increasingly great extent by
scientific-technical progress and the practical use of its achievements.

In the report to the 26th party congress Comrade L.I. Brezhnev put forward the
task of bringing all sectors of the economy to the foremost boundaries of
science and technology. A systen of measures with respect to the most inport-
ant areas is envisaged to this end in the 11th Five-Year Plan:

the creation and introduction of types of equipment and technology which pro-
vide for the more rapid growth of labor productivity and an appreciable saving
of financial and material resources;

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an acceleration of the retooling of sectors of the economy on the basis of the
modernization of production capital and the introduction of progressive tech-
nology, highly productive equipment and modern forms of prodution organization;

a considerable increase in the level of the mechanization and automation of
production processes. particularly with difficult work conditions, and smelli-
ary and handling operations and a decisive reduction in the proportion of work-
ers employed in manual labor; and

an increase in the proportion of products of the top quality category in the
overall volume of output, the withdrual of obsolete products from production
and a 1.5-2-fold acceleration of the rate of replacemt of manufactured
machinery and equipment.

Considerable scientific process stock has been created and 160 goal-oriented
scientific-technical programs have been drawn up with respect to a mmber of
these areas. It is essential to pay constant attention to their practical
implementation. increase the comprehensive nature of the solution of problems
and link more fully the targets of the program with other sections of the
national economic plans, primarily in the sphere of capital investments end
production.

The decisive and most pressing area now is the introduction of scientific-
technical achievements. The 26th CPSU Congress criticized the impermissible
slowness in the assimilation of promising developments in the sphere of the
continuous pouring of steel and powder metallurgy, mique power lines and
high-strength rayon. In the 10th Five-Year Plan the proportion of the continu-
ous pouring of steel increased only from 7 to 11 percent of the total amount
of smelted steel, whereas in a nuli>er of other countries it constitutes 60-
45 percent. And this is a national invention. And it must be introduced
extensively in the next few years. The production of ferrocart increased in
the same period 28 percent. which also cannot be deemed sufficient. Con-
sidering the progressive nature of powder metallurgy, it is planned to triple
the production of metallic powder in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

Industry Is confronted with many urgent questions also. Thus the equipment
specimens for mining industry, which have been created on a par with world
achievements, have been manufactured only in individual aodels, and their

mass production has not yet been organised. But the need for such equipment is
growing rapidly in connection with the increased extraction of hard minerals.
He cannot get by here without qualitatively new equipment.

11w acceleration of scientific-technical progress under current conditions is
inconceivable without the integration of science and production, which pre-
supposes the close linkage-econonically and organizationally-oof scientific
research and planning-design work with production. line science-production
associations. in which the entire cycle of operations-«from scientific search
through manufacture of the new productnis organized rationally, are an ef-
fcctive means of such integration. There are as of the present more than 190
science-production associations in industry. Many of then. including the
"Tulachemt" and "Plastpolimer" associations (Leningrad), Central Scientific

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Research Institute of Engineering Technology and others, have scored consider-
able successes in their activity. The Institute imeni Ye.0. Paton (the Uk-

raine) is setting a good example of the cod>ination of science and production.
This experience should be disseminated universally.

The 26th CPSU Congress set the task of a further enhancement of the role of
the USSR Academy of Sciences and an improvemt in the organization of the
entire system of scientific research in the country. In this connection the
party authorities should display greater and more profound interest in the
activity of the scientific research institutes, design bureaus and planning
organizations, contribute to the creation of a creative atmosphere in the col-
lectives, influence an increase in their work efficiency more actively and
strive to ensure that together with the development of theoretical problems

due attention be paid to the applied directions and the solution of key na-
tional economic questions.

An iwortant task of science and technology is an increase in the quality and
reliability of the products and their economical nature and technical level.
Much has already been done in this sphere. The proportion of products of the
top quality category in overall output tripled approximately in the last 5
years. Positive experience of this work has been accumulated by the foremost
collectives of Moscow, Leningrad, L'vovskaya Oblast, Saratov, Dnepropetrovsk
and Sverdlovak. At the same time an improvement in product quality in the
broad sense of the word is becoming an increasingly urgent question. losses
from shoddy work in production are still great, certain products do not conform
to the world standard andthere are serious cowlaints about the quality of a
number of consumer goods. It is necessary to step up quality control in earnest
at all levels of production amdinculcate in every working person a sense of
personal responsibility for the honor of the trade nrk.

Official standards are the nonnative basis of planning and management in the
sphere of product quality. It is essential to strictly monitor fulfillment
of their requirements in production. In order for the system of standardi-
zation to correspond more fully to the party's strategic line--an increase in
production efficiency—standards must be reviewed in good time and fully re-
flect not only the technical level and consumer properties of a product but
also the efficiency of its use in the national economy. They should be in-
vested with more progressive requirements of an economic nature, primarily
those such as specific use of fuel, energy and raw Interials, material con-
sumption and labor expenditure.

The economy's transition to the tracks of intensive development and the reali-
zation of economic goals largely depend on the comrehensive, rational use of
labor, raw material and other resources. Our country possesses a rich mineral-
raw material base, as is known. The USSR economy is developing on the basis
of its own resources in terms of practically all type of natural raw mterial
and fuel, which ensures the country's economic independence and provides con-
siderable advantages, which are manifested particularly noticeably against

the backgromd of the energy and raw material crisis in the capitalist coun-
tries and the abrupt change in conditions on the world market in the direction
of an increase in the value of these connodities and the demnd for them.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL l'SE ONLY

At the same time the availability in the USSR of a rich raw material base does
not in the least lessen the urgency of the problem of the careful expenditure
of natural resources. "He are particularly responsible for their correct,
zealous use," Comrade I..I. Brezhnev erphasized, "to not only the present but
also future generations. And no one has the right to forget this."*

It is essential to take fully into account the particular features of the
accomplishment of this task at the current stage of the Soviet society's
development. The point being that in connection with the increased raw material
requirement and capital-intensiveness of extractive industry the state has to
spend increasingly large resources on its development. It is also necessary

to berr in mind that the cost of the raw materials and intermediate products
constitutes roughly two-thirds of all expenditure on the production of pro-
ducts in industry as a whole. This is a very big ingredient of the economy's
efficiency. and the closest attention of the party and management authorities
and scientific and planning organizations Inst be focused on it.

The zealous use of natural resources presupposes as a'condition thereof an
increase in the extent of the extraction of minerals from the interior and a
reduction in their losses during extraction, transportation and storage. The
lore extensive introduction of modern methods and technical means of an in-
crease in pools' oil yield and progressive methods of the mining of coal,
nonferrous metal ores and other minerals is making it possible to involve ad-
ditional raw material resources in the economic turnover.

An efficient direction is the comprehensive, heavy processing of raw material,
which is particularly inortant for nonferrous and ferrous metallurgy. oil,
gas. petroleum-refining, chemical and wood-processing industry and other sec-
tors. There are both certain achievements and unutilized potential here.

we may cite as a positive examle the Orenburg gas couplex, where more than

1 million tons of sulfur and a large amount of helium is extracted from na-
tural gas annually. 'lhe nonferrous metallurgy enterprises obtain many valuable
elements as byproducts. '

At the same time the degree of extraction of useful components from many types
of mineral raw material is still insufficient. Petroleum-refining technology
er; also the structure of the petroleum products obtained are in need of
further improvement. World and national experience shows that it is possible
to obtain in cost terms far more output than at present thanks to heavier pe-
troleum refining.

An improvement in the use of secondary raw material and energy resources con-
stitutes an appreciable reserve. work is being performed in this direction.
hare than 60 million tons of steel and a considerable amount of nonferrous me-
tals. paper, cardboard and other products are produced from secondary resources.
The utilization of power and heat in standard fuel equivalent constitutes
several tens of millions of tons. Economically this is very profitable

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 61.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
inasnuch as the necessary expenditure is several times lower than for a cor-
responding increase in the extraction of primary raw material and fuel. But
insufficient use is as yet being ads in the national economy of any types
of secondary resources. Approximately only 1.0 percent of aobile secondary
heat and power resources and approximately one-fourth of waste paper are
couissioned. Plastics, industrial rubber products and others are utilized
in negligible quantities.

For the purpose of a fundamental improvement in the use of secondary resources
the plan for 1981 includes a special section and determines quotas for the
ministries and departments. A decree has been adopted on an ilprovement in
the system of the procurement and processing of ferrous metal scrap. The
task is to provide for the implementation'o’f the scheduled measures, increase
the attention to thesequestions on the part of the party, soviet and manage-
ment authorities and disseminate more extensively the work experience of the
party organizations and collectives of the Hayritogurak Metallurgical Dorks,
the Volkhoz Aluminum Plant and the Novopolotsk "Polimir" Association, which

has been approved by the CPS" Central Connittee, on the use of secondary energy
resources.

The efficiency of the economy is inseparably connected with a reduction in
output's smterial consumption. 1his constitutes a principal area of work on
the rational use of and economies in materials. Bach percentage reduction
in material outlays on a countrywide scale enables us to obtain additionally
several billion rubles of national income. This is an impressive figure.

And we have considerable potential here. Certain types of manufactured equip-
ment, machinery, mechanism and other products do not yet correspond to
modern requirements in specific mterial consumption. For this reason sec-
tors, design and planning organizations and enterprises are set the task of
an improvement in such parameters of manufactured output as weight and re-
liability. No less ilportance is attached to the accelerated introduction of
low-waste technology and a reduction in the expenditure of materials in the
production of output.

It is also necessary to strictly pursue an energy-saving policy. This means
the efficient use of prospected fuel reserves, a reduction in all kinds of
energy losses. the introduction of more economical equipment and energy-saving
technology, the increased heat-resistance of buildings and installations, the
utmost economies in the expenditure of fuel and energy and the undeviating
observance of discipline in their consmption.

The consistent implementation of the practice of economies in all components
of the economy is now being put forward at the level of an all-state task.

In accordance with the instructions of the 26th CPSU Congress. upgraded quotas
are being determined for the llth Five-Year Plan for sectors and enterprises
(or economies in fuel. energy. mtal and other materials in the national economy.
Proceeding from this, it is necessary to ensure the economical and rational
use of all types of mterial resources. It is necessary to raise to a higher
level all work connected with the planning and norming of the consumption of
resources and the material stimulation of economies therein and to make more
extensive use of the progressive experience available in our country and in
other socialist comunity countries.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Assistance in the accomplishment of this task can and must be rendered by

the press, television and radio. It is necessary to step up mass-political
and educational vork and convey the tremendous national economic significance
of economies in resources to all working people.

IV

A most important question of the party's economic policy is the increased
efficiency of capital investments and the accelerated construction of produc-
tion and social facilities. It is difficult to exaggerate the role of capital
construction in the development of the national economy. The bulk of the in-
crease in industrial output is secured and hitherto unutilized resources are
involved in the national ernnomic turnover thanks to the commissioning of new
enterprises, production facilities and shops. No less important is the quali-
tative aspect. New capacity means realization of the latest achievements of
science and technology, progressive techniques. a more refined product and
high labor productivity. A considerable proportion of the country's national
income is channeled into capital construction.

A big and complex construction program has to be implemented in the 11th Five-
Year Plan. ”Its characteristic feature." Comrade L.I. Brezhnev pointed out

at the 26th CPSU Congress, "is the utmost concentration of forces on the
speediest completion and startup of the enterprises which are capable of se-
curing the biggest increase in output and opening up bottlenecks. He have
already embarked on this course, and it must be followed unswervingly."*

The urgency of an increase in the efficiency of capital investments is caused
by a number of factors. Primarily the huge and constantly growing scale of
construction. The country is not only installing individual enterprises but
also creating major territorial-production complexes. The cost of the con-
struction projects is put at billions of rubles. In the last 10 years capital
investments in the development of the economy increased by a factor of almost
1.7 and constituted more than 3133 billion in 1980. Having achieved such
great volumes of capital investment and having accomplished the task quanti-
tatively, it is now necessary to turn our main attention to the qualitative
aspect of construction.

The country has real opportunities for an improvement in construction. More
than 570,000 basic construction machines and mechanisms are in use at the
construction sites. Over 40 percent of all construction and installation is
effected from large assembled components. The country possesses splendid
construction worker personnel. The planned nature of the socialist economy
enables us to channel resources where they will have the biggest effect.

At the same time the joint purposeful efforts of the constructive workers,
dosigners, clients, planning and supply authorities and party and soviet
organizations are needed for tackling the tasks of an improvement in con-
struction. The main efforts should be concentrated in the most important areas
of an increase in construction efficiency. These include primarily an improve-
ment in the structure of capital investments thanks to:

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 39.

54

INDR‘OFFICJAI.IEHE(NNLY
priority being given in the allocation of money and resources to the accomp-
lishment of the most important econoaic. scientific-technical and social
tasks determining the intensification of the national economy and the popu-
lation's increased living standard;

the preferential channeling of capital investments into the retooling and
modernization of operating enterprises inasmuch as expenditure for this pur-
pose is recouped three timss more quickly on average than for new construction;

an increase in the proportion of capital investments for the creation of the

active part of production capital (equipment, machinery. mechanisms) and its
replacement on the most modern scientific-technical basis; and

a decisive reduction in all kinds of excesses in construction, particularly
those connected with so-called embellishment and the installation of costly
facilities for which there is no great need, and the surmounting of localistic
and departmental trends inconstruction.

It is also important to strive for a halt to the practice of the dispersal

of capital investments around numerous projects. He cannot be reconciled
with the fact that the number of construction projects is growing inordinately
and that the amount of incomplete construction is increasing. It is essen-
tial that there be a change of attitude toward this question on the part of
Our personnel, which must display particular concern for the speediest com-
pletion of the projects under construction.

The efficiency of capital investments is determined to a considerable extent
by the rational location of the production forces. It is necessary when de-
ciding questions of the construction of new enterprises to take proper account
of the availability of raw material, energy and labor resources in a given
region and provide for the comprehensive use of natural resources and for
bringing energy- and material-consuming production closer to the sites of the-
extraction and processing of fuel and other minerals. '

It is essential in this connection to enhance the role of the technical-
economic substantiation of the building of new enterprises. It must take
fully and objectively into consideration all the factors determining the ef-
ficiency of outlays and comprehensively weigh end results. The principal
criterion here should be the biggest returns from the invested resources on an
economy-wide scale. It is necessary to increase attention to a streamlining
of planning-estimates work and an improvement in the expert appraisalof plans,
increase exactingness toward the planner personnel and raise their responsi-
bility for the high scientific-technical level and economical nature of the
planned decisions.

The question of the increased mobility of the construction organizations also
deserves attention. The installation of projects is frequently necessarily
linked to areas where construction capacity is available, even though this

is not always justified economically. At the same time we have experience,
in the Ministry of Power and Electrification, Ministry of Installation and
Special Construction Bork and Ministry of Construction of Petroleum and

55

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gas Industry Enterprises. for ennple. of construction forces prmtly re—
locating wherever this is necessary. This practice should be applied in the
general; construction ministries also. It is also inortant to closely link
the plans of capital invest-ants and contractual work both sectorially and
territorially. .

Big costs are connected with the state of coalinution of the construction
industny. There are several tens of thousands of enterprises and works of
this profile in the country belonging to many ministries and depart-ants. The
majority of the plants is snall and unprofitable. The centralization of the
construction industry and consolidation of the enterprises is essential.

All measures for an inprovenent in capital construction should be geared to
the end results—the on-schedule emissioning of production capacity. housing
and other projects and the creation of a firm base for the further buildup

of the country's econonic potential. This is a nos: important task not only
of economic but also party-political work. It nust be constantly at the cen-
ter of the ideological personnel's and nose infatuation nedia's attention.

V

It was enphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress that the solution of the problems
confronting us and the use of the potential which we possess largely depend on
the level of leadership of the national economy and the level of planning and
managenent.

Both centrally and locally it is essential to enhance the organizational and
nobilizing role of the plan. This means prilarily a strengthening of plan and
contractual discipline, an improvement in the degree of balance in the develop-
Icnt of production. the nexim use of intrinsic resources and the utnost de-
velop-ant of the working people‘s initiative. The plan out beans: in prac-
tice the law of the production life of every enterprise and construction proj-
ect. Yet there are still many enterprises and construction sites which are
failing to-zcope with the plan quotas.

In accordance with the congress' instruction, it is necessary to pursue per-
sistently the policy of executive personnel's increased personal responsibi-
lity for the organization of production and its rhythnic nature and the un-
conditional fulfillment of the plans in both quantitative and qualitative
indicators. Questions of discipline and responsibility nust constantly be at
the center of the party authorities' attention. Ideological and educational
work nust point in the direction of the workers' inpeccable perfornance effi-
ciency being organically conbined with creative initiative and enterprise and
the captains of production heading the covenant for the successful accomplish-
ment of the task set by the congress: "the econony oust be economical".

The increased scale of production and the expansion of econonic relations
urgently demand a streamlining of mega-eat at the science-production asso-
ciation level. There are more than 6,000 associations in industry. They
are responsible for 68 percent of total sold output. however, the advantages
of this progressive fora of management are as yet being used for from fully.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This applies particularly to such questions as the maneuvering of financial
and material resources, their concentration in the decisive areas, the pre-
cise interaction of subdepartnental enterprises and a uniform technical policy.

A task of great importance is the practical implementation of the measures pro-
vided for in the CPS" Central Oouittee and 0881! Council of Ministers decrees
on an inrovement in the economic mechanism. They target planning and manage-
ment at the achievement of high and national economic results, the efficient
use of production capital and material and labor resources, an intensification

of the practice of economies and the acceleration of scientific-technical prog~
ress.

The main direction in this work is an increase in the efficacy of economic
levers and stimuli, the strengthening of cost accounting and strenuous,
purposeful efforts in each place of work and in each section and at each enter-
prise and construction site aimd at a reduction in neterial and labor expen-
diture in the production of products. Cost accounting principles should per-
meate the entire economy from top to bottom. Only on this condition is it pos-
sible to secure an increase in social production efficiency.

A key position in cost accounting is occupied by questions of prime production
costs. however, attention to this indicator has diminished recently. Yet a
reduction in prime costs is a most important criterion of the appraisal of the
state of production and a source of profit and socialist accumlation Inst
beneficial to the state. A product's prime costs reflect practically every-
thing constitutingefficiency: the level of labor productivity and the saving
of raw material, intermediate products, fuel and energy and the use of capital.
he cannot fail to be disturbed by the fact that the prime costs of many types
of industrial product not only have not declined but have even increased
markedly in recent years.

Of course, there are objective factors which lead to a growth in a product's
prime costs, including complication of the conditions of the extraction of
ninerals and the increased technical level and quality of the products. But
it would be wrong to attribute everything to these. The main reason for such
a situation is that a persistent struggle is not yet being waged at the enter-
prises for a reduction in prime production costs and the variety of losses in
production and that excess is permitted in the expenditure of resources on
nonproductﬁon purposes. It is essential in this respect to display greater
strictness, weigh any measure from the viewpoint of economic calculation and
economize in matters large and small.

Implementation of the principles of cost accounting is a most important task
both of executive personnel and the broad working people's masses themselves.
The personnel's economic training is called on to play a big part in inculca-
ting a proprietorial attitude toward public property and interest in a quest
for potential for a reduction in material and labor expenditure in production.
Questions of cost accounting should occupy a central place in it and should
he studied not in general form but in relation to the specific features of
production and with regard for the singularities of each category of workers.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Questions of leadership of the economy are, as Comrade L.I. Brezhnev enha-
sized at the 26th CPSU Congress, not sinly scone-it but political, party
questions. It is necessary to constantly inrove the nethods of party control
of economic activity, increase the efficacy of organizing and political work in
the labor collectives, enlist the working people in production nanagenent nore
extensively and develop initiative and socialist competition.

It is essential to work extensively and purposefully on inlenentation of the
CPS“ Central Committee, USSR Council of Ministers, A000!!! and Konsonol Central
Committee decree "Socialist Competition for the Successful Fulfillment and
Overfulfillnent of the llth Five-Year Plan Quotas". I would like in this con-
nection to stress the need for the consolidation of the successes scored in
precongress cowetition, the further upsurge of the labor and political enthus-
iasm of the masses and its direction toward the acconplishment of the tasks
set by the 26th CPSU Congress and the successful fulfill-ant of the adopted
pledges. Questions of the efficiency and quality of work, which are closely
tied in with the tasks of every enterprise and construction project, should be
paramount in the content of socialist cospotition.

Development of the creative cooperation of the scientific research, planning,
production and construction collectives and the strengthening of the inter-
action of allied subcontractor enterprises in the acconplishnsnt of semen
tasks is also an inportant feature. Hatters should be organized such that
work on the dissemination of progressive experience not be confined merely to
study and propaganda thereof but have a practical thrust and be supported by
the appropriate organizational-technical measures and that the innovatora'
achievements become the property of the entire collective and the norn of its
work.

Competition for the successful ilplenentstion of the decisions of the 26th
party congress is spreading in the country with every passing day. hater-
prise and construction site collectives have adopted upgraded socialist
pledges and counterplans and are mobilizing their resources for the fulfil‘.-
lent and overfulfillnent of the 1981 quotas and the llth Five-Year Plan as a
whole.

In the current year it is essential to secure a considerable increase in in-
dustrial output, assimilate more than R160 billion of capital investnents,
cosuission large-scale production capacity, build approximately 109 nillion
square mters of total apartment house area and other facilities and strive
for an increase in production efficiency, an imrovenent in product quality
and an appreciable growth in labor productivity.

The country's economy has developed successfully ass whole, in the period Of
1981 which hm elapsed. The plan for industrial production has been overful-

filled and the installation of fixed'capital has increased. we

have to consolidate what has been achieved and build up even greater labor
intensity, bearing in nind that the quotes increase in the next two quarters.
‘Ihe first year of a 5-year plan is a special year: the successful fulfillment
of the quotes of this year largely determinethe basis of the upcoming period

and its results.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ideological and political education has an ilportant role in ilpleantation of
the economic policy outlined by the 26th CPSU Congress. It is called on to
raise the broad Issues to the struggle for increased production efficiency,
econolical and rational nanagenant and the acceleration of scientific-technical
progress. The ideological cadres lust constantly iaprove their work netth
and strive to ensure that its content be sore relevant and that its for-
correspond to Soviet people's current needs and requirenents.

*H.S. Gorbachev. neuter of the Politburo and secretary of the Central Co-ittee
of the CPSU: "Urgent Questions of Agrarian Policy in the Light of the Deci-
sions of the 26th CPSU Congress"

I

A principal result of the 26th CPSU Congress is further development of the
party's econonic strategy with reference to the present stage of col-mist
building. The continuity of the policy elaborated by the 26th and 25th party
congresses and in the works of Conrade L.I. Brezhnev is ensured here.

At the center of the attention of the party's economic and social policy is
Soviet nan and the fuller satisfaction of his naterial and spiritual require-
ments. Questions of an inrovanent in the people's well-being and an increase
in the production of counter goods, primarily food, have been advanced to the
forefront. The totality of these requirements also determines the place and
role of agriculture and the agrarian-industrial couple: as a whole in the
accowlishnsnt of the rain task of the llth Five-Year Plan. It is for this
reason that the further developnnt of questions of agrarian policy occupied
an inortant place both during the preparation for the 26th party congress and
at the congress itself.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report su-Iarized coqrehensively and in depth the
results of the party‘s work in the 1970's on inplenentation of the agrarian
policy and set nev tasks for the llth Five-Year Plan and the 1980's as a
whole. Practice has fully corroborated the correctness and fruitfulness of
the party's agrarian policy. Agriculture has covered a big path of develop-
neat, there has been a qualitative change in its nature and the indicators of
its intensivencss and productiveness have risen since the-CPSU Central Connit-
tee March (1965) Plenun. A new material-technical base of agricultural pro-
duction has been created in practice. Agriculture's fixed capital has risen to
aluost 3.240 billion, and capital availability per 100 hectares of agricultural
land has increased by a factor of 3.6 since the CPS!) Central Coulittee March
Plenun. Currently over four-fifths of agricultural fixed capital is capital
introduced in the last 15 years. The power-worker ratio in this tine has

more than tripled and constitutes 210 h.p. per worker.

The nachimry-tractorpool in the countryside has more than half a nillion
modern powerful tractors. Aninal husbandry premises have essentially been
built anew or nodernized. Over 500 vigorous poultry factories have been con-
nissioned; the "Ptitsepmn" systel currently produces 85 percent of market-
able egg and poultry neat production. Hundreds of industrial-type nechanizcd

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conpleages for beef, pork and milk production have been built. Modern hot-
houses centers are operating near large cities and in industrial areas. Work
on land: reclamation and chemicslizstion is being perforned on a vast scale
and in all parts of the country.

New sectors servicing agriculture—machine building for anz'nl husbandry and
fodder production, rural construction and the formula food and nicrobiological
industoynhsve been created. Inaword, the party has done a great deal of work
to make agriculture a highly developed sector of the economy.

The growth of capital investments. equipment and fertilizer supplies and
other naterial resources with s simltsneous improvenent in the forms of
organization of labor and production have made it possible to increase sub-
stantially the volume of agricultural production. The average annual gross
grain harvest in the last 5-year plan was hiﬂler than the level of the 5-year
plan which preceded the CPSU Central Co-ittee March Plenun by 75 sillion tons.
Production of meat in this tine increased from 9.3 to 16.8 million tone or by
a factor of 1.6; nilk fron 65 to 93 nillion tons; and eggs fron 29 billion to
63 billion. As a result, despite all the difficulties and weather complexi-
ties, we have reached a new, higher level of food consumtion. Uith an in-
crease in the country's population of sore than 3!. nillion, per capita con-
sumption of neat has risen by 16 kilos. milk by 63 kilos and eggs by 116 since
1965.

International coupsrisona also point to the achievements of the agrarian sector
of the country's econony. Our country's agricultural developnent rate is
higher than in the developed capitalist countries (in the period 1976-1980 it
constituted 150 percent in the USSR, 130 percent in the United States, 125
percent in the no, 133 percent in Prance and 129 percent in Britain conpared
with the 1961-1965 period).

At the sane time there are certain problem in supplying the population with
foodstuffs. The CPSU Central Com-ittes Report to the 26th party congress paid
great attention to this question, particularly supplies of meat and other
animal husbandry products to the population.

ll should be mntioned for an understanding of the essence of the question that
there have been very pronounced changes in the country's domestic nsrket in
recent years. There has been a rapid growth in the income of the population.
and of all categories therefore, moreover, inasmuch as there has been a growth
not only of wages but also pensions, various allowances, student grants and
other receipts fro. the social consumtion fund. Hhereas in 1965 only lo per-
cent of families had an income of R100 and over per family nder, in 1980

this is the position of approximately half of all fanilies. This has naturally
increased the population's purchasing power considerably and increased its
demand for s11 col-odities, particularly food. Under these conditions the

rate of growth not only of food but of s nusber of other co-odities also has
been insufficient. Unsatisfied demand has exacerbated the entire problem of
the market. It has to be considered here that in the present structure of
retail couodity turnover almost 75 percent of commdities is connected with
agricultural production and its products and raw material.

60
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Proceeding from the singularities and requirements of the new stage of develop-
ment of the Soviet society and also the increased possibilities of the social-
ist economy, Comrade 1..I. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSI' Congress deter-
nined the main directions of the party's agrarian policy and its further
development. The task of an inrovemsnt in food supplies to the population
was advanced to the forefront. The need for the formulation of a special

food program was substantiated. The practice of co-Iunist building has shown
that major strategic tasks are tackled Inst successfully on the basis of
goal-oriented programs. Cowrehensive program have now bacon a feasible mat-
ter inasmuch as they are based on the huge potential and economic power of

the country and all its regions and the increased level of executive and work-
er personnel.

The CPSU Central Committee proceeds from the fact that the most realistic
food program capable of ewracing all the potential at the country's disposal
may only be formulated with the active participation of the republics. krays
and oblasts. This is not a matter just for the central departments, although
they do have a tremendous role here. Every republic, every tray and every
oblast must determine its contribution to and degree of its participation

in the development and inlemsntation of the food program. At the behest of
the CPSU Central Co-ittee and the Soviet Government the USSR Gosplan has
sent control figures to the repdalics. The country's food program will also
be formulated with regard for the proposals from the localities as an organic
component of the 5-year plan.

L.‘.. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSU Congress emphasized that the present
stage of the country's economic development is characterized by the increas-
ing dependence of agricultural production and its end results on other see-
tors of the national economy, primarily those supplying the countryside with
producer goods, fuel and chemical products and also those catering for the
procurement, transportation, processing, storage and sale of agricultural
products. Even now expenditure connected with the functioning of other see-
tors of the economy has reached more that 60 percent and will continue to rise
in the end results of agriculture. Such is the regularity. But agriculture
has been and remains here the main element in food production.

And it is perfectly understandable that the propositions and conclusions con-
cerning the developnent of this sector formulated at the 26th CPSU Congress
are of fundamental significance for our entire practical work in the 1980's.

The agrarian-industrial complex currently is a large-scale national economic
organism and intricate production-economic system. Son 37 percent of the
national economy's fixed capital is concentrated and more than 140 percent of
working people is employed in this sector. Some 62 percent of the country's
national incom is created here.

The problem of the interconnected development of the sectors constituting
the agrarian-industrial complex has become more urgent than ever. A task of
tremendous importance was set at the 26th party congress-ensuring the uni-
form planning and proportional and balanced development of these sectors, a
considerable strengthening of the material-technical base of the entire com-
plex, an improvement in the economic relations among its constituent sectors,

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the organization of their precise interaction for an increase in the produc-
tion of agricultural products and an inrovemant in their preservation, pro-
cessing and delivery to the consumer.

Recently the CPSU Central Comittee has adopted a amber of measures to im-
prove the functioning of the agrarian-industrial complex and to separate into
independent sectors those of the national economy which work directly on in-
creasing food production. Party leadership and state management of the con-
plex ate also being streamlined at the same time.

With regard for the sipificance which questions of the further cosprehensive
mechanization of agriculture and its trmsition to an industrial footing
have acquired at the present stage, the Department of Agricultural Machine
Building has been created in the CPS!) Central Comittee. Sinilar departments
or sectors have been created in a masher of mien republic Conunist Party
central connittees and obko' and krsykoms. A new structural subdivision-
Agrarian-Industrial Cowlex Administration—headed by the USSR Gosplan first
deputy chairmen has been formed in the USSR Gosplan.

Considering that aineral fertilizers and chemical protection agents are a most
important factor of the enhanced productiveness of farming and an increase

in agricultural products. their production has been separated off into an
independent sector and a special ninistry has been created. For an inprove-
ment in the organization of the entire business of veptable, fruit and
potato growing the CPSU Central Comittee and the Soviet Government deened

it necessary to form the Ministry of Fruit and Vegetable Industry with cor-
responding bodies locally which are in charge of questions of the production,
procurenent, transportation, storage, processing, trading and sale of these
important products.

The process of the formation of the agrarian-industrial complex is being ac-
companied by an increase in agriculture and throughout the agrarian sector of
the industrialization of production and marks the. completion of its transi-
tion fron extensive methods to the path of all-around intensification. The
achieve-eat of higher indicators in agriculture will now be secured not so much
by an expansion of the sown areas and the increased head of livetsock as on

the basis 0f.increased labor productivity and an increase in the productive-
ness and stability of farming and sniml husbandry.

The 26th CPSU Congress confirmed the party's policy of the further allocation
of large-scale financial and material resources for the development of agri-
culture. which will enable us to continue to furnish the sector with equip-
ment. extend work on reclamation and chemicalization, reinforce the base of
animal husbandry, develop the infrastructure and so forth. At the same tine
(and it is very ilportant that this be borne in mind in propaganda and manage-
llent) the CPS!) Central Connittee Report to the 26th party congress emphasized
that the center of gravity now is shifting to the return on the capital in-

vestments. the growth of the productiveness of agriculture and the extension
and streamlining of its relations with all sectors of the agrarian-industrial

complex.

62
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
'ﬂnc problem of the me of the production potential that has been and is being
created in the countryside is the key problem of the further development of
agriculture and the entire agrarian-industrial cmlex. There are big re-
serves here. and the state of affairs in a under of sectors is taming con-
cern. Dith an overall increase in labor productivity in agriculture of a
factor of 1.8 in 15 years. in the last 5-year plan it increased only 15
percents Nor can we be satisfied by such an indicator of agricultural pro-
duction u the yield per hectare. with an increase in output per hectare of
a factor of 1.3 for the comtry as a whole in 1970's, which cannot be deemed
sufficient, there are many farms, rayons and entire oblasteeven where this
increae constituted only 5-10 percent and even less in places. As the prac-
tice of the foremost far- shows, we are underutilizing the potential of the
present head of livestock to the extent of 20-25 percent. A mater of other
data on big production reserves could also be cited.

The conclusion is clear: an abrupt turnabout in all management, organizing
and political work toward the efficient use of labor and material resources
and the fuller mobilization of kolkhoz and sovkhoz production potential are
needed.

More favorable conditions for this are now being objectiwa created. L.I.
Brezhnev's report emphasizes particularly the importance of a continued
improvement in the economic conditions of the operation of the kolkhozes

and sovlrhozes as an obligatory and exceptionally important ingredient of
agricultural production efficiency. The consistency of the policy of the
CPSU Central Couittee formulated by the March Plenum and geared to the
accelerated development of agriculture, a further inrovemnt in the planning
and stimlation of production and a strengthening of cost accounting prin-
ciples in the work of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes is manifested here.

A comprehensive CPSU Central Cal-ittee and USSR Comcil of Ministers decree
was adopted which provides for the establishment of a single product pur-
chase plan broken down by year, the introduction of a new system of stimula-
ting the farm for an increase in the sale of products to the state compared
with the average annual level of the 10th Five-Year Plan and the increased
connectbnbetween the material encouragement of the agricultural workers and
end results, particularly an iwrovement in qualitative indicators. The
task now is to ensure that the economic levers contained in this decree

be employed in the practice of every kolkhoz and sovkhoz and in party and
economic leadership of the activity of the ld>or collectives in the country-
side.

Important theoretical and practical significance is attached to the proposi-
tions of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report on the role of the components of the
agrarian sector in the accomplishment of the food program. Our party's
fnmdanental position is that the kolkhozea and sovkhozes have been and re-
nnin the basis of socialist agriculture. And this means that the party,
soviet. management and scientific personnel is called on to further ieprove
the form and methods of farm management and pay the closest attention to the
processes occurring in kolkhoz and sovkhoz production (its production forces
and the nature of labor) and in the social sphere. It is necessary to

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

implement consistently the provisions of such a most imortant document as

the CPS}! Central Conittee decree "The Further Development of the Special-
ization and Concentration of Agricultural Production on the Basis of Interfarm
Cooperation andAgrarian-Industrial Integration". Interfarm cooperation and
agraria'n-indmtrial integration and the utmost intensification of kolkhoz

and sovkhoz production are the single, most effective path of an increase in
production.

The process of the specialization and concentration of agricultural produc-
tion has now encompassed all republics, [trays and oblasts. But a nunber of
theoretical and practical questions is arising requiring the more detailed
study of accumulated experience and more extensive collation. They concern,
inter alia, such problems as the selection of the organizational forms of
interfarm and intersectorial cooperation which are the most progressive and
have given a good acount of themelves. a streamling of economic mutual
relations among the participants in the cooperation, development of democratic
principles of management, the increased role of the labor collectives and
realization of the requirements of the Kolkhoz Charter and the Regulations
Governing . terfarm Enterprises and Associations.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report also determines from Marxist standpoints the
significance of the population's private suasidiary farms for the develop-
ment of agricultural production. The private subsidiary fam' contribution
to the formation of the comtry's food stocks could be more appreciable than
is the case now, particularly if there is closer cooperation between the
kolkhozes and sovkhozes and the private subsidiary far-ms based on contractual
relations. The CPSU Central Co-dttee proceeds from the fact that such co-
operation successfully codoines the interests of the state and kolkhoz-sovkhoz
production and the private interests of the Itolkhoz mesbers, workers and
employees~ It is rational in all respects since it permits the fuller use
of labor resources, feeding land mid livestock premises and is an important
step on the path of the private swsidiary farm's integration with social
production on the basis of. the leading role of the kolkhozes and sovkhozcs
and the utmost assistance to rural inhabitants in an improvement in the run-
ning of their farm. Assistance and the utmost support should be received
primarily by the workers who participate actively in public farming. Of
course, this business requires constant attention and flexible leadership on
the part of the party conIIittees and rural party organizations.

An urgent problem of the party's agrarian policy is the social development of
the countryside. The 26th congress emphasized with new force the party's
concern for bringing the living conditions of the rural population closer

to those of city dwellers. Addressing the CPSU Central Conittee October
09%) Plenum, L.I. Brezhnev observed that the efficient use of the possi-
bilities of agriculture is connected mostly directly with the solution of so-
cial problems of the countryside. Much has been done in this respect in
recent years, and the rural worker.‘ material well-being has risen consider-
ably. Nonetheless, the reorganization of the social living conditions of the
countryside is occurring more slowly than is necessary and below available
possiblities. The proportion of capital investments channeled into nonpro-
duction construction in the countryside has been manifestly inadequate in a

610
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_nud>er of places, particularly into the construction of housing, schools,
children's establishments and consumer service enterprises.

The shortcomings in this sphere are increasing the migration of the rural
population. And this is being reflected negatively in the retention of per-
sonnel in agricultural production and the creation of stdale laborcollectives.
The appreciable outflow of personnel, primarily the youth, in certain parts,
particularly the RSPSR's nonchemozem zone, has led to the point where the
farm have been forced to perforn sou of the work with the help of workers
from the cities. There is a shortage of experienced skilled machine-opera-
tor personnel.

Uith regard for these phenomena and trends, the 26th CPSU Congress deter-ined
tasks for the countryside's social development for the inediate future.

The Main Directions of the USSR's Economic and Social Develop-cut in 1981-
1985 and the Period Through 1990 provide for the construction at a preferen-
tial rate in the countryside of well—appointed homes with outhouses, child-
ren's preschool establishments, clubs and other cultural-social facilities.
Capital investnents for this purpose will increase by 39 percent. It is
planned to increase the rural centers of population's provision with cen-
tralized heat and gas, running water and sewerage, and the scale of road
building is being extended.

“the solution of these iaportant questions will depend to a considerable extent
on the republics, krays. oblasta and rural rayons, to which the capital in-
vestments and material resources are being allocated. "The problems of re-
organization of the countryside ," L.I. Brezhnev enphasized, "need to he tack-
led energetically and thoroughly, the necessary resources for this being

found both on an all-state scale and in the republics, krays and oblasts and
on each kolkhoz and sovkhoz."*

Thus the CPSU's agrarian policy enjoyed further scientific sdastantiation

and development at the 26th party congress with regard for acctnulated ex-
perience and the new tasks of co-unist building. The congress again showed
convincingly that the party constantly keeps questions of agrarian policy

at the center of its attention. It is very inortent to am all the communists
and the workers of city and comtryside with a correct, Harrist-Leninist un-
derstanding of the tasks in agrarian policy and an understanding of the signi-
ficance of the creation of dependable food stocks for the country's entire
econony and a further rise in Soviet people's living standard. And a trev-
nendous role here belongs to the propagandists and all the party's ideological
workers.

II

The 26th CPSU Congress determined that the main task of the agrarian-indus-
trial conplex is the comtry's dependable provision with food and agricul-
tural raw material. A decisive condition of the successful accomplishment of
this task is the dynamic development of agriculture.

 

31:}. Brezhnev. "Leninskin kursom" [Lenin's Way], bbscow, 1981, p 669.
65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I’K'IM. USE ONLY

The production volume outlined for the 11th Five-Year Plan considerably
surpass the indicators achieved in the last 5-year plan in my products.

The increase in the gross product will constitute 12-16 percent compared with
9 percent in the 10th Five-Year Plan. The average gross grain harvest is
envisaged at 238-263 million tons, that is, the increase should be 33-38 mil-
lion tons comared with the 23 million tons for the previous 5 years. It is
planned to raise meat production to 18.2 million tons in 1985,. that is, in-_
crease it by more than 3 million tons coupared with 19m. To comprehend

the scale and complexity of this task it is fitting to recall that the net
increase ccnstituted 2.8 million tons in the previonu 10 years.

A high level of the production of other agricultural productsumilk. eggs.

raw cotton. sugar beet, sunflower, potatoes and cereal and other crops-

has to be achieved also. The increase in the production of agricultural prod-
uects will afford an opportunity for a further growth in per capita consum-
tion and an iwrovement in the structure of the population's diet. By the
and of the 11th Five-Year Plan per capita consumption is scheduled to rise

to 62 kilos of meat, 320 kilos of milk and 250 eggs. Consulption of fruit
and vegetables will increase also.

The tasks confronting the agrarian sector are, as you can see, large-scale.
And if the specifics of agricultural production and its great dependence on
natural-climatic conditions are considered, it is clear that a truly gigantic
amount of political, organizing and magemsnt work will have to be done to
ensure that the charted boundaries are reached. Only on the basis of such
work by the party, all its detachments and all our personnel canwe count

on the successful implementation of the food program.

A nigh rate of growth of agricultural production can only be secured by way
of a further and accelerated increase in agricultural labor productivity.
Hhereas in the 10th Five-Year Plan labor productivity increased 15 percent,
for fulfillment of the quotas outlined by the 26th CPSU Congress it is essen-
tial to raise it 22-24 percent. that is, secure an average annual labor pro-
ductivity growth rate of 4.1-4.6 percent compared with 2.9 percent in the
10th five-year period. Taking account of certain fluctuations by year in
agricultural development, this indicator should be exceeded by a factor of
1.5-2 in favorable years.

"hi 1e mentioning the tautness and complexity of the impending tasks it should
at the same tine be emphasized that they are feasible. Their fulfillment has
as a basis the tremendous production potential which the agricultural sector
possesses even today and the sizable financial and material resources allo-
cated the countryside in accordance with the decisions of 26th party congress.

It is planned in the 11th Five-Year Plan to implement a whole system of
measures for the further mechanization and electrification of the sector, the
chemicalization of agricultural production and land inrovenent. These gen-
eral directions of the strengthening of the materiel-technical base of agri-
culture and its intensification retain their fundamental significance. The
retooling of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes will be effected at a high rate

in the 11th Five-Year Plan in order for us to come close to the optimum times

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in thc perfomnce of the majority of agricultural operations. The kolkhozes
and sovkhozes will acquire new high-powered dependable equipment ensuring
the high productivity and quality of agricultural operations and permitting
the transition to industrial techniques on an extensive scale in Earning

and animal husbandry. This process is currently being held back by the ab-
sence or shortage of such equip-ant.

Particular attention is being paid to the comprehensiveness of the supplies of
agricultural machinery to the holkhozes and sovkhoses. The disproportion which
has emerged at this tine between engine capacity and the range of the mterials-
handling machinery is preventing highly productive as of tractors to the full
extent. This applies primrily to the powerful new tractors. In accordance
with the optim correlation, the country's kolkhozes and sovkhoses should

have on average R260 worth of machinery employed in plant-growing alone per
moo of tractor cost and R308 worth when machinery for animal husbandry is in-
cluded.

Another ilportsnt task in the mechanization sphere is the creation of the
necessary mdern base of the servicing and repair of agricultural equipmnt.
The lagging in this sphere is ispeding thehighly efficient use of the tech-
nical potential of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes and leading to the premature
failure of the machinery.

It should be said that owing to sgriculture's insufficient provision with so-
dern equipment. full use is not being made of the tremendous advantages of
the large-scale socialist agricultural enterprises which the kolkhoses. sov-
khozes and interfarm associations objectively possess for the industrializa-
tion of production and the efficient use of labor. And these possibilities
are enormous.

Grain farming and poultry breeding are convincing corroboration of this. The
transition of grain farming to a machine technology basis at the initial stage
secureda fourfold increase in the peasant farms' labor productivity, and the
average annual rate of increase in ldaor productivity in the period of the
extensive industrialization of crop cultivation constituted approximately

10 percent. There was an even higher rate of increase in labor productivi-y
in poultry breeding in the period of this sector's mass transition to an
industrial footing (l965-197S)-roughly 15 percent annually.

This is why our party focuses its attention constantly on the development of
the industrial complex oriented toward the retooling of agriculture and the
acceleration of scientific-technical progress in this sector. A system of
machinery for the period 1981-1990 has been drawn up in the country and passed
by the appropriate ministries and departments for the accomplishment of this
task. It provides for the transition from the development and introduction of
individual nachines to composite sets. flow technology and transfer machinery
catering for the mechanization not only of basic but also auxiliary proces-
ses. particularly transport and handling operations. Whereas currently agri-
cultural machine building is producing l,700 types of technical facility,

in the future, according to the adopted machinery system, more than 3,000 will
be produced. It is planned to create over 200 new types of machinery to

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

replace manual labor in plant growing. It is planned to mechanize many pro-
cesses_currently performed by hand in animal husbandry.

The machinery system presupposes, the development of new areas of technical
progress and the creation of are accosplished design: precision-seeding
mchinery; a new generation of anti-erosion machines for soil cultivation;
mineral and organic fertilizer application machines; power-driven cobination
machines; and highly productive combines for the harvesting of cereals, po-
tatoes_and cotton, fodder procurement and so forth. Designs of machines
equipped with devices for controlling the process from the place of work of
the machine operator which require minimal expenditure on servicing and are
more economical in terms of fuel and power expenditure are being developed.
The new machinery system reflects more fully the requirements of the zonal
singularities of different regions of the country. particularly unirrigated
and irrigated farming. the nonchernozem zone, the areas subject to wind and
water erosion and the mountain areas.

According to estimates, introduction of the new technical facilities in full
in plant growing should ensure a 30-percent reduction on average in labor
expenditure in soil cultivation and sowing and a reduction of 10-12 days in
the duration of harvesting operations. The application of the machinery sys-
tem in plant growing will produce big savings.

Understandably, huge capital investments and large-scale work on their assimi-
lation and the construction of new and modernization of agricultural machine-
building enterprises will be necessary in order to ensure the manufacture and
supply to the kolkhozes and sovkhozes of agricultural machinery in such a
volum. in the llth Five-Year Plan the Ministry of Tractor and Agricultural
Machine Building is being allocated over twice the amount of capital invest-
.ments than in the previous 5-year plan. It may be said that national agri-
cultural machine building is entering a new stage of its development marking
a transition to the assimilation of equipment which is in the literal sense
revolutionizing agricultural production and making room for the introduction
of progressive techniques.

Taking account of the scale of the work in this area of our national economy,
the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers are adopting mea-
sures, on the initiative of LI. Brezhnev, general secretary of the CPSU
(‘entral Connittee and chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium, for

the accelerated building and modernization of agricultural machine-building
enterprises. Enterprises and facilities of the ministries of tractor and
agricultural machine building and machine building for animal husbandry and
fodder production which are being built and modernized have been recognized
as construction projects of particular state importance. The ministries and
departments have been instructed to allocate the necessary resources to these
construction sites as a priority and make extensive use of the most progres-
sive building structures and planning decisions and the experience of the
installation of the Volga and Kama truck plants and the "Atonmuash".

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fulfillment of the established quotas will enable us at the end of the 11th
Five-Year Plan to have increased engine capacity per 100 hectares of sown

areas to 390 h.p. and per worker to 38-60 h.p. and to have increased it by a
factor of 1.5 compared with 1930.

The future of our agriculture is largely connected with chmicalization. This
is a powerful factor of intensification, for whose development extensive pre-
requisites have been created. The cheaical industry is capable of tackling

82 million tons in 1980. The policy of the preferential developments of the
production of phosphate fertilizers, an improvement in the quality of the
mineral fertilizers and an increase in the proportion of the production of
concentrated and complex fertilizers, which by 1985 will amount to 90 percent
of their overall production, will be continued in the llth Five-Year Plan.

Practically all fertilizer will be produced in granular, large pellet and
noncaking form.

fertilizer production with an increase in the production of chemical plant-
protection agents. Supplies thereof will increase considerably and rise in
1985 to 650,000-680,000 tons, which is particularly necessary for the cultiva-
tion of the highest harvests of corn, sunflower, soybean, sugar beet and
other crops when they are raised in accordance with industrial techniques.

The development of measures is being completed in the Gosplan currently on an
increase in the production and supply to agriculture of aineral fertilizers

in 1981-1985 with the establishnent of concrete quotas for the ministries and
departments for the accouplishnent of this most important national economic
task. Large-scale capital investments are being channeled to this end. A
great deal of experience of the rapid installation of cheaical facilities has
been accmmlated in the country, and fuller use Iust be asde of it by the
ministries and party and soviet authorities in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

of an increase in the productiveness and stability of farming is land improve-
ment. The total area of inproved land now constitutes almost 35 million hec-
tares. Over 60,000 kolkhozes and sovkhozes have irrigable or drained land.
The 11th Five-Year Plan schedules the commissioning thanks to state capital
investments of approximately 3.6 nillion hectares of irrigable and 3.8 million
hectares of drained land. In addition, it is planned to supply 26-28 million
hectares of pasture with water in desert and senidesert and nountain areas.
Some R140 billion of state capital investments is allocated for the complex of
operations in land improvement in the 11th Five-Year Plan, which is 19 per-
cent more than in the previous 5-year period. work on the modernization of
Operating reclamative system and an improvement in their provision with water
and liquidation of soil salinity and higher-than-usual acidity will be car~
ried out at a preferential rate. As a result of the realization ofall these
measures the zone where guaranteed cereal, fodder and vegetable crop harvests
are obtained will expand considerably in the‘country.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Smiling up what has been said about the plans for the further development of
agriculture's naterial-technical base. it say be observed that the 11th Five-
Ycar Plan will represent a Iajor new step forward in an increase in the capital
provision and available power of kolkhoz and sovkhoz production and the accel-
eration of scientific-technical progress in the countryside. Approximately
R200 billion of capital investnents is being channeled into the entire com-
plex of operations in the developlnnt of agriculture cowared with R171 bil-
lion in the 10th Five-Year Plan. Thus the high targets of the growth of
agricultural production are based on a solid uterial foundation. It is only
iaportant that all this be used skillfully and with the greatest efficiency.

III

"To speak of agriculture as a whole," Comrade l..I. Brezhnev observed at the
26th congress, "we are confronted with the sane principal problen as in other
sectors of the national economy—an increase in efficiency and quality."*
This is a very iwortant and fundamental directive. It requires of our en-
tire personnel a switch in its attention to questions of the are efficient
naming of agricultural production and higler and results corresponding to
the scale of the investments to which the state has consented.

We still frequently encounter certain workers. of the most varied levels,
furthermore, who display great persistence, I would say inventiveness even, in
striving for the biggest possible allocation of capital investments and nater-
ial resources. However, they frequently do not have enougi of these quali-
ties in order subsequently to organize the proper me of all resources and
obtain high returns fron the capital investments. Re need to enphatically
conbat consumerist, dependent sentinents. He cannot agree with instances of
certain workers atterpting to explain the lagging of agricultural production
and breakdowns in plan fulfillnent by a variety of references to circuastances
beyond agriculture and their activity and responsibility. Such an uncritical
approach to an evaluation of their work does not contribute to the mobilization
of the huge potential of kolkhoz and sovkhoz production.

I would like in this connection to express a few thoughts on questions of the
choice of direction and the optimum proportions in the allocation of capital in-
vestments and their most rational use. An analysis shows that any of our
shortcomings in agricultural production are connected with precisely this.

It should be said first of all that capital investments are channeled into

this sphere of production or the other not always with due econonic sub-
stantiation and a comparison of expenditure with end results. But perhaps

the east prevalent shortcoming is that there are many oblasts, krays and repub-
lics where capital investments are allocated not for the acconplishnent of
some concrete goal-oriented tasks connected with an increase in the production

—,————————-—-—-——TF__———
*' Material of the 26th CPSU Congress. p 106.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of grain, fodder or animal husbandry products but are distributed in an equal-
izing manner in accordance with the "lest anyone take offense" principle.

But this leads to the dispersal of material resources. And the capital invest-
Ients in this case do not produce the returns which we have a right to expect.

It can hardly be considered correct when the interests of faraing are in-
fringed. Insufficient capital invest-ants are allocated for the purpose of an
increase in soil fertility, the development of seed growing and the chemicali-
station and equipment servicing and repair facilities and fodder procurement
and storage. An appreciable shortconing in the work of past years has been
the discrepancy between production construction and the creation of housing,
sociocultural and everyday conditions for the working people. All this is
leading to the point where in a under of instances newly installed produc- '
tion capacity (ilproved land, animl husbandry couplexes) is being utilized
inadequately owing to a lack of people.

Other examples could be cited also illustrating the miscelculations end errors
in the use of capital investIents. But it is not a question of the mater of
examples. It is inortant to draw practical conclusions for future work.

This is all the more necessary now, when the 5-year plans are being drawn up
and the questions of where to channel the capital investnents are being de-
cided.

The CPSU Central Couittee and USSR Council of Ministers have deemed it neces-
sary to examine a nutter of problem at their level. Decisions were adopted.
imediately following the 26th party congress on a reinforcenent of the stor-
age facilities and an improvemnt in the use of equipment and the creation of
a chemicalization center and the securing of the necessary returns from the
chemical fertilizers on this basis.

he CPSU Central Oomittee and USSR Council of Ministers decree "The Further
Development and Incremed Efficiency of the Agriculture of the RSPSR's Non-
chernozen Zone in 1981-1985" is aimed at the more rational use of capital in-
vestments. For all party cornittees, soviet authorities and nanageaent per-
sonnel of this vast region of the country the efficient use of allocated capi-
tal investnents and material resources is a most important state task. And
the party committees lust take this into consideration in their organizing
and political work.

A most inportant direction of increased agricultural efficiency is an improve-
ment in the use of land resources. Agronomic meetings were held at the start
of 198! in the republics, krays, oblasts and rural rayons which. in accordance
with the recouendations of the all-union agronomic conference held following
a decision of the CPSU Central Collaittee, discussed these urgent questions and
outlined a whole set of measures. These include industrial techniques, the
application of highly productive strains and hybrids, the competent use of
mineral and organic fertilizer, the most rational structure of' the sown areas
corresponding to zonal singularities, soil-tilling methods and so forth. The
persistent. purposeful work of the agrononists and kolkhoz and sovkhoz and
agricultural body leaders is needed to ensure that the entire vast arsenal

of agrotechnical and organizational measures be put fully at the service of
the harvests.

-71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.ue party co-ittee workers must approach the labor of the agricultural spec-
ialists'and scientific workers with great attention, actively support their
useful initiatives and everything that progressive experimce and science pro-
vides and study in greater depth, collate and introduce lore assertively the
best nodels of agricultural mags-ant. This was emphasized yet again in Can-
rsde Ll. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSU Congress.

Questions of an increase in the efficient use of the land should be posed
particularly keenly in respect of improved land. The ilproved land is already
providing a considerable quantity of products, but this nonetheless far from
corresponds yet to the large-scale financial and naterial resources which are
being channeled into land inprovemnt. The yield of cereals and other crops
on the irrigable land is growing, but it is as yet below the potential of
irrigated farming. This situation is largely explained by the fact that the
development of land ilprovenent in a number of oblasts, krays and republics
has proceeded in breadth, as it were, in recent years, while the practical
develop-lent of the land has lagged behind. Measures are now being taken to
rectify theseshortconings. A considerable increase in capital investncnts in
the practical rigging up and lamching and an improvement in the reclamative
condition of the irrigation and drainage system which have already been
built is scheduled in the 11th Five-Year Plan. A special improved land
exploitation service is being created for this purpose.

A higher level of the fam' provision with production capital is required for
the rational use of irrigable and drained land. As is known, the plans pro-
vide for allocation of the necessary equip-ent, fertilizer and other Inter-
ial resources for this purpose. However, the allocated resources frequently
fail to reach the improved field. It is understandable how senseless and
wasteful this is--building an engineering irrigation system, incurring big

out lays and failing to provide the irrigable land in the complex with every-
thing necessary for obtaining a high harvest.

In many cases the improved land is still occupied by nonintensive crops. A
most efficient crop such as corn for grain has essentially retained beyond the
bounds of irrigable farming in certain areds. There is real potential for an
increase in the production of corn grain mder irrigation in the Ukraine,

the Central Asian and Trans-Caucasus republics, Kazakhstan, the North Caucasus
and the Lower Volga area.

Big potential for a growth of the harvests is contained in the chenicaliza-
rim of farming. And it is not sinply a matter here of the kolkhozes and sov-
khozcs needing more mineral fertilizer and of better quality but also of the
efficient use of this powerful lever of the increased productiveness of
agricultural production. The farm are experiencing a shortfall in their re-
ceipts of a large quantity of products on the one hand owing to losses and
spoilage of the fertilizer even during shipnent and storage and, on the other,
as a result of the incompetent application of mineral fertilizers and other
chenicalization agents. These losses do not show up inediately and do not
lie on thesurface but they lead to a considerable product shortfall at her-
vest time.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Given the present scale of chemicalLation, the agronomists, machine opera-
tors and all plant-growing workers of every kolkhoz and sovkhoz should ponder
and work on how to make better we of every ton of fertilizer. The chemicali-
zation of farming is a delicate matter requiring a great deal of knowledge of
the soil, the plant, the chemical processes and so forth. It is, consequently,
a question not only of the volm of the fertilizer which is obtained. It is
fitting to recall here what Academician 1).". Pryanishnikov had to say on this
subject: "A shortage of knowledge cannot be made good with a surplus of fer-
tilizer."

An agrochemical service has been created in the country. We need to display
concern to ensure that this service be responsible in practice for the effi-
cient use of mineral fertilizers and chemical protection agents and an in-
crease in the harvests of agricultural crops.

[n implemting the set of measures for an increue in farming's productive—
ness we must first of all provide for a considerable increase in grain pro-
duction. Grain farming is a factor stabilizing the economy of kolkhoz and
sovkhoz production. It determines to a decisive extent the satisfaction of
the population of the country's growing food requirements. Every good-harvest
year, providing for fulfillment of the grain procurement plans, creates favor-
able opportunities for an increase in the production of animal husbandry prod-
ucts and the increased efficiency of a agricultural production as a whole.

The average annual gross grain harvest increased by 61. million tons or 30
percent in the last 10 years. Grain production per capita in the 10th Five-
Year Plan constituted 785 kilos. However, despite the appreciable growth of
grain production, this problen has yet to be solved both in term of gross har-
vests and the stability of its developunt. Fluctuation by year has assumed
great dimensions. which creates difficulties in the development of animal
husbmdry and is reflected in food supplies. The country's need for grain,
particularly forage grain, is growing. "hence the new high demands both on
its production and on its use, both these factors being interconnected, more-
over, in =:the solution of the grain problem. According to scientific data,
for the coqlete satisfaction of our need for grain it is necessary to pro-
vide for gross harvests thereof on the basis of 1 ton per inhabitant in the
country as a whole. Therefore the task of increasing grain production to

2105 million tons by the end of the llth Five-Year Plan is an intemdiate
task on the way to the achievemt of this goal.

The possibilities of expanding arable land in the country are practically ex-
hausted. The areas of cereals have been stabilized in recent years at the
level of 127-138 million hectares. It is essential to maintain these grain
area dimensions in the country in the future. For fulfillment of the set
quotas for the gross grain harvest in the 11h Five-Year Plan the grain crops'
yield must be increased on average in the country to almost 20 quintals per
hectare. that is, we need to obtain an increase of no less than 3-6 quintals
per hectare compared with the last 5-year plan.

In order to achieve this multifaceted and persistent work is needed locally.
as is the cot-issioning of all factors of an increase in yield and the full

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of the reserves and potential of every kolkhoz and sovkhoz and each grain
field. It is essential to create an ataosphere everywhere where grain pro-
duction ‘always be at the center of the attention of the specialists and lead-
ers of all levels of farn nanagenent and the key task of the party, soviet and
Isnagens'nt authorities.

To secure a growth in grain production and the increased stability of grain
Earning great importance is attached, among other neasures, to a further
inprovenent in the structure of grain crops. Scientists believe that in
Belorussia, the Baltic area and nonchernoaell oblasts there is a possibility
of securing ”an increase in fodder production thanks to natural hayfield and
pasture and the intensification of fodder production on arable land, thereby
releasing part of the area occupied by grain crops. The strmture of the
grain field should provide for the accolplishnent of a very iaportant task—
m increase in the gross harvests of groats. Unfortunately. this is not
always properly understood in practice; not everyone takes into consideration
the fact that this is necessary in the interests of an inrovsnent of the
population's provision with foodstuffs. This is what the chairnan of the
Kolkhoz ineni Vatutin of Volynskaya Oblast's Rozhishchensltiy Rayon wrote to
the central authorites in this connection: "Here on the kolkhoz we have learned
to cultivate pretty good harvests of buckwheat--16 quintals and more. In the
period 1978-1980 we sowed it over 80 hectares, whereas the rayon's renaining
'l’arns consented to buckwheat reluctantly and cultivated it on 10d12 hectares.
Even last year, which we dfficult, we sold 2100 quintals of buckwheat grain,
whereas our neighbors did not sell a single quintal. And then we had a tele-
phone call iron the Rozhishchenskiy llayon Agricultural Administration's Plan—
ning Departnent: 'Do not plan buckwheat savings, the sewing plan has been
withdrawn Eron the rayon and oblast, you will sow 80 hectares of barley in-
stead. ' He urged that we were cultivating buckwheat as a higher-yielding crop,
and was it possible to sow high-yielding barley at the end of May? But this
had not been taken into account either. Only when a big noise was kicked up
around this question did they consent to our sowing buckwheat." Is this a
party-minded approach to the interests of the state and the people's require-
nents?

1n the coning years a sore appreciable role in an increase in the yield and
gross harvest of grain is to be performed by mineral fertilizers. “by put
the issue thus? According to the plan outlines, the increase in fertilizers
by the end of the 11th Five-Year Plan will constitute over 1!) million tons.
Considering that the cotton plant. sugar beet and other industrial crop sow-
ings are provided with fertilizer, in the main, there is a real opportunity
for their considerably increased application with respect to grain crops.
CaICulations show that in the new 5-year plan two-thirds of the nineral ferti-
lizer addition nay be channeled into grain crops, their application having
been increased by a factor of more than 1.5. And this could produce up to
an additional 20 nillion tons of grain by the end of the 5-year plan. In a
word, in deciding the question of where to channel the fertilizer addition.
priority should be given to grain fanning.

As has already been said. the problen of grain needs to be tackled not only
on the basis of a further increase in its production but also thanks to the

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rational use of grain resources, primarily grain for forage. More than one-
haif of the total grain harvest has been used for fodder purposes in recent
years. It needs to be said plainly that this part of the grain is as yet
being used irrationally here, particularly the grain which renains on the
kolkhozes and sovkhozes. Only part of the grain is fed in the form of formula
food, and even this fodder is not always sufficiently balanced. Thus in the
production of formula food at state enterprises the proportion of grain con-
stitutes 65-70 percent and is even higher at Itolkhoz and sovkhoz enterprises.
while it is no hidler than 50 percent in may developed countries.

A sharp change in attitude toward the use of grain for forage purposes is a
task of trenendous importance. It is evidently necessary to draw up a special
program whose inlesentation would enable us to release a considerable quant-
ity of grain in the production of for-11a food thanks to other cowonents.
Insufficient concern for this is being displayed as yet, and the production of
vegetable and industrial protein and other additives for fomla food has not

yet been organized in the necessary volun, yet the possibilities for this
exist.

The principal measure is the maximum expansion of the swings of legules,
primarily peas. alfalfa. clover and lupin, and an increase in the production
of grass seal. We Inst promote lore assertively, primarily in the southern
parts of the country, such a protein-rich crop as soybean. The possibilities
exist for the cultivation of winter and spring rape not only for soiling food
but also for grain. It provides not only vegetable oil but also ground oil
cake for fodder. It is necessary to make extensive use of dessicated potato
as an additive to formula food. Food industry waste such as fried beet pulp,
molasses and such nay be used as cowonents thereof with reference to the
concrete conditions and zones of our comtry. Better use must he nsde of the
possibilities of neat and dairy industry enterprises and also the "Ptitseprom"
in the production of neat-and-bone neal and other animal fodder. An isport-
ant source of valuable components for formula food is an expansion of protein
production at microbiological industry enterprises.

0n the other hand, we must overcome the trend of recent years of many agri-
cultural workers connecting an increase in animal husbandry products nerely
with the increased expenditure of grain for fodder purposes and failing to
display the necessary concern for the production of other types of fodder
and an improvement in their quality. Is this not what is indicated by the
fact that in the 10th Five-Year Plan the expenditure of coarse and succulent
fodder in the country increased only 9 percent while that of concentrated
feed increased 23 percent. This applies particularly to the Lithuanian,
Estonian. Moldavian. Georgian and Uzbek republics. Gor'kovsksys, Ivanonskaya,
Tanbovskaya, Penzenskaya, Odesskaya and Voroshilovgradsksya oblasts, the
Tntarskaya ASSR and Krasnoyarskiy Kray. An unjustifiably large quantity of
concentrated fodder is expended by the kolkhozes and sovkhozes in the feeding
of cattle and sheep. According to scientists' calculations, on condition that
that types of livestock's full-value coarse and succulent fodder requirements
were catered for, it would be possible to save millions of tons of grain.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK 00"“.th Dbl: UNLV

Providing animal husbandry with coarse and succulent fodder presupposes not
only an increase in its quantity but also a significant inproveunt in quality.
According to Ministry of Agriculture data, up to 20 percent and lore nutrients
are lost annually in a number of places became of violations of fodder-pro-
curement techniques and a shortage of fodder storage pits.

'l'hus grain faraing and fodder production are closely connected. For this
reason it is necessary, together with the measures to increase the gross
grain harvest in the country, to also work with all due persistence in the
sphere of the production of hay, haylage, silage and other coarse and suc-
culent fodder.

Solution of the grain and fodder problem should ultimately provide for an es-
sential improvement in animal husbandry. The country possesses the necessary
numbers of cattle, pigs, sheep and poultry; and the majority of kolkhoaes and
sovkhozes has send animal husbandry prenises and trained personnel, which
win enable us to tackle the tasks of the 11th Five-Year Plan in the animal
husbandry sphere successfully.

The fact that the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee Report to the 26th party concress
termed animal husbandry a shock front of work is not siwly a tribute lan- -
guage. It expressed an urgent requirement of the present stage of agriculture's
developnent. Unusual measures are necessary. It is worth recalling once

again here Conrade L.I. Brezhnev's words that it is necessary "to display

the naximun persistence and the maximum initiative and flexibility and to make
use of all potential and possibilities in order to not only fulfill but con-
siderably overfulfill the outlined plans.“r

There is a shortfall of many products owing to serious shortcomings in the
reproduction of the animals. “mere are many kolkhozes and sovkhozas where
thescquestions are being tackled successfully. Last year approximately 9,000
farm obtained 90 and more calves per 100 cows. At the same tine these indi-
cators are at an extremely low level in any republics and oblasts. Hundreds
of thousands of cows produced no offspring in the RSPSB and the ELI-sine in
1980, and there are any barren cows in Kazakhstan. The situation concerning
the reproduction of sheep is also unsatisfactory on many farms. Animal
husbandry suffers big losses from nurrain.

Speaking in Alma-Ate in the sumnr of 19m, Comrade LI. Brezhnev observed
that certain workers had become accustomed to low livestock productiveness and
abnormalities in the reproduction of the herd. This matter can no longer be
left in this state. It is necessary to work well with the specialists and
stockhreeders and rectify the situation.

Much potential is contained in the organization of the raising and fattening
of livestock. Low weight gains and the delivery of underweight livestock

are reducing our neat resources. Siwle arithmetic shows that fattening all
the young animals to 600-650 kilos would make it possible to obtain an addi-

tional 1 million tons of beef approximately.

______.______________W__
*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress, p 66.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
All these indicators characterize not only the state of zootechnical work but
also the level of all mnagemsnt to a certain extent. Not overcoming such
negative phenomena would man a cowlication of the fulfillment of the 11th
Five-Year Plan. This ésolutely cannot be permitted. The less so in that
all these questions can, given due attention, be tackled successfully on

every kolkhoz and sovkhoz, in every rayon. in every oblast and in every re-
public.

It is necessary to organize everywhere a mass mvenmnt for overfulfillmnt of
the 5-year plan in animal husbandry and create a really shock front of strug-
gle for an increase in the production of meat, nilk and other farmstead products.
The party, soviet and agricultural authorities of a nuber of oblasts of the
RSFSR. the Ukraine, Belorussia and Kazakhstan have already initiated work on
securing a considerable increase in the production of animal husbandry products
in the 11th Five-Year Plan. M exawle here is being set by the party organ-
izations and kolkhozes and sovkhozes of Glerkasskaya Oblast, which have come
out with the valuable initiative of securing a 33-36-percent increase in the
production ofmeat and a 26-percent increase in the production of milk in the
5-year period. These undertakings need to be supported in every possible way
by means of organizing and propaganda activity.

IV

The losses in food and consumer goods owing to the discrepancy between the
development of the raw material base, that is, agriculture and the state of
the processing sectors of industry have become particularly pronounced as
the scale of agricultural production has grown.

A comprehensive analysis of the state of affairs and also the presentation of
concrete tasks to surmount these negative trends were made in Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev's report at the CPS!) Central Co-ittee July (1978) Plenum. Atten-
tion was drawn to these questions repeatedly during examination of the annual
plans of the development of the country's economy. particularly in the pre-
congress period, at the time of the preparation of the Main Directions of the
0888's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and the Period Through
1990. They occupied a big place in the material of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The timely acceptance, processing and high-quality storage of agricultural
products, particularly fruit, vegetables and potatoes, is not being provided
for in a number of instances. A significant proportion of the repositories
operating currently lacks the proper technical facilities, primarily refrig-
eration, which, naturally, leads to spoilage and big labor expenditure in
fruit and vegetable processing. Packaging facilities, particularly for the
small-scale bagging of foodstuffs, do not correspond to the voluae of the
production of fruit and vegetable and food products.

Certain losses are allowed to occur in the slaughtering of the livestock ad
the processing of meat, milk and other animal husbandry products. And it is
not merely a question here of a lack of necessary capacity but of the cor-
rectncss of its location on republic, tray and oblast territory. Life has
shown that the creation only of large-scale meat and dairy enterprises causes
wanted difficulties and leads to a big rise in the costs of products and

77

non OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK UI‘I'ILIAI. Ual‘. UNLI

losses. The insufficiently high level of technical provision of processing
industry enterprises again leads to a product shortfall in connection with
shallow processing and the incomplete, noncomprehensive use of raw material.

Measures have been scheduled in the 11th Five-Year Plan to ensure the greater
correspondence of the capacity of processing industry and storage facilities
to the agricultural production development rate. In .articular, No.6 billion
are allocated for the developmnt of mat and dairy industry, that is, 26 per-
cent mre than in the 10th Five-Year Plan; and R6.6 billion for food industry.
that is, 22 percent more than in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

For the purpose of a rise in the level of these sector's technical provision
measures are being adopted for the accelerated development of machine build-
ing for liyzt and food industry. It is proposed to increase capital invest-
ments for this by a factor of 1.8 compared with the last 5-year plan. And

40 percent of these resources, mreover, is being channeled into the creation
of capacity for the production of new equipmt enabling us to increase labor
productivity bya facterof1.S-2 in the processing of grain, meat, milk, veget-
ables and fruit, secure the comprehensive use of agricultural raw material
and raise the quality of the manufactured product. The construction of a
amber of new and the modernization of operating enterprises is planned for
this. Measures are currently being worked out for the development of fruit
and vegetable industry's material-technical base.

An important task is the timely and couplete assimilation of allocated capital
investments and the use of all potential for building up the production po-
tential of the processing industry sectors. The practice of past years shows
that an attitude 0‘ due responsibility and attention is not being adopted
everywhere toward the construction of storage facilities and enterprises for
the processing of agricultural products. And many party. soviet and manage- '
ment authorities must reorganize theaselves in their work emphatically here.

Nor can we fail to take account of the fact that's large contingent of our
country's working class. a considerable proportion of which are women, is
employed in the processing industry sectors. Approximately 1 million persons
currently work in mat and dairy industry. 1.6 million in food industry. To-
gether with the large ones there are small labor collectives and party organ-
izations here which sometimes slip from the sights of the leading party and
soviet authorities. It is necessary to increase the attention paid to the
conditions of the work and everyday life of the workers employed in these
important spheres of the economy. .

V

The modern scale and complexity of the tasks dictate the need for an appre-
ciable rise in the level of agricultural leadership. More refined methods of
economic and party-political work must correspond to the new stage of its
development, as of the development of the entire economy. At all levels of
thc- sector's leadership everyone must realize that this is a vitally import-
mt sphere of the economy, that the party's policy of an increase in

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
production efficiency requires the most serious reorganization in organizing,
economic and daily practical activity and that a shallow, superficial atti-
tude toward matters, subjectivism, every conceivable improvisation and leader-
ship of the econony by injunction cannot be tolerated. It is very iuportant
in all our work now to see any phenomenon as a whole and view the totality of
interconnected factors and on the basis of an objective analysis, relying on
science and economic calculation, to find the optimum solutions to urgent
problems and work with-a via: to the long term.

The attention of the party and soviet organizations and managers should be
focused on such determining indicators as labor productivity growth, field
yield and farmstead productiveness, an increase in product quality, the recovery
rate of expenditure and the efficiency of the use of available resources, par-
ticularly land. equipment, fertilizer and work tine. It is these indicators,
which reflect the new tasks of the sector's development, which should f! rm

the basis of the system of the workers' material and moral encouragemt and
the leadership of socialist competition.

The big tasks in the agricultural sphere in the l9&)'s demand that the work
style of the personnel in the countryside be characterized by an in-depth
study of the achievements of science and progressive experience and their ac-
tive introduction. Much that is new and valuable is currently being born
everywhere in the scientific establishments, on the kolkhozes and sovkhozes
and in agricultural production as a whole. The application of these inno-
vations would afford an opportunity to secure a considerably more rapid
growth of agricultural production. But the party comittees are operating
variously in this respect. Sane quickly take up all that is progressive,

and others hesitate and display no initiative, for which reason the work suf-
fers.

Our country's agriculture is at the stage of conplete machinization. This

is fundamentally changing the content of agricultural production itself and
requires a further inprovemnt in the form not. only of the professional train-
ing and new knowledge of the workers and specialists but also more progressive
forms of the organization of production and labor and new forms of nanagenent.

At enterprise and association level these problem are best tackled on the
paths of the more in-depth specialization, concentration and interfarn co-
operation of production and introduction on the kolkhozes and sovkhozes of the
sectorial (shop) principle of management, unregulated system of labor organ-
ization, payment for end results and other progressive initiatives. As the
experience of many farms which have switched to the new management structure
shows, it produces big results.

work on the further refinement of the organizational form of nodern agri-
cultural production and forms of managenent is no simple matter, but life posed
these questions, and they cannot be brushed aside. It is necessary to study
problems of aanagenent and the available experience in this respect in great-
er depth in order to introduce it in practice systematically and purposefully
at all levels. This is very important both for tackling the tasks of an in-
crease in agricultural production efficiency and also for an improvement in
production-economic cooperation among the sectors of the agrarian-industrial
complex.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN UI'I'IL'IAI. not. ONLY

Itis essential to rake econonic work on the holkhoaes and sovkhoaes lore
efficient, active and effective. On my farm currently everything is fre-
quently reduced to a summation and recording of results, an analysis of the
accomplish-ant of this operational task or the other and goal-oriented pro-
grn is lacking and effective measures to renove shortcomings at the plan-
implementation stage are not adopted. The economic analysis groups and bureaus,
econonic councils and budget comissions frequently work insufficiently ef-
fectively. And this is evidently because sane party, soviet and magenent
personnel lack the proper taste for economic work. With the transition to
guaran:eed pay and centralized financing certain kolkhor and sovkhoz leaders
and specialists have essentially forgotten how to count money. All this leads
to a weakening of the principles of cost accounting.

It should be added to this that certain leaders forget about the first con-
nandmnt—the need for the punctual fulfillment of plans for the purchase

and supply of products to centralized stocks. Now, at the start of the 11th
Five-Year Plan. it would be useful to increase the attention paid to questions
of the utmost strengthening of state discipline and an increase in the person-
nel's responsibility for the fulfill-ant of plan quotas both in term of an
upsurge in production and in the sphere of the social development of the
countryside.

A big role in all this belongs to the leaders and primary party organizations
of the kolkhozes and sovkhozes, the rural rub. and the rayon activists.

It is they who directly organize the conversion of party decisions into con-
crete practical deeds. It is therefore necessary to continue to display con-
stant concern for an increase in the level of their activity and the intensi-
fication of organizing and political work in the local production collectives,
at the famteads and in the brigades, detachments and links, that is, where
the fate of the plans and adopted pledges is decided.

An intensive struggle is currently under way everywhere for the harvest of

the first year of the 5-year plan. It is well known that in agriculture the
organized performance of every current operation is exceptionally imortant for
overall good results at the end of the year. We are sure that the partici-
pants in today's seminar-conference will adopt measures to strengthen party
influence on the course of the practical realization of the tasks which ensue
from the results of the 26th CPSU Congress.

' B.N. Pononarev, candidate of the Politburo and secretary of the Central Con-
nittee of the CPSU: "The Results of the 26th CPSU Congress and Certain Ques-
tions of the World Commist Movement"

The 26th CPSU Congress is not only a very big landmark in the life of our
country but also an outstanding event of world significance. Its conclusions
and decisions are exerting and will continue to exert a profound and all-
around influence on the course of the historical process in the 1980's and are
of great significance for the international commist and the entire liberation
mvenent.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The breadth of representation of foreign delegations at the 26th CPSU Congress
could serve as a kind of yardstick of an evaluation of our party's place in
this movement. At the same time it showed graphically its universal dimen-
sions and unswerving growth. At the 19th party congress—our first congress
to which foreign guests were invited-dds Con-mist Party delegations attended.
But 123 foreign delegations from 109 countries took part in the 26th CPSU
Congress: representatives of 86 co-unist parties and 36 revolutionary-demo-
cratic parties. More than 70 delegations were headed party general (first)
secretaries and chairmen. In a word, the entire flower of the present-day
revolutionary forces was represented at our congress in Moscow.

The congress confirmed far-reaching tasks of the Soviet society's economic
and social developmnt iinued with the husne idea of peaceful construction.
it counterposed an emphatic peace-loving line to the inflannstory, aggressive
policy of imperialism. The domestic and foreign policy program of the con-
gress mltiplies the magnetic force of socialism worlaride, and its realiza-
tion will consolidate the positions of the socialist co-snnity even further

and contribute to the struggle of the working class and co-unist parties
throughout the world. '

The increased aspiration of the vast majority of the mist parties to
Harndst-Ieninist, internationalist cohesion and the stimulation of joint ac-
tions against the danger of war and for the cause of democracy and socialism
was manifested more distinctly in the profoundly internstionalist atmosphere
of the congress, which was isbued with justified political optimism.

Our congress was a platform on which the foremost fighters for a better fu-
ture for unkind and representatives of practically all the organised revolu-
tionarybliberation forces of our tine expressed their views on fundamental
problem of world development. The report of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev, general
secretary of .the CPSU Central Committee, nines an outstanding contribution to
the teaching on socialism and co—nniss and the theory of the communist move-
ment, the national liberation struggle and the peaceful coexistence of states
with different social system. The material of the congress contains import-
ant evaluations and conclusions concerning the general characteristics of

the world revolutionary process, the singularities of the current stage of
the crisis of capitalise and the new phenomena and processes internationally.

The foreign guests expressed deep satisfaction with their participation in the
26th CPSU Congress. They ewhasized that they had derived in Moscow new

ideas which were very useful to them and gained striking ilpressions of Soviet
reality and the activity of the CPSU.

The documents of plenums of the fraternal parties' leading bodies held after
the 26th CPSU Congress, the speeches of their leaders and their press mater-
ial contain comprehensive evaluations of the international significance of
the forum of Soviet communists. B. Miss. chairman of the German Comunist
Party, drew attention to the spirit of optimism and confidence which char-
acterized the congress and its consistent internationalism, raking particular
mention of the significance of the congress' responsible approach to the Inni-
fold problems of world developmnt and its contribution to the teaching of
Namism-Ieninism. "To understand the universal significance of the 26th CPSU
Congress," 8. ﬂies declared, "is to support its state-ants and initiatives
and disseminate them and make use of them in the struggle."

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fraternal parties emphasize the role of Comrade L.l. Brezhnev, outstand—
ing figure of the communist and revolutionary-liberation movement, in the
development and pursuit of the domestic and international policy of the CPS"
and the 'Soviet state. The ideas of the 26th CPSU Congress are inseparable in
the minds of millions o'fpeople from die—hm of L.I. Brezhnev. His tremendous
party and state experience, unshakable devotion to the cause of co-unism and
peace, his ability to determine the correct paths and means of the accomplish-
ment of pressing and long-term tasks and his entire work style, which is im-
bued with a Leninist approach to the party's political and ideological tasks,
collectivism and practicality and sensitive heed to the requirements and opin-
ion of the masses-all these qualities of the leader of the Lenin type were

reflected in full in the work and the decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress.
I

The international communist movement has continued to increase its contribu-
tion to the struggle for peace and socialism in recent years. Many of the
most isportant problem-whose such as the prevention of thermonuclear war,

a halt to the arms race and disarmment, assertion of the principles of peace-
ful coexistence, resistance to hegemonism and the complete liquidation of
colonialisn and racism-have been promoted to the center of world politics
thanks to a considerable extent to the initiatives and joint efforts of the
comm-list parties. They will undovbtedly be of key significance in the l9w's
also. Both from the congress' platform and in the press the foreign comrades
pointed to the outstanding role here of our party and its 26th congress.

(“on-mist and workers' parties are currently operating actively in 910 countries.

The fraternal ruling parties of the socialist coll-unity countries are a power-
ful force of the conunist movement. Their cooperation makes it possible to
strengthen the aggregate economic, scientific-technical, defeme and ideologi-
cal-political potential of real socialism. have an active impact on the situa-
tion in the world. oppose the actions of inerialism and reaction and render
progressive and peace-loving forces international support in all parts of the
world.

An important means of the consolidation of mutual understanding, trust and
consent among the ruling parties are their leaders' meetings with Comrade
L.l. Brezhnev in the Crimes, the exchange of party-government delegations at
the highest level and meetings within the Harsaw Pact framework. Meetings
of secretaries of the fraternal parties' central conittees on international,
ideological and organizational-party questions have also become regular.

The coordinating activity of the socialist comtries' ruling parties is con-
tributing to the fiditing efficiency and unity of the entire world commist
movement. Our congress was an outstanding demonstration of the cohesion of
the socialist community and convincing testimony to its forces and vitality.

The congresses of the Bulgarian Communist 'Party, Czechoslovak Con-mist Party
[CPCz] and Socialist Unity Party of Germany were a striking new expression of

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
also the revolutionary movement and the struggle against the danger of war.
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's speech at the 16th CFC: Congress elicited the broadest
response. This was a mat ilportant step in implenentation of the foreign
policy program of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The fraternal parties have advanced markedly recently in the nonsocialist part
of the world. The overall nuwer of co-unists here is approximately 6.5
million. The increase in the last 10 years constituted 1.2 sillion persons.
The most pronounced growth occurred in the mist parties of West Europe
(approximately 800,000) and also Asia (more than 350,000), prinrily in India.
New cos-mist parties were formed: the Egyptian (Io-mist Party, the Workers'
Party of Jamaica, the Couunist Party of Malta and others. '

one-time circulation of newspapers of coll-mist parties of the nonsocialist
mrldis in excess of 10 million copies. In a nuﬁer of countries the com-
munist parties perform such an influential role that essentially not a single
major problem of national proportions can be tackled without them.

The commists are waging a constant, persistent struggle against bourgeois
ideology and time-serving reformisn.

In our tine, when the general crisis of capitalism has become more profound
and when one country after another is breaking away from the capitalist world
systen, the ruling classes have intensified and increased tenfold their
activity in the ideological sphere, making extensive use of the mass infatuation
media. The following pattern can be determined: the deeper the crisis of
capitalism becomes and the more forcefully it undermines the foundations of
the bourgeois social systen, the sore assertively and fiercely its leaders
and apologists develop the ideological struggle in defense of imperialism and
its policy. Large-scale centers have been created for the psychological in-
doctrination of the masses and the spread of information convenient for the
monopoly upper stratus. The main shafts of this shady, reactionary propagan-
da are aimed against real socialism, the Soviet Union and the socialist con-
munity countries. Bourgeois newspapers and radio and television preach anti-
Sovietisa and anticomisn day and night and spread all kinds of fables,
lies and slander in respect of real socialism.

world are warding off the attacks of ideological and political adversaries

and defending Marxist-Leninist ideology, their program principles and the goals
and tasks of their practical activity. Taking advantage of any opportunity,
the calm-mists are sowing the seeds of the socialist truth and exposing the
defects and plagues of capitalism.. Thousands and thousands of comnists
speak at meetings and gathering and in parliaments and mumlcipalites. convey-
ins columnist ideas to the broad masses of the working class and all working

&
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

people. The comist parties take advantage of election campaigns and every
opportunity of speeches on radio and television to inform the masses of the
truth about cos-Innis. and its activity and real socialist.

All this is most directly connected with detente and the prospects of prevent-
ing war. When the broad pgblic and the people's Iasses in this capitalist
country'or the other receive truthful information about the state of affairs
in the socialist countries and about the USSR and its policy, this also has

a definite inpact on the ruling circles. and those who harbor aggressive
intentions frequently think seriously before putting their aspirations into
practice and venturing on a military confrontation with the socialist coun-
tries. For they could encounter a stormy wave of anger and indignation on

the part of their own people, who would raise the question of the responsibi-
lity of the purveyors and inatigators of' aggression. The co-Iunist parties--
each with regard for its own conditions—are waging a struggle for peace,
against the am race and for the interests of the working class and all work-
ing people and for social progress.

The significance of the fraternal parties' collective actions in the interna-
tional arena increased in the 1970's.

The 1976 Berlin conference of European con-unist and workers' parties provided
reliable reference points for the working class and broad working people's
masses in the struggle against the arms race and for the consolidation of
detente and social progress. The Paris meeting of European cot-waist parties
in May 1980 contributed to the stimulation of the struggle on the continent
against the deployment of new American nuclear missiles. Conferences at which
the comlunists of the capitalist part of Europe, its northern countries,

Latin America. Africa and the Arab states discuss their regional proble-s

are convened periodically.

Together with other political and public forces the mists participate
actively in the world Peace Movement, the Organization of Solidarity of the
Asian and African Peoples and in other international democratic movelmnts.

The communists have played an active part at fora of peace supporters—in
Moscow, Helsinki and Brussels. The World Parliament of the Peoples in 19m
inSofia was of particular inortance. Some 2,260 representatives from 137
countries, more than 100 international organizations, including 18 special-
ized UN organizations, and over 300 political parties, including 83 comunist
parties, participated. The Sofia parliament oriented the public in tiurly
manner toward an effective repulse of the offensive against detente unleashed
by American imperialism and put convincing, inpressive argmnts at the his-
posal of the peace forces.

The collective efforts of the fraternal parties contributed in the past to the
success of the broadest, truly universal, campaigns of solidarity with heroic
Vietnam. The movemnt in support of the revolutionary forces of Afghanistan
and Ethiopia and Nicaragua and El Salvador and the freedon fiylters in south-
ern Africa and the Near and Middle East is assuming ever increasing proporb
tions currently.

86

FOR OFFICIAL l." "I ONLY
1he CPSU and the fraternal parties are the aain moral-political bulwark of

the selfless fighters against fascist dictatorships and tyrannical regiles and
all who are abject to cruel repression and are operating in the direst under-
ground situation. Sons 22 cal-mist parties are still illegal or senilegal.

Cruel repression has been brought down on the communists by the fascist junta
in Guile. Approximately 10.000 party were have been killed as the result

of bloody reprisals. Over 100,000 have been arrested or slbjected to police
persecution. Thousands of con-mists have been expelled fron the country.
Among the so-called "disappeareds," that is. those who have been seized and
whose fate is still uncertain. are V. Dias, deputy general secretary of the
Chilean Cos-must Party. and other presinent Co-Imist Party leaders. However,
as L. Corvalan declared at the 26th CPSU Congress, "the Chilean people have
not been and never will be brought to their knees."I

Hundreds of commists have died under torture or have disappeared without
trace in Uruguay since the 1973 coup. Approximately 6,000 Uruguayans (Con-
sunist Party nenbers, for the lost part) have been sentenced to long terns
of imprisonment and over 3,000 rennin imrisoned without trial and investi-
gation. including J.L. Nasser, J. Perez, prominent leaders of the Conunist
Party and We!" of parliaasnt, and others.

The party of col-unists in Guateasla is being cruelly persecuted. No general
secretaries of the Guatemalan Labor Party Central Conittse—B. Alvarado
Honzon (1972) and H. Alvarado Arellmo (l976)—approximtely 1) party Central
Committee neabers and hundreds of ﬁddle-echelon leaders have fallen at the
eucutioner's hands. More than 20 mists-trade union and student organ-
ization leaders-were secretly killed in l9w-l98l alone.

Persecution of the Paraguayan Cmist Party continues. Its leader, A.
Haidana, who was released in 1977 sets result of an internationa.‘ solidarity
campaign following 19 years of imprisonment, was again seized by the Paraguayan
secret policy on Argentinian territory in 1980, when he was preparing to re-
turn to the hoaeland to continue the struggle. "where ay working class and

my party are, there I shall be," hidana said. This is an example of what
,true revolutionaries there are in the ranks of the col-mist movement.

In a word, col-mists everywhere. under the nest difficult conditions. regard-
less of the difficulties and sacrifices, are waging a noble and often heroic
struggle for the interests of the working class and their people. And the
political vanguard of the working class—the international cot-unist nove-
nent—had approached the frontier of the 1980's, in L.I. Brezhnev's words, in
"confident stride". Even nore coaplex and critical problens confronted then
at this frontier.

II

The present situation in the world and the increased pressure on the part of
the opponents of detente aid the reactionary and nilitarist forces of

*” Greetings to the 26th CPSU Congress From the Coauunist, Uorkers', National-
Denocratic and Socialist Parties." Moscow, 1981, p 206.

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UR Vl'l'lklﬂb U99 Ul‘bl

imperialism demand of all the fraternal parties even mare assertive actions
for the preservation of detente, against the arms race and for the prevention
of thermonuclear war. This is now the main historical task of the communist
movenent, which is inseparable from its class interests and the development
of the world revolutionary process.

With the assmtion of office by the new adainistration in the United States
a fierce avowed campaign of reaction and aggression has been unleashed against
the forces of peace and democracy and the revolutionary movement. Top
statesaendeclare openly that they. you see, will "no longer tolerate" any
liberation movenent, which they explain as "Moscow's machinations". Turning
the course of world events infavor of imperialisr-such is the class essence
of the position of the new 0.8. Administration. An endeavor to "replay" his-
tory and take revenge for the successes of national and social liberation which

marked the'last decade can be clearly traced behind the counteroffensive
against detente.

Carter's "human rights" campaign is no longer seen as being sufficient. "In-
ternational terrorism," by which is meant both the columnist and any libera-
tion novement in general and which is portrayed as an instrument of "Soviet
expansion." has now been promoted to the foreground. He thus have a new
version of the old myth of the omipresent "hand of lbscow". This, ultimate-
ly, is how the 11.8. ruling circles jmtify the policy of whipping up tension
and the course toward military superiority and the buildup of military night.
As 0.8. Defense Secretary Heinberger candidly declares, "it is essential to
possess the capability of the use of military might" in order that the United
States can "control events or prevent events such as those in, for example,
Angola, Yemen and Ethiopia." The campaign of "comaeting international terror-
isn" announced by the 11.5. Administration has served a a kind of directive
for all imperialist, reactionary propaganda.

Antidentente policy is of a multipurpose nature.

It represents, first, an attempt to discredit the foreign policy of the
Soviet Union, which acquired particularly great authority in the 1970's, and
an endeavor to impede and complicate the developmnt of the socialist coun-
tries, forcing then to spend more on defense. A gadle is also being made
here on undernining the cohesion of the socialist countries and "creeping
counterrevolution“. Various neans--from ideological sabotage through direct
support for antisociolist elenents—are being teoyed for this purpose.

Second, the whipping up of the arm race and international tension is being
used for an offensive against the living standard of the working people and
an increase in the monopolies' superprofits. A golden rain of new appropria-
tions is literally being showered on the Pentagon. Attempts are also being
aade to force the entire peace-loving and democratic public to remain silent
or change its tune and to strike a blow at all movements and organizations
protesting the militarization of their countries, the cutting of social pro-
grams and an adventurist foreign policy.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Third. a departure from the policy of detente signifies a return to power
methods of politics in the national liberation zone. The U.S. Administration
has adopted a policy of open participation in the suppression of liberation
movements and has stepped up subversive activity against progressive regimes
and. put simply, has set in motim everything that is called "export of
counterrevolution". A thousands-strong gendarme "rapid deployment force" is
being formed as an instrument of direct intervention. Attents are being
made to drag other NATO countries into this dirty business.

In the Near East Israel's extauim of the undeclared war agaimt Lebanon is
being encouraged under the cover of hypocritical "condemations" of its pro-
vocation against Syria. The 11.3. military presence is being increased in
the Persian Gulf zone. and new military bases are being created in Egypt.
Somalia. Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Oman.

In the Middle East there is intervention against revolutionary Afghanistan.
participation in which the 0.8. President has now bluntly put down to his
credit. The rearming of Pakistan is planned.

In Latin America the United States has to its credit direct comlicity in the
suppression of the popular move-ant in El Salvador, economic blackmail of
Nicaragua, CIA participation in the removal of the progressive government on
Jamaica and the threat of intervention against Grenada and the expansion of

relations with reactionary military juntae, which are cynically called "mo-
derately repressive".

In Africa we have the resumption of open cooperation with South Africa and
support for the apartheid regime there, attempts at a neocolonialist solution
of the Namibia problem in the interests of the South African racists and di-
rect military and material assistance to the counterrevolutionary UNITA organ-
ination in Angola.

Thus it is a question of a global strategy of inerialism's comteroffensive
against the liberation forces.

Col—mists and the international peace-loving public regard the 26th CPSU
Congress as a forum which counterposed to the aggressive policy of imperial-
ism a decisive and realistic position which makes it possible to effectively
rebuff the hankerings of the forces of reaction and war. They value hid-11y
the restraint and calm confidence of the Soviet leadership. which has not suc-
cuui>ed to provocations and has not transferred relations between the USSR and
the United States to the level of "knife edge“. There is emphasis here of
the exceptional timeliness of the Soviet peace initiatives, which have been
put forward at a time when the United States has set the goal of adding a
new twist to the arms race spiral and when program of the creation of quali-
tatively new types of weapon of mass destruction. particularly the neutron
bomb. laser weapons and means of warfare in space. are being adopted one
after other there.

At the same time the 26th CPSU Congress showed how great now is the potential
of the forces of peace and social progress, which succeeded in the 1970's in

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

breaking the ”war-peaceful interlude-war" vicious circle and preventing a
military catastrophe.

The fraternal parties drew particular attention to the all-edaracing, compre-
hensive nature of the "CPSU's peace charter". Encompassing the most acute,
urgent questions of international life, it takes account of the political
interests of the col-mists and the peace forces of all parts of the world
and puts forward mobilizing slogans. Foreign friends emphasize the truly
democratic content of the congress' foreim policy program: the new Soviet
initiatives are addressed both to governments and also to the people's masses
and the entire world public.

The 26th CPSU Congress, in the estimation of the fraternal parties, was an
expression of solidarity with all forces of national and social liberation,
for whom international peace and detente are an important condition of the
achievement of the goals of liberation.

This was strikingly and splendidly put on the congress' platform by 6. Hall:
"You-the Soviet people and the CPSU—can always be proud of your peace mis-
sion and your historic contribution to the struggle for peace and detente.
You are bringing unkind a priceless gift—salvation from war and nuclear
catastrophe. Without your uncompromising, mswerving and heroic dedication
to the cause of peace our planet might now be a lifeless heap of nuclear
ashes. Yes, socialism is truly the savior of all Innkind."it

New possibilities have emerged, the goals have become more specific and at-
tainable, a deeper comprehension of the situation and the tasks is developing
and new ideas are arising currently in the antiwar movement in connection with
our congress' peace program. Faced with the danger of war, which the 11.8.
Administration is increasing with its irresponsible actims and statelents,

the antiwar movement in West Europe has recently assumed proportionsprobably
not seen since the start of the 1950's. This mvement has deep roots in the
people and unites people of the most diverse views and political beliefs.

It is particularly extensive in Heat Geruny. The movement here includes

the social democratic masses, many local party organizations and influential
figures of the SP1), some "free democrats," certain Bmdeswehr generals and
religious circles. More than 1 million persons, including many prominent
politicians, cultural personalities and journalists, have subscribed to the
well-known Krefeld Appeal, which calls on the government to reject the NATO
decision to deploy missiles in West Europe. Thousands of PRC citizens parti-
cipated in "peace marches" in variom of the country's lands under slogans of
active struggle against the ar- race and the deployment of new American inter-
mediate-range nuclear missiles on the territory of West Europe.

There is no country or any part of the worldwhere the Soviet peace initiatives
have not evoked interest and not stirred hopes that detente may be preserved
and war avoided.

_____.________————-——
*"creetings to the 26th CPSU Congress Prom Commist, workers', National-
Democratic and Socialist Parties ," pp 229-23).

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The United States is engaged in secret and unconcesled actions to force the
governments of the NATO countries to curb the antiwar novement, but it is con-
tinuing to grow. The broad sweep of the struggle against NATO's nuclear
policy is engendering serious conmrn in those who inspired it. The influen-
tial UASIIINGTON POST wrote in this connection on 29 March 1981: "A use move-
ment against nuclear am is growing and spreading in several of the met in-
portant west European countries, which is alarning certain of the Heat's of-
ficial representatives on the grounds that this could become a political force
strong enough to undermine NATO unity...." This is a significant acknowledg-
nent of the strength of the current upsurge of the antiwar want, a most
active part in which is being taken by the co-nnists.

The foreign policy initiatives of the 26th CPSU congress serve a a powerful
appeal to the peace-loving public to exert every effort in the struggle for
peace and against the threat of war. The peoples are persuaded tin and again
that the standard-bearers of peace and the nost selfless fighters against the

frenzied maniacs and hawks of the aggressive imerialist circles are the con-
nunists.

III

The domestic policy activity of the con-moist partia of the nonsocialist coun-
tries is developing under the lost diverse conditions. And this, naturally.
imparts a distinctiveness to their strategic and tactical goals. At the

sanne tine the effect of the co-on patterns of the struggle for socialisn
revealed by HandsnnnvLeninism and a cowarative coll-unity of concrete-historical
conditions in certain groups of countries and regions of the world are appar-
ent. For this reason inportant features of similarity are also manifested in
the activity of the communist parties of, for enmple, highly developed capit-
alist countries, Latin American countries and Asian or African countries.

As a whole. the situation in the nonsocialist part of the world is taking
shape nnnder the very strong influence of the further deepening of the general
crisis of capitalisn,,the exacerbation of social contradictions and the in-
creased claas--econnonnic and political-~strugg1e.

Developing Lenin's theory of state-monopoly capitalism, our party has proven
that the further iaperialisn goes in its attennpts to adapt to the struggle of
the two system and the scientific-technical revolution, the deeper and note
complex its socioeconomic contradictions and antagonism become. Recent years
have confirmed the trend toward the increased frequency and deepening of crisis .
production recessions. The structural crises-energy, currency, financial.
ecological and so forth-which are becoming interwoven with increasingly
frequent and profound cyclical crises. are continuing. The comnists' pre-
diction that state-monopoly regulation is incapable of saving capitalism
Iron crises is being corroborated tine and again.

The biggest social enely of present-day capitalist: is unemploynnnt. It has
doubled in the last decade in the developed capitalist countries. The number
of unemployed is currently approximately 8 million in the United States and

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

even more in West Europe-9 million—and in Britain it has approached the

level of the start of the 1930's, that is, the period of the so-called "great
depression".

Inflation continues rampant. All the attenpts of the Heat's ruling circles
to cope with it are failing. Under the banner of fighting inflation the
governments are stepping up the offensive against the working class and the
working people's living standard and cutting expenditure on social needs,
unemploylentbenefits, education, Iedical services and so forth. And at the
same tine orders to the military-industrial cooler are increasing sharply
and the military budgets are swelling. This is now a typical feature of the
policy of the governance of the majority of capitalist countries.

Today, as in the past, ultraright and fascist forces are attempting to use the
crisis situation and sociopolitical tension to their own reactionary, sinister
ends. This is why the sass work being done by the com-unist parties aimed at
explaining to the working people the true causes and essence of the crisis

is so inportsnt. This is why such importance is attached to consistent strug-

gle against attenpts to. overcon the crisis at the expense of the working peo-
pie.

This now basically determines the Iain directions of the domatic policy
activity of the cot-mist parties of the developed capitalist countries.

For what are the communists in these countries fighting currently?

First, for the right to work and against unenploynent. The comists are seek-
ing special treasures ained at preserving jobs. In the United States, Britain,
the PRC and other countries they consider the "battle for elploynent" a prior-
ity task. The German Communist Party is insisting that the right to work be
enshrined in the comtry's constitution and in a progressive code of labor

laws. The German Commist Party is opposing the shutdown of enterprises

and supporting the banning of mass redundacies, a reduction in the work week
with full preservation of wages and the comprehensive developnent of a re-
training professional improve-eat system.

At one time the military-industrial complex had spread the legend quite ex-
tensively that increased military production contributed to increased employ-
ment. The communists have now coqletely exposed the falsity of this propo-
sition. The coununists are directly linking the fiat against increased
military spending with the fight for elployment.

Second, considering the unprecedented surge of inflation and, simply put, the
gigantic rise in prices, the col-mists are advocating the adoption of really
effective anti-in‘lation neasures and'defending the working people's living
standard. -

The Austrian Comunist Party and the communist parties of a nulber of other
countries are putting forward the denand for automatic increases in wages

linked to increases in prices and taxes. The Commist Party of Great Britain
advocates price controls and the establismsnt of a national minimum wage.

90

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
Commists in the countries of the "eat and Japan are fiating for strict
measures to limit the rise in the prices of goods and services which consti-
tute a particularly large part of the working people's expenditure—food,
rent, gas and electricity, transport and so forth. The inortancs of public
price monitoring to be exercised primarily by the trade unions and consumer
associations is emphasized here.

In the fight against increased prices the workingpeople of the capitalist
countries have before them the example of stable prices for basic products and
connodities in the USSR. Delegations from abroad always show a particular
interest in this aspect of matters and inquire in detail as to how this is
achieved. It is sufficient to say at any meeting, whether in Italy, France,
the PRC or Japan, that the prices for bread, sugar and other basic products
in our country are currently the same as 20 years ago, while the prices in
their countries have doubled and tripled, to elicit an enthusiastic response
from those present. The working people in the capitalist countries rightly
see the stability of the prices of mass products as a principle of the so-
cialist society reflecting state concern for the man of labor.

In struggling for the day-to-day interests of the working people and support-
ing their demands the comnists at the same time reveal the connection be-
tween the iI-ediate, direct tasks of the antimonopolv struggle and the long-
term, socialist goals of the workers' movemt.

The third area of the struggle of the West's columnists is the defense of
democratic, including trade union, rights, a repulse of the infringements
thereof on the part of the official authorities and governments and implac-
able struggle against the riyltwing danger, which is nurtured by the military-
industrial complex. The co-Iunists and all democratic forces of West Europe
scored palpable successes in this field in the 1970's. The black spots of
the fascist regimes in Spain, Portugal and Greece were wiped off the political
map of Europe.

The events of recent weeks and months testify, however, that the forces of
rightwing extremism are not laying down their am. An attewt at a fascist
putsch was made and the dream of a new Franco is alive among the reactionary
military clique in Spain. The reactionary forces are conducting an offen-
sive against the gains of the April revolution in Portugal. In the United
States the attempts to drive the comtry into new McCarthyite hysteria and
unleash a new mass terrorist orgy of racists against black Americans and
against all democratic forces are becoming increasingly obvious. Attempts
to revise the constitution and draw up legislation for the contingency of
"ext raordinury circumstances" are increasing and militarism is raising its
hood in Japan.

The problem of terrorism has become very acute. In addition to the United
States. a wave of political and criminal terrorism is also deluging other
capitalist countries, particularly Italy and Spain. It is rolling toward
other capitalist countries also. Terrorism in the modern world is a result
and manifestation of the profound putrescence of bourgeois society and the
crisis of its political-ideological superstructure and moral degradation and
the outcome of the long-standing cultivation of the "law of the strong".

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Together with the rightwing profascist terrorism there is also another var-
iety thereof operating with "ultraleft" slogans. This is, for example, the
notorious Red Brigades in Italy aand all kinds of anarchist, Trotskiyite and
Maoist groups, which objectively, by the natur" 1nd consequences of their
activity and sometimes organizationally even, close ranks with the neofascists
and the CIA. Politically inature elemnts who have been driven to de-

spair resort to terrorism spontaneously in a number of instances, thinking

that something may be achieved in the fight against oppression by such methods,
which are harmful in essence and form. The conunist parties emphatically
condemn terrorism.

If we somehow try to bring all these heterogeneous phenomena and processes
together in one, we cannot fail to conclude that, as in the crisisperiod of
the 1930's, in the present phase of crisis for capitalism also it is attempting
to resort to methods which in son respects are essentially reminiscent of
the 1930's. But the correlation of forces in the world today is totally
different from the 1930's. The gigantically increased powerful forces of so-
cial progress and democracy oppose the extremist aggressive elements of fi-
nancial capital, which are again ready to push the world into the abyss of
fascism and war. But this by no means signifies that it is possible to dis-
play any complacency here and relax vigilance. It is essential to struggle
tirelessly and persistently against the threat of war and against the
militarist policy of the monoplies and the military-industrial oligarchy.
This is what the connunist parties are doing.

Fourth, both within the framework of individual capitalist countries and
internationally the communist parties and all progressive, demcratic forces
are confronted increasingly seriously with the problal of struggle against the
main force of world capital of our day—the big monopolies-"which have crossed
national boundaries and become transnational monopolies. The growth of these
mighty octopuses is leading to even greater economic instability, the deepen-
ing of the crisis processes and new disasters for the masses.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSU Congress set Soviet researchers
the task of an in-depth, Marxist study of the role of the transnational mono-
plies and the so—called military-industrial cowlex, which is also tending

to become an imperialist transnational force. Problems of the struggle

against the transnational monopolies have already been the subject of dis-
cussion at conferences of European communist parties and Marxist scholars.

Under current conditions tremendom significance is attached to the question
of the working class' allies. There has been a colossal increase in recent
decades in the army of wage workers of intellectual labor—employees and

the intelligentsia-~in the economically most developed capitalist countries.
This is a natural consequence of the process which V.I. Ienin once investi-
gated. "In all spheres of public labor capitalism," he wrote, "increases
with particular rapidity the nudner of employees and makes increasingly great
demands on the intelligentsia. This latter occupiesa distinctive positionamng
the other classes, associating partly with the bourgeoisie in its relations,
views and such .partly with the wage workers a capitalism increasingly
takes away the intelligentsia's self-sufficient position, makes it a dependent

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wage worker and threatens to lower its living standardv'“ v.1. Lenin enpha-
sized the trenendom iaportance of attracting the laboring intelligentsia
and esployees to the side of the working class and foresu the significance
of their unity. "Ho shady force," be predicted, "will withstand an alliance
of the representatives of science, the proletariat and technology."**

These instructions of Lenin's retain all theirsimificance under current
conditions, when the vital interests of the uillions-strong losses of the
laboring intelligentsia insistently denand unity with the working class. The
cmist parties are paying increasingly great attention to the specific prob-
lem of different groups of the intelligentsia and, in particular, to work
among the student youth, lecturers, doctors, those enployed in the use infor-
mation udia and so forth.

It is well known what significance K. Marx, P. Engels and V.I. Lenin attached
to the question of the alliance of the working class and the peasantry. On

a world scale and within the framework of a tremendous nuber of countries,
primarily of the national liberation zone, the peasantry constitutes a big

or still predoainant part even of the population. In a nunber of developed
capitalist countries the nulber of those employed inagricultune has declined
considerably as a result of its alnost total industrialization. but even
here the lboring far-ere have retained considerable econosdc weight and poli-
tical potential. This can be seen if only in the angle of the Cannon Market,
where agricultural policy is a subject of acute disagreeunts connected with
the interests and struggle of precisely this strata of the population.

The position of rural workers in the capitalist comtries is beconing parti-
cularly difficult at the present tine of crisis. The faraers' and peasants'
real into: is falling fron year to year, and they are increasingly being
ruined. The columnists in a nuﬂnr of countries, including France, Italy and
Greece, all the Cos-on Market countries in general and also in the United
States, Canada and Japan are paying serious attention to agrarian policy and
actively defending the interests of the toiling peasantry.

Big efforts are being made in this area by the Trench Conmist Party [PCP].

The newspaper published by the Connist Party, LA rms (THE EARTH), is
popular among the peasants.

The commist parties of a hater of BBC countries are actively advocating a
price policy which guarantees the rural workers sufficient payout for their
labor and is supporting the peasantry in the face of the nonopolies.

The Columnist Party of the United States is resolutely defending the interests
of the agricultural workers, poor farners and owners of fanily farm and fer-era
who carry a huge nortgage and debt burden load. The Cmadian Commist Party

_____5_______."_—____
NJ. Lenin, Cowlete works, vol «'0, p 209.
**Ibid., vol 100, p 189.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is energetically championing the interests of farmers suffering from the "price
scissors" and demanding the adoption of effective assures against the plunder
of the‘farners by the monopolies, big landowners and private banks.

In defending the interests of the working people and organizing them for the
struggle for their rights andneeds the communists of the capitalist countries
understand, of course, that any possible gains in this sphere cannot be stable
and long-term without constant and persistent mass struggle. The concrete link:
age of this struggle for insediate, partial demands, so to speak, with the
struggle for fundamental transformations aimed against the omnipotence of the
monopolies and, ultimately, against the state-monopoly system and for so-
cialist goals is highly pertinent and very complex for many comist parties.
Speaking from the platform of the 26th CPSU Congress, G. Plissonier, mem-
her of the PCP Politburo, expounded the PCP's position on this question thus:
"In inspiring the struggle in defense of the working people's interests and
for satisfaction of their economic, social and political demands the PC? is

at the same time struggling to bring nearer the h0ur of genuine political
changes which will open the way to socialism.“

Many communist parties, the French, Germ, Japanese, Amtrian, Danish and
Belgian, for example, have in recent years drawn up program of profound
democratic transformations. They reflect national specifics in each country,

of course. But what are the general features typical of the mjority of such
programs?

Defense of national interests against the transnational monopolies and state-
monopoly sssoci" tons and an aggressive struggle against the encroachmants
of American inner. .iism on political sovereignty and the national economy.

Struggle for the net 'onalization of themost important sectors of the economy
and democratic control of both the state and private sectors of the economy.

An endeavor to ensure the democratic planning of the economy with the regard
for the interests of the working people.

The demand for profound democratic transformations in the sphere of education,
the higher school. health care and social security and in defense and develop-
ment of the national culture.

Struggle for the extension of democratic rights and the abolition of repres-
sive laws against the worker and democratic movements and for democratiza-
tion of the army, the security services, the police and the courts.

The commist parties regard realization of these programs as a stage in the
continuous process of the persistent struggle of the working class and its
allies paving the way toward socialism.

 

*"Greetinga to the 26th CPSU Congress From Conunist, Uorkers', National-

Democratic and Socialist Parties," p 262.

94

FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY
An important zone of the present-day liberation struggle is the latin Ameri-
can continent. Harrist-Leninist parties operate in my Latin American coun-

tries. There are approximately 650,000 consulate here (besides socialist
can).

In the Latin American countries where fascist regimes rule the co-unists set
as the main priority task the liquidation of fascism and the establishment of
a democratic system. According to L. Corvalan. Chilean con-mists reject the
alternatives of fascism or socialism and facial or bourgeois dnnocracy. They
advocate the establishment of a new, demcratic popular and national system
under which such profound transformations would be effected as would be pos-
sible on the basis of an arrangelent with political allies.

In countries where bourgeois freedom have been preserved the commist
parties are endeavoring--by means of the association of progressive forces

in a broad front or coalition—to iwede antidemocratic trends in government
policy, counteract the comterrevolutionary alternative and isolate the most
reactionary elemnts and those most closely connected with inaerialism. They
are persistently pursuing a policy of ensuring the hegemony of the working
class for without this the path to fundamntal transformations and genuine
national independence and social liberation is impossible.

The documnts of the 1975 havens conference of Latin American com-mist par-

ties observe that the qualitative changes in the socioeconomic development

of the countries of the continent have made their ark on the nature and

content of the revolutionary process. Its principal feature is the anti-
1Iperialist thrust. "Insofar as American inerialism is our nain and canon
enemy," the conference declaration states, "the strategy and tactics of the
revolution in Latin America for those who, like us. believe that its ultimate
goal is socialise should be characterized by an anti-ilperialist thrmt." The
main goal of the liberation struggle in Latin America is, as before. the achieve-

ment of complete national independence.

An important trend which has made itself known internationally has been the
endeavor of many Latin American countries to perform a more independent role.
This reflects the growing level of their economic developmt. The attempts
of the imperialist monopolies to continue the unrestricted plunder of the Latin
American countries' natural resources are encountering increasingly frequent-
ly resistance on the part of the public and the governments. An ever in-
creasing nuvber of countries is opposing the economic and political diktat

of the United States.

Inperialisn exercises its domination in Latin America via the local ruling
classes, primarily the financial-latifundist oligarchy. For this reason the
national liberation struggle here is inseparably connected with the struggle
against the local finsncial-latifundist oligarchies, local monopoly capital
and, ultinstely, capitalism itself.

At the sale time the docunnts of the main parties point out that al-
thouyl there are already certain material prerequisites for socialism in many

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Latin Anerican countries, revolution here cannot seen. a socialist char-
acter imdiately. A leader of the Argentine Communist Party, R. Ghioldi,
wrote: "Our party believes that a democratic, agrarian and anti-inperialist
revolution will bring closer the stage of socialist revolution and accelerate
the mount of transition thereto.... Our party inseparably links its strug-
gle for the country's mlete independence and antilatifundist and denocratic
transformations opening the way to socialisn with defense of the cause of
peaw and disarnsmnt...." As yet, however, the Argentine co-Iunists are
conducting a difficult struggle for the comtry's democratic reneval, seeing
this as a necessary prerequisite of profound revolutionary transfornations of
all aspects of the life of society in the future.

The native forces of revolution in Latin America are the working class. the
peasantry and a large part of the niddle strata. The lost populous ally of
the working class is the peasantry. The rural population is suffering not
only from the oppression of capital but also precapitalist, feudal for-s of
exploitation. The co-mist parties are advocating radical agrarian reform,
the safeguarding of the lad of the peasants and agricultural workers and
their cooperation. Thus the progran of Uruguay's commists proposes the
expropriation from the latifundists of the land which is unsuitable for farm-
ing and animal husbandry or which is not being cultivated, the transfer of
the unutilized land to the small-scale and niddle peasants or agricultural
cooperatives and the development of new land such as to correspond to the
interests of the rural workers; and assistance to the agricultural cooperatives,
particularly support for then in the struggle against the big landowners and
nonopolies.

The present situation in Latin Allerica is characterized by the appearance of
elements of a new upsurge of the liberation anti-imperialist struggle follow-
ing the phase of the counterrevolutionary offensive in the first half of the
1970's. The nest striking boosts to this upsurge are the victory of the
revolution in hicaragua and the revolutionary movement of the people of El
Salvador.

More than 30 columnist parties uniting in their ranks approximately 700,000
neuters are currently operating in the Asian and African developing comtries.

Despite all the difficulties, repression and underground conditions, here also
the communist novement is a real political force. The influence of the Con-
munist Party of India and the Syrian Comist Party is growing, the Egyptian
Communist Party has been recreated, the Iran People's Party hm energed from
Lhe underground the Tunisian Com-mist Party has been legalized and the posi-
tions of the Lebanese (to-mist Party, the Conunist Party of Sri Lanka and
the Connunist Party of Bangladesh are strengthening.

The task set by v.1. Lenin of finding concrete forms of cooperation with the
peasant movement and striving for the cohesion of all forces interested in

the consolidation of national sovereignty and the creation of conditions for
the surmounting of technical-econonic and cultural backwardness and an improve-
ment in the living conditions of the people's masses remains relevant for
Asia's communists.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Commist Party of India. Co-unist PartonSri Lanka and others are de-
termining their tasks with regard for the situation in their countries and
the alignment and correlation of class and political forces. The program of
the (Jo-mist Party of India says: "Before marking on the path of social-
ism and beginning the constructianof the socialist society, India has to pass

the stage of the cowlation of the anti-iqerialist, antifeudal, democratic
revolution.” -

At a conference held in 1978 cor-mist parties of Arab comtries concluded

that "the interaction and organic link between the national liberation struggle
of the peoples of individual Arab countries and the Arab world as a whole

on the one hand and the struggle for social liberation on the other strengthened"
in the 1970's. "It is ohviom that socioeconomic developmnt is connected both
with the struggle against iwerialism and the monopolies and against reaction

and with the strengthening of relations with the countries of the socialist
system."

Our party adopts an mderstanding mad sympathetic attitude toward the activity
of the fraternal parties, which are tackling diverse social and national tasks
under the specific conditions of their countries and regions. Expressing this
internationalist position of the CPS". Conrado L.I. Brezhnev declared at the
26th party congress: "Soviet co-nists welcome the communist parties' achieve-
ments in the broadening of their ranks, the strengthening of relations with the
masses. the championing of the interests of the working class and all working
people and their democratic ridlts and freedom and the struggle for uniting
the omnipotence of the monopolies and curbing the growth of militarism and for
a socialist development prospect for their countries.“ ~

The speeches of our col-mist guests at the 26th CPSU Congress show graphi-
cally what great ideological-political support is being rendered our class
brothers by the stability and dynamism of the development of the Soviet econ-
omy, our social achievemts and CPSU policy, which is entirely subordinated
to the motto: all for the good of man, all in the name of mm.

A considerable contribution to this great cause is being made by our party
and its ideological-theoretical and ideological-political work, which is not
only of intraparty and domestic political but also international significance.
The preparation of a new version of the CPS]! Program lies ahead. This will
raise our entire theoretical and ideological activity to a new level.

IV

Despite the diversity of the conditions in which the world col-mist movement's '
constituent parties operate and despite the difference of the tasks which they
are tackling, proletariat inter-nationalism remains its cornerstone.

The con-son denominator of sur movement's diversity and the single final goal
set by the communists of different comtries is the revolutionary transformation

7"Haterial of the 26th cpsu Congress," 1) 19.

97

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

of society. the victory md establishmnt of the power of the working class

and the people of labor, the building of socialism and lasting peace in this
world. ' Such cor-unity continues to determine the nature of the counter move-
ment as an international force. It also fosters the endeavor within the

ranks of each co-unist party to strengthen the ties of fraternity. coopera-
tion and solidarity with their comrades in other countries and to defend the
cohesion of the commist movement. It is not fortuitous that our ideological
enenies are constantly attacking proletariat internationalisn. The 26th

CPSU Congress lent powerful new iqetus to the strengthening of the interna-
tionalist positions in the cor-mist and throudaout the revolutionary-libera-

tion lovenents. This is not only of ideological but also great practical
significance.

The congress once again showed as forcefully as could be that talk of prole-
tarian internationalism being "obsolete" is groundless and repudiated by

the vast majority of co-Inists. The entire work of the congress and the
speeches of the representatives of the fraternal parties are graphic testimony
to the vitality of proletarian internationalisn, its constant enrich-ant and
its capacity to "1113112," so to speak, the experience of increasingly new
revolutionary forces.

Several nain areas in which the efforts of the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee and
its Politburo for the development of international relations with the frater-
nal parties of the nonsocialist countries are concentrated nay be highlighted.

Particular inortmce is attached to the neetings and talks of I..l. Brezhnev,
general secretary of the CPSU Central Co-ittee, and delegations of our party
which he heads with the leaders of the fraternal parties. Talks have been con-
ducted in recent years between L.I. Brezhnev and G. Harchais (1980), 8. Der-
linguer (1978 and 1979), K. Hiyamoto (1979) and R. lao (1980).

Every year neetings are held in the CPS!) Central Cal-littee with dozens of
delegations of the fraternal parties. In traveling to the Soviet Union and
asking a tour of the comtry these delegations have a chance to feliliarize
theuelves with the CPSU's work experience. Foreign commists see the results
of the Soviet people's labor and the successes in socialist competition with
their own eyes. And I would like to stress particularly here the role of our
republic, kray, oblast and other local party organizations, which, receiving
delegations and representatives of the com-must and revolutionary-denocra.
tic parties, are naking their big and very important contribution to the
strengthening of international relations. This is a matter of trencndom
political importance and practical inplelnntation of the policy of party con-
gresses aimed at the strengthening of internationalist solidarity between the
CPSU and the Soviet people and the comists of other countries.

In turn, delegations of our party regularly participate in the biggest under-
takings of foreign conunist parties, in the work of party congresses and

in press celebrations. This strengthens the ties of friendship and nutual
mderstanding and conradeship and affords an opportunity for us to inforn
our friends in detail at "first hand," so to speak, of CPS!) activity and the
great creative feat of our people, who have created the world's first society
of developed socialist: and who are proceeding successfully toward commnisn,
and to describe our country's very rich spiritual life and Soviet democracy.

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The CPSU has a perfectly defined position concerning divergences and disagree-
nents in the column movement. If it is a question of "different readings"
with respect to individual, concrete questions of the class struggle brought
about by dissinilarity of conditions, this is one thing. Such differences

are surmountable. In any event, they should not serve as an obstacle to
political cooperation, particularly on international issues, the less so in
that it is precisely joint participation in the col-on struggle which is the
best method of gradually surmomdng differences. "Disagree-ants in principle
between revolutionaries and refer-iota and between creative Narxism mad dog- '
Iatic aectarianisa and leftist adventurism are,” as Comrade I..I. brezhnev
said at the 26th CPSU Congress, “quite another.”

A particular issue is the critical judpnts which are sometimes expressed
in certain co-aunist parties in connection with this aspect of our country's
development or the other. Soviet people by no means believe that our society
has reached the limit of perfection. We have problems and difficulties, and
the CPSU does not hide them. This was also discmsed candidly at the con-
gress—both in the CPSU Central Couttee Report and in the speeches of the
delegates. The CPSU values good wisha and advice as manifestations of friend-
1y concern for the canon cause. ”He listen attentively to contadely, con-
structive criticism," Comrade l..I. Brezhnev observed. "But we ewhatically
oppose 'critician'which distorts socialist reality and thereby wittingly

or unwittingly does inerialist propaganda and the class enely a service."**

It is for this reason that nany fraternal parties believe it wrong altogether
to comterpose to the vital and constantly developing socialism which actually
exists and which has been conditioned historically plans of a future social-
ist society which it is ideally proposed to create in this country or the
other. A. thsl, general secretary of the Portuguese Col-mist Party Central
Connittee, wrote: "...we believe that however great the distinctiveness of
the program of a co-unist party of a capitalist country, this program cannot
be counterposed to socialism such as it is. It should be comtarposed to the
capitalist society, irrespective of its political regime. Counterposing one's
own program of the building of socialism to the reality of the socialist coun-
tries would inevitably lead to a weakening of the struggle for socialism in
one's own country."

As far as the riynt to national specifics is concerned, the CPS" holds firmly
to Leninist standpoints on this issue, regarding consideration of concrete
national conditions not only legitimate but also obligatory. Without this,
not a single party is capable of becoming a real political force in its own
comtry. The 26th CPSU Congress gave a reninder of this thought of henin's:
all nations will arrive at socialism, this is inevitable, but not all will
arrive identically, each lending distinctiveness to the process of the trans-
formation of social life)“ Despite the spiteful assertions of bourgeois

* Haters a]. of the 26th CPSU Congress, 17.

P
**Ib1d.
***See v.1. Lenin, "Conplete Horks," vol 30, p 123.

99

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

propaganda. the CPS]! has not imposed and is not now imposing on anyone any
stereotypes and outlines which ignore the particular features of this country
or the other. Practice shows that in each country where socialism is victorious
the forms, methods aud'paths of socialist transformation and the creation and
strengthening of the foundations of socialism are distinguished by their
singularities. There is, therefore, no reason to speak of any ”standardization"
and contrast mist parties according to recognition or nonrecognition of
the paths of the reorganization of society for which they have opted.

Soviet comnists and all Soviet people value highly foreign oommists'
manifestation of international solidarity with us, treasure it and derive
strength and inspiration from it. From the platform of the 26th CPSU Congress
the representatives of conmnist and other progressive parties emphatically
rebuffed anti-Sovietiam, which is particularly inportant under the present
conditions of exacerbation of the antagonist of the two systems. A thought
was pursued in nany speeches which has to be supported: repudiation of anti-
Sovietisva is a fundamental criterion of a class. intemationalist Pontcha-

Not only inperialism but the Glinese leadership also has been endeavoring
particularly assiduously for many years now to iqose anti-Sovietism and
drag it into the cou‘sunist ranks. For two decades it has been trying out
various tactics of undermining the positions of the comunist parties. Ini-
tially it took the path of knocking together Maoist groupings in various
countries, which it used in the struggle against the col-unist mvement. But
this tactic went bankrupt. Nowhere were pro-Beijing proteges able to create
viable political organizations. The majority of. then has by now collapsed.
Utilizing a selective approach. so to speak, under the mask of "normalization
of relations," the Chinese leadership has now adopted a course aimed at coun-
terposing certain co-Iunist parties to our party. The anti-Soviet and anti-
socialist purpose of these maneuvers is obvious. For-this reason establish-
ing and developing interparty relations with the Beijing leadership under

the present conditions means indirectly approving its dangerous foreign policy
course, which is geared to a compact with isperialism.

It should be said that a rapid process of disenchantment with Haoism is now
under way and that the "new" tactics of the Chinese leadership are also doomed
to fail.

The present-day couunist movenent has a rich and long history. Deriving
lessons from its difficult experience, over six-plus decades it has formulated
standards of relations between parties which in the present situation also
ensure the conditions for the preservation of the ideological-political health
and fighting efficiency of our great movement. Affirming the CPSU's fidelity
to these standards, our party's 26th congress contributed to a strengthening
of its Handst—beninist foundations.

V

Among the processes of world significance an increasingly big role is being
performed by the national liberation movement. The key question of its
development in our time is the question of revolutionary democracy. What
does it represent and what is its social essence? It is a bloc of anti-
inperislist, progressive forces which is bated primarily 0n the peasant masses

100

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and seniproletarian urban strata, radical circles of the intelligentsia and
the progressive military. The fact that it advocates a socialist choice
and strives for its practical realisation is what determines revolutionary
democracy as a political sovenent and ideological current.

Its increased role in the world revolutionary process is mifested:

first, in the growth of the water of rsvolutionary-dsnocrstic parties and
the extension of their influence on the masses;

second, in the increased number of countries which have opted for a socialist
orientation or proclaised a socialist path of develop-ant;

third, in the increased gravitation toward scientific socialism, which marks
a further stage of the spread of Harxist-Leninist teaching; and

finally, in the development and strengthening of cooperation and allied rela-
tions with actual socialism and the columnist parties.

The following data attest the nuserical growth of the revolutionary-democratic
parties. Whereas at the start of the 1960's there were approxisately 10 such .
parties, there are now approximately (.0 of then. There are in practice very
few remaining countries liberated fron colonialism where revolutionary-deno-
cratic forces do not operate in one form or another.

Of course, there have been losses. There has been a degeneration in places

of the leadership of revolutionary-democratic parties, which have descended

to reactionary, rightwing-nationalist position and positions of class colla-
boration with isperialisn. Egypt and Somalia are the most typical cases.

But such deviations are isolated. Moreover, even where revolutionary deno-
cracy was at one time defeated, in Giana or Mali, say. it is once again mak-
ing its presence felt as a serious political force and striving for the restor-

ation of its positions.

The states headed by revolutionary-democratic parties have switched to an
offensive against the positions of inerislisn in their countries' economies
and are endeavoring to restrict capitalist relations. There are currently
appmxinately 20 such states, and their population constitutes rouﬂxly 160
million. while 20 years ago there were only 6 such countries, with a popula-
tion of 50 million.

~An objective pattern of this process was revealed by v.1. Lenin. It was he

who substantiated for the first tine hhe possibility for individual countries
of bypassing or reducing the capitalist stage of develop-eat. Lenin pre-
dicted that the struggle of the Isjority of mnkind against colonial oppression,
dependence and backwardness would develop directly into a struggle against
capitalism and, moreover. that the peoples which had lagged behind in their
development would be able to rely on the comtries where socialism had been
victorious. Life has fully corroborated the correctness of this brilliant

piece of foresight .

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The upsurge of the revolutionary national movesent is leading to increasingly
new countries falling away fron the imperialist systea, combat revolutionary
parties energing and new leaders coming to the fore. "ho even recently knew
the nenes of Comrades Hengistu ﬂaile Karin, Babrak Karmal, Ali Nasir Huts-ad,
Jose Eduardo dos Santos and Senora Rachel! Yet they now head states with po-
pulations of 15, 20 and 30 million even, as, for example, in Ethiopia.

The countries of a socialist orientation have become a dynamic force interna-
tionally and an important positive factor of world politics. Their voice is
being heard attentively in the nonaligned mvenent, the United Nations and
other international organizations. they are playing an increasingly active
part in the struggle for peace and are cooperating with the Soviet Union and
the other socialist states.

The eeergent countries' development along a progressive path, L.l. Brezhnev
emphasized in the CPSU Central (Jo-littee Report to the 26th party congress.

is occurring dissimilarly and under complex conditions, but the main directions
are similar. The positions of the iQerialist nonopolies, local haute bour-
geoisie and the feudal lords are gradually being wound up in these countries.
The comanding heiglts in the scenery are being secured for the people's state.
A transition to the planned development of the production forces is under way.
A cooperative movement in the countryside is being encouraged. A process of
the strengthening of the revolutionary parties is under way, the role of the
working people people's nassea in social life is increasing and the machinery
of state is being reinforced with national personnel devoted to the people.
The anti-inperialist nature of their foreign policy is typical of all these
countries.* The analysis of the general patterns of the development of 'the
emergent countries nade in L.I. Brezhnev's report is an inortant contribu-
tion to Marxist-Leninist theory on this question.

These patterns are reflected differently in different countries. Some are
only just eabarking on revolutionary transformations, in others the process
of socioeconomic renewal is quite well advanced and has acquired considerable
scope and depth. In this case it is legitimate to talk about then no longer
simply as countries of a socialist orientation but as states which have opted
for a path of socialist development. The nain thing is that the position of
such countries become increasingly strong and stable. All historical experb
ience testifies that for this it is necessary:

to have a revolutionary party leading society and operating on the basis of
scientific socialism;

to strengthen the organs of denocratic power fro. top to bottom;

to prepare and train party and state personnel devoted to the working people's
masses and the ideals of socialism;

_‘—______._._
*See 'Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 12.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
to strengthen national armed forces capable of defending thenpeople's gains;

to constantly extend the relations of the party and the state with the masses
and enlist the working people in the running of public affairs;

to pursue a correct economic and social policy providing for the strengthening
of the country's independence, a rise in the level of production and an improve-
ment in the population's life; end

to develop relations with the socialist countries-the most faithful and de-
pendable friends of independent freedom-loving states.

In the majority of countries which have opted for the path of socialist changes
a process of the formation of parties of the revolutionary vanguard which are
ideologically and organizationally cohesive and capable of being an effective
instrument of the ideological training and political leadership of the masses
is developing. Such parties have already been created in South Yemen, Angola,
Afghanistan, Mozambique. Congo and Benin. Such a party is also taking shape

in Ethiopia and certain other countries.

These parties recognize the principles of proletarian internationalism. Their
primary organizations are being created in accordance with the production-
territorial principle. A strictly individual method. Co-unication with the
people performs a tremendous role. Life teaches that only a party which lives
in the thick of the people. knows their mood and aspirations and is able to
approach the masses and win their trust is capable of providing for the prac-
tical inlementation of the policy of a socialist orientation.

A most important sphere of the activity of parties of the revolutionary van-
guard is an economic policy which affords an opportunity for simultaneously
creating a new material-technical base and improving the life of the working
people. The decisive moment and. it may be said, turning point guaranteeing
the success of a socialist orientation is the achievement of a position where
the working people really perceive the fruits of the revolution, and not only
in the moral-political sense-in the sphere of the human dignity and respect
for the man of labor which has been found-~moreover, but also in the sphere
of a marked inprovement in material conditions.

The experience of the building of the fomdatlons of the new society accum-
lated by the Soviet Union and the other socialist cos-unity cauntriea is of
great value for the states which have embarked on the path of socialist
changes. It is not, of course, a question of some copying of our models.

The paths of the transition to socialism are manifold. The practice of the
countries of a socialist orientation is contributing and will continue to
contribute much that is new here. And it is understandable that each of them
aspires to find forms and methods of transformations which will correspond

to concrete conditions and national singularities.

A striking demonstration of the CPSU's relations with revolutionary democracy
was its representatives' extensive participation in the 26th CPSU Congress.
Whereas in 1961 delegations of only 3 revolutionary-democratic parties and

103
FINICHﬂﬂCJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizations attended the 22d congress at the invitation of the CPSU Central
Conittee, there were 36 of then at the 26th congress.

The form of the CPSU's relations with the revolutionary democrats are Inni-
fold. They consist primarily of the development of the mutual exchange of
party and party-government delegations. Party and party-government delegations
from Angola and Afghanistan, Algeria and South Yemen, Ethiopia and Hozamibque,
Congo, Kanpuchea and other countries visited the USSR in 1980 alone at the
invitation of the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee and USSR Government. Cooperation

on a planned basis is exercised with the ruling parties of Afghanistan, Angola,
South Yemen. Benin, Hozmique, Guinea-Bissau, the Cape Verde Islands. the
People's Replblic of Congo, Tanzania and Mali.

At the request of many of the revolutionary-democratic parties the CPSU renders
them diverse assistance in the training of party personnel. More than 1. 600
of their activists are being trained in party, Konsomol and trade union edu-
cational institutions of the USSR. Literature in 65 foreign languages and
hundreds of books and brochures of political subject matter are published in
the Soviet Union. Their total print in 1979 was 15 million copies. The re-
volut ionary-denocratic parties are being rendered assistance in the organiza-
tion of party schools and the creation of a base for their own press.

The international conference on the theme "Joint Struggle of the Workers' and
National Liberation Movements Against Iqerialism and for Social Progress" in
October 1980 in Berlin was a major landmark tnstrengtheningthealliance ofuorld
socialism, the workingclass of the capitalist countries and the revolutionary-
democratic forces of national liberation. It demonstrated the revolutionary-
democratic parties' growing gravitation toward cohesion with world socialism
and the profound concurrence of the interests and positions of the three main
revolutionary streams of the present day.

The policy of the further strengthening of the CPSU's allied relations with
the revolutionary-democratic forces comtitutes a most inportant element of
the CPSU's overall policy of the unity of world socialism and the national
liberation novement. This policy was confirmed as emphatically as could be
by the 26th party congress.

VI

In the struggle for the interests of the working class and all working people
the communists consider it their duty, as v.1. Lenin taught, to actively
develop cooperation with other democratic forces. These also include social
democracy.

Present-day social democracy, Comrade L.I. brezhnev observed in the report at
the 26th CPSD Congress, possesses considerable political weight. Indeed, in
the majority of west European countries, including the NATO countries, social-
ist and social democratic parties perform a pronounced and important role in
political life and in a number of instances head governments or participate

in then. Consequently, the development of the international situation largely
depends on the positions of social democracy and the activeness of the millions
of its supporters.

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Guided by the decisions of the thh and 25th congresses, throughout the 1970's
the CPSU endeavored consistently to develop relations with the socialists and
social democrats. It thereby made its contribution to realization of the
common purpose of the world cmmmunist movement of the strengthening of the
joint efforts of the political parties and organizations operating in the
ranks of the working class, particularly on questions of war and peace. This
was expressed in the work and summary documents of, inter alia, the berlin
conference and the Paris meeting of European communists.

The CPSU now maintains relations with 20 socialist and social democratic
parties-mainly on questions of the struggle against the danger of war. The
contacts with the leadership of the Socialist International, the participation
.of CPSU representatives in the Socialist International's disarmament confer-
ence (Helsinki, 1978). the contacts with the working group which it set up

for this problem and the reception of its delegation by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev
and in the CPSU Central Committee (1979) were important.

Questions of mutual relations with the socialists and social democrats are
constantly within the sights of the com-nusts of the capitalist countries
also. The fraternal parties 0‘ West Europe are doing much to achieve better
mutual understanding with the socialists and social democrats in the inter-
ears of the joint struggle for the common goals of the workers' movement and
peace-loving forces. Of course, the positions of each communist party on this
question have their own particular features brought about by concrete circum-
stances.

The decisions of the 26th C280 Congress on international issues were perceived
positively in social democratic circles. The Executive Committee of Great
Britain's Labor Party passed unanimously a resolution which said that the
Laborites "welcome President L.I. Brezhnev's statement at the 26th CPSU Con-
-gress" and express support for the Soviet peace initiatives. SPD Chairman

H. Brandt. who is also president of the Socialist International, said: "I
wish to say in all seriousness that the Heat would be following bad advice

if it did not first study these proposals and make full use of the opportuni-
ties for negotiation."

There was support at meetings of social democratic leaders of Belgium, Holland,
Luxembourg, Denmark and Norway in 1981 for the position of the Dutch and
Belgian socialists,who insist on their countries' refusal to allow the deploy—
ment of new American missiles there. At a conference of social democratic
leaders in Paris (March 1981) there was criticism of 0.8. policy, which is
aimed at the achievement of military superiority over the USSR, and expres-
sions of concern at the increase in the American military budget and attempts
to foist the neutron weapon on West Europe. Certain speakers pointed direct-
ly to the fact that the deterioration of the world situation began with NAJO's
decision in the fall of 1978 on a 3-percent increase in military budgets and
as a result of the nonratification of the SALT II Treaty. Social democratic
figures paid great attention to the Soviet peace initiatives put forward by
the 26th CPSU Congress.

He believe, and this was stated directly at our party's 26th congress, that
social democracy could be doing more to defend the peoples' vital interests,
primarily to strengthen peace. As is known, the social democratic leaders
far from always operate in this direction in practice.

. 102
FOR OF1WCIA USEiﬂvLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The propositions concerning the role of social democracy expressed by Comrade
L.I. Brezhnev from the platform of the congress are mdoubtedly a subject for
serious reflection both for leading personalities and also for the ordinary
members of the social democratic parties. Both the big opportunities of social
democracy and its great historical responsibility for' the cause-cot peace and
the peoples' security were emphasized anew. Once again the communists ex-
tended the hand to the social democrats for joint struggle for man's deliver-
ing from new devastating wars and the salvation of peace. '

All that 'has been said, of course, by no means removes the need to continue
the ideological struggle, particularly against anticoaztmism in the ranks of
social democracy. At talks with social democratic personalities our party's
representatives consistently defend positions of principle and tell our inter-
locutors plainly where we disagree with them and what we consider incorrect
and unacceptable. And, if necessary. there is always a public repudiation of
anti-Soviet and anticommist attacks on the part of some social democratic
personality or the other.

The 26th CPSU Congress demonstrated convincingly the aspiration of the vast
majority of colmsunist, workers' and revolutionary-democratic parties to a
strengthening of relations and cooperation with our party. They value highly
its authority. its tremendous potential in the struggle for peace, security
and social progress and its immutable internationalist line. Solidarity on
the part of the present-day revolutionary forces is also helping us tackle
the tasks set by the congress.

Of course, the class enemy undertakes everything to break up the revolution-
ary and democratic forces. The pressure of the ruling bourgeoisie in the
capitalist camp is still very great. An entire system of special state and
interstate machinery for anticomsunist, anti-Soviet activity has been created.
The CIA has a special department for cowating communism. Momtains of books
have been written against communism and against our ideology and policy. The
newspapers, radio and television and verbal propaganda engage in this by the
day and by the hour. In a word. the struggle continues and will continue to
spread.

As a whole, however, an irresistible process of the strengthening of the
positions of peace and socialism is under way. The ideas of conunism are
continuing their successful march around the world. The people's messes
have become involved in active political life on a scale unprecedented even
in history's most stormy periods. And this is the surest guarantee of the
world revolutionary process' unswerving, ongoing development.

Proceeding from the decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress, the CPSU, as a part
of the cousunist movement, sees as its task:

developing even more actively joint actions with the fraternal parties in
the struggle for the accomplishment of the main historical task of the cur-
rent mment: preventing the growth of the danger of war, preserving and
consolidating detente and preventing imperialism from adding a new. most dan-
gerous twist to the arms race spiral;

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
contributing to the cohesion and autual understanding of the revolutionary
and other demcratic, progressive forces in the face of the adventurist,
aggressive and neocolonialist plans and actions of inerialisn and in support
of the peoples' just liberation struggle; and

consistently championing the principles of the eternally vital revolutionary
teaching of Marxism-Leniniaa in the nsne of consolidation of the columnist
movement on an internationalist, class basis.

Lenin and our party played an exceptionally important part in the inception and
development of the present-day co-unist lovenent. Taking the decisions of
the 26th CPS!) Congress as a basis, Soviet cos-mists will continue to do every-

thing within their power for a strengthening of its positions, an increase
in its influence and the growth of its authority.

- P.N. Denichev, candidate of the CPSU Central Comittee Politburo and USSR
minister of culture: "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of Cultural
Building"

In pondering and analyzing the documents of the 26th CPSU Congress, this out-
standing event of our tine, we are all atteltping to find the right paths of
the practical implementation of its ideas and conclusions with reference to
the spheres of our own activity and our own areas of work.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report "CPSU Central Conittee Report to the 26th
CPSU Congress and the Party's Priority Tasks in the Sphere of Domestic and
Foreign Policy" gave the Lenin Party's clear, scientifically substantiated
and principled answer to all key questions of the present-day.

I

The main directions of the accomplishment of the economic, social. political,
ideological and international tasks determined by the party congress are also
related to the main directions of cultural building in the USSR. Ihe CPSU
Central Couitme Report to the 26th party congress and the Hain Directions

of the USSR's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and the Period
Through 1990 which were confirmed by the congress set the sphere of culture
and art nev tasks of a grand social scale corresponding to the denands of the
stage of developed socialism.

"hat is the essence of these tasks?

Modern production and socialist social relations presuppose a high standard of
labor and social life, the political and noral culture of the masses and
each person's active position in life. And this, in turn, cannot fail to
influence the entire cultural sphere.

The party's policy formulated by the congress, which is ail-ed at the inten-

sive develop-tent of the economy, sakes higher denndson a person's education.
vocational training and general culture. .

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
RH OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The industrial development of new regions and the need for the eqc‘liaation
of social differences territorially bring forward tasks of the accelerated
development of the entire sociocultural cleex in Siberia and the Far East,
in the RSPSR's nonchernozen zone and in other areas and oblasts of the coun-
try. A system of neasuree is envisaged aimed at a further increase in the
role of culture and art in the comunist education of the working people. an
iwrovement in cultural services for the population, the planning of cultural
building, the training of personnel and the further development of culture a

material base .

In order to cope successfully with these tasks it is necessary to emphatically
improve the entire system of management of the cultural sphere. Fundamental
significance is attached to a creative approach to matters and the ability

to refine work forms andnethods under current conditions. As Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev emhasized. the forms should be brought into line with the changing
tasks. Hany urgent problens of cultural building objectiwa require the
combination of the efforts of the state authorities, creative unions and
various interested organizations.

The significant increase in a nuﬂaer of republics in the umber of citizens
of nonindigenous nationality with their specific requirements is confronting
the cultural sphere with its own urgent problem. which need to be tackled
correctly.

The 26th CPSU Congress enphasized the need for an increase in the role of
literature and art in the cot-Innist education of the working people and the
holding of a Harxist-beninist world outlook and the fuller satisfaction of
Soviet people's diverse spiritual requirements.

The wide-ranging and effective measures outlined by the party for an improve-
nent in work conditions and family recreation and the increased attention

to mothers also require a further refineunt of the system of cultural ser-
vices for the working people.

The practice of cultural cooperation and cultural exchanges with foreign
countries must be brought fully into line with the foreign policy course formu-
lated by the congress and the tasks of the ideological struggle in the inter-
national arena.

As you can see, the congress determined the nain tasks and requirenents of

the cultural sphere expansively and at the same tine concretely. Their so-
cial and ideological substantiation, whihh is also backed up by our increased
potential, was revealed with exceptional persuasiveness. The country possesses
a solid material base, a large detachment of skilled personnel and accumulated
experience of the inplementstion of large-scale cultural measures for success-
fully tsckling the tasks put 'forward by the -26th CPS!) Congress.

The USSR Hinistry of Culture has formulated a plan of basic measures for
implenentation of the decisions of the party congress in which the developnent

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of culture and art has been organically connected with the prospects of the
country's socioeconomic development and the demands put forward in Comrade

I..I. Brezhnev‘s report. The decisive surmounting of formalism and departmental
and bureaucratic barriers, the creation of a dependable personnel reserve

and increased supervision and verification of the fulfillment of adopted de-
cisions--all these are essential conditions for success.

Speaking of the current stage of cultural activity. it is important to men-
tion two aspects of the question: new specific requirements and tasks and

the preservation of continuity in cultural policy. This must not be forgotten
under the conditions of the coming into being of a new social system. Plung-
ing from side to side in cultural policy, as is happening in (him, is

fraught with extraordinarily dangerous consequences.

Our party regarded the cultural revolution as a principal tuk under the con-
ditions of the transition from capitalism to socialism and the building of

the foundations of the socialist society. This was dictated by two main fea-
tures. First, the general cultural backwardness of tssrist Russia. Despite
the high achievements in individual spheres of literature, art and science
and despite individual outstanding talents, the country as a whole was char-
acterized by a culture lag comared with the most developed capitalist coun-
tries of the West. This was expressed primarily in the mass illiteracy of

the population, the lack of access for the broad people's masses to higher
education and the best achievements of culture and in the extra-sly backward
outlying regions of tssrist Russia. Second, it was necessary to msh the
reactionary ideological and social basis of the prevailing ‘iandowner-bourgeois
culture with its class and casts nature, chauvinistic and nationalistic satur-
ation and clerical, Black Hundred ideas. The successful accoqnlishmsnt of

the cultural revolution enabled us to tackle these tasks, create a socialist
culture and mold a new type of individual capable in deed and practice of;
building the socialist society.

The problems of cultural building acquire new characteristics under the con-
ditions of mature socialism. Comrade L.I. Brezhnev observed at the 26th party
congress that currently three-fourths of workers have secondary (cowlete and
incomplete) and higher education. The country has universal secondary educa-
tion. Every fourth worker is now connected with brain work, in the main.
Consequently, we are now dealing, to speak of the bulk of the population and
not individual groups, with a qualitatively new person with increased mater-
ial and spiritual requirements and a creative potential of the entire people
which has increased nanny times over.

An important singularity of the decisions of the 26th CPSIJ Congress is that
the objective requirements of developed socialism are exanined in them through
the prism both of the actual conditions and possibilities of the current stage
of communist building and also the concrete practical tasks confronting the
country. The specifics of these tasks are determined by a number of factors,
which are having an increasingly profound impact on various aspects of social
life. '

First. the impact of the scientific-technical revolution on the processes of
communist building. It is essential now that the builder of the new society

109

FOR 0-”3-‘1Cial. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not only possess the fundamentals of nodern learning but also constantly
renew then in accordance with the objective requirenents of scientific-tech-
nical progress. And this, in turn, requires the development of the creative.
potential of the personality and a capacity for adapting to changing produc-
tion conditions.

Second, the inprovenent in socialist social relations and the develop-ant of
democratic principles of manage-ant are asking increasingly high denands on
a person's level of consciousness and civic responsibility. '

Third, the working people’s increased free tine has posed the question of its
productive use by the broad asses, and this, in turn, is having an inpact
on production and people's social and personal life.

Thus the all-around, her-onions develop-cut of the personality coiaining a
high professional culture corresponding to the conditions of the scientific-
technical revolution, high political and soral culture corresponding to the
current require-eats of coll-mist building, high spiritual require-ants

and culture of everyday life--these are not good wishes and not nerely our
ideal but actual densnds of all present-day social life. It is not fortuitous
that the party orients us toward a comrehensive approach to the education of
Soviet nsnwhich esbrsces labor, ideological-political and soul training.

The task of a cowrehensive approach to educational work was set with all
clarity and certainty at the 26th CPSU Congress, and the entire party and
various organizations and departnentsuour entire systen of education and
ideological activity and literature and art-were included i'n'its accowlish-
mt.

If the general meaning of the new tasks put forward in Conrado L.I. Brezhnev's
report at the 26th party congress is considered fro. this viewpoint, it
consists of a significant increase in the social and ideological effective-
ness of the entire sphere of culture. 1his deaand is a natural developnent
of the conclusions .of the 26th and 25th CPSU congresses, which stressed the
constantly growing role of culture and art in comist building and Soviet
nsn's education. It is a question, inter alia. of new. sore profound social
functions of culture and art characteristic of the conditions of developed
socialist.

"hat is the leaning of these?

First, the inset of culture in various for-s now encoapasees not comparative-
ly narrow strata of the population but udtinillion-strong asses and practi-
cally the entire Soviet people.

Second. art in its specific form is becoming a factor of the fornetion of
Iran's vital environ-ant, influencing his via the entire spectrum of artistic
culture: architecture and nonmntal art, ausic, the ease developnent of
auteur creativity. design and so forth.

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Third, having becom generally accessible thanks to their ms character and
thanks to the development of radio and television and the stage and movie
theater. literature and art are exerting an increasingly broad and effective
influence on the formation of people's world outlook and world perception,
assisting comprehension of social and moral problem. contributing to the
enrichment of the spiritual world of the personality and influencing the in-
culcation of artistic tastes.

Fourth, art is becodng. together with physical culture and sport. a key factor
of the harmoniom development of the personality. The entire system of con-
temporary culture is intended to shape spiritually a person who naturally

and organically becoaes a part of life as an active participant in communist
building and a person who correctly mderstands the objective requirements

of the current stage of society's development.

An increase in culture's social and ideological effectiveness .danands of all
workers of this sphere a clear understanding of themin goals and a constant
quest for the most effective for. and methods of their activity. It is
important to see both our unutilized potential and the entire spectrum of
specific tasks, which is exceptionally broad. He can and must with cultural
resources mold a correct attitude toward our social system and the moral code
of the builder of socialism and respect for Soviet laws, rules of law and.

the USSR Constitution; and shape a aolicitous attitude toward socialist owner-
ship, public property, natural resources and nature.

Culture can and must become an increasingly weighty factor of international
education with regard for the fact that the most complex economic and poli-
tical tasks are now being tackled by the joint efforts of the peoples and
nations not only of our country but of the fraternal socialist countries
also and with regard also for the 0583's ever increasing assistance to the
developing countries.

Under the conditions of extensive international spiritual mutual influence
secialist culture is becoming an even more important factor of correct ideo-
logical and aesthetic education and an important area of the ideological
struggle. In connection with the exacerbation of the international situation
and the attempts of reactionary 0.8. circles and the Beijing hegemonists

to capsize detente and revive the "cold war" there is an increase in the role
of socialist culture as a factor of the assertion of the ideas of humanism
and peace between peoples and social progress.

The increased significance of socialist culture in the formation of the new
social mentality also demands the correct determination of the goals of our
cultural policy. The CPSU has always been guided in the formulation of cul-
tural policy by a leninist approach and Ianinist ideas, which remain definitive
for us. And now, co-emorating the lllth anniversary of V.I. Lenin's birth,
we perceive particularly keenly the great invigorating force of Lenin's
thoughts and Lenin's ideas.

In the 1970‘s the CPSU and the Soviet Govermlent adopted a whole nudoer of
decrees determining the practical solution of the main problems of cultural
bui ldingufrom the development of library work. theamateur arts and folk

1.11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

handicrafts through problem of the creative youth. The all-union conference
of cultural workers (1979) and Comrade L. I. Brezhnev' s. greetings to its parti-

cipants were of importance for the solution of urgent questions of cultural
building.

The CPSU Central Co-ittee decree ”A Further Itarovement in Ideological and
Political Education" views cultural problems in organic connection with the
entire system of the fornation of the new man. The decisions of the 26th,
25th and 26th party congresses and also CPSU Central Co-ittee and USSR
Council of Hinisters decrees on questions of culture and art and Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev's speeches and theoretical works not only determine concrete tasks

but also foruulate a precise strategic line in cultural building at the current
stage.

what are the nain directions of this strategic line of the party?

Pirst. inplementation of a policy of the achievement of constant correspond-
ence between the country's socioeconomic development and the development of
the spiritual life of society and its culture.

Second, the assertionnf the correct ideological thrust,oo-Iun oo-Iunist party-mind-
edness and high artistic level of socialist art and the strengthening of its
ties to the life of the people and commist building.

Third, an increase in the social and ideological effectiveness of the entire
sphere of culture and its increased influence on the solution of problems of
the working people's co-Iunist education, the strengthening of the friend-
ship of the USSR peoples and the formation in each individual of an active
position in life. advanced morals and ideological conviction.

Fourth, an increase in the impact of the cultural sphere and art on the solu-
tion of key problems of scientific-technical progress, the creation of a
favorable noral-political climate in the labor collectives and the erasure
of the essential differences between city and countryside.

II

In analyzing the development of contemporary Soviet art we cannot fail to see
its positive impact on various aspects of social life.

A successful stage performance and motion picture, a patriotic play, talented
book and painting and so forth containing an idea which is comprehensible
and intelligible to a person convinces him graphically and has an emotional
inpact on him. The artistic image has its strong points in this respect.

Of course. art cannot substitute for propaganda, agitation or other forms of
ideological-political education. At the same time it has an increasingly
pronounced role in the cultivation of the personality's active position in
life. It is impossible to mold such a position without inculcating social
sentinents, including those of justice, class hatred of the enemies of social
progress and peace and hmIanism.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Main Directions of the USSR's Econoluc and Social Development in 1981-
1985 and the Period Throuﬁ: 1990 put forward the task of pronoting the develop-
nnt of socialist culture and art and enhancing their role in the forntion '
of people's Harniat-Leninist world outlook. It is essential that this task be
correctly understood. Art cannot be a sine illustration of theory and so.
idea or the other thereof and of conclmions and propositions. Abstract.

coldly intellectual and oversilplified art inevitdily departs from the prin-
ciples of realism and loses its power of persuasion.

‘Ihere is also the danger when, in the n-e of erroneously interpreted "realism,"
the artist departs from the presentation of big social problems. becomes e9-
closed within a circle of trifling, philistine interests, laying it on thick
and concentrating attention only mthemrky aspects of life, and ceases to
see what is most important and determining in it. Such an approach leads to
the emculation of the high ideological content of art and ideological in-
discriminateness. Comrade I..I. Brezhnev paid particular attention to this
aspect of utters. "...llanifestations ofa lack of progressive ideas, world-
outlook indiscriainateness." he emphasized, ”and a departure fron a precise
class-based evaluation of individual historical events and figures are cap-
able of harming the work even of gifted people." It is therefore necessary

”to be assertive and scrupulous in instances where works disparaging our
Soviet reality appear. We mat he implacable here."*

The CPSU Central Comittee once nade a higl-minded evaluation of the attempts
to discredit Soviet reality. This permitted a recuperation of the situation
and the creation of a normal creative atmosphere in literature and art and
the preservation of many men of letters and artists from the wrong path.

Of course, no one is advocating a return to a varnishing of reality and the
creation of works which paint idyllic pictures of social life and avoid real
problems and difficulties. In this case literature and art would be indulg-
ing in a kind of social blindness and an inability to see the reel purveyors
of social evil--people infected with a consumerist mentality, grasping senti-
ments and huresucratism, the purveyors of a variety of prejudices and, some-
times. simply idlers, drmkards, parasites and professional incompetente,
that is. all who are impeding our advance. As practice shows, the negative
type can represent only a serious social danger, and the task is to spot this
phenonenon in good time, expose it and show its incompatibility with the
standards of communist morality and the socialist way of life.

We cannot deny the ooaplexity of the artistic interpretation of socialist
building and its real difficulties and sometimes contradictions even. The

artist has a right to have his say here. At the same time we frequently also
encounter the insufficient depth of the artistic penetration of the dialectics
of social life. an inability to find the correct paths of psychological inpact

on the under, viewer and audience, the insufficient assinilation of material
and a disregard for artistic form.

“Material of the 26th crsu Congress," p 62.

113

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To rectify such shortcomings literary-artistic criticisa should are itself
with the entire set of tools of an analysis of art phenomena. Only an in-
depth, eonprehensive understanding of social processes and the phenonena of
spiritual life is a prerequisite of really convincing, fruitful criticise.

If they are both concerned for the progress of socialist art and the asser-
tion of the truth of life and couunist building. the artist and the critic
act as allies in the canon cause. And here the truth is higher than anything.
higher than all personal editions, smathies and antipathies.

The shaping of people's Marxist-Mini“ world outlook by leans of art is a
creative, highly artistic process of the creation of realistic characters of
revolutionaries and representatives of the people and the people of labor who
by their entire life assert the principles of the new society. Integrity of
character, lively convincing Insanity and irreconcilability to all that is |
alien to socialist ideals-these character traits of the hero of our tine grow
froa life and the logic of cor-mist building. And they nut be portrayed

in art correctly and with great artistic power. A Haraist-Ieninist world
outlook is blended here, as it were, with Ian's typical traits and his way
of life. It is such an approach which can enhance the world-outlook role of
socialist art. The develop-eat of soviet art is bued on the scientifically
substantiated heninist principles of patty—undedness and national character
which have been verified by life itself. The aethod of socialist realise de-
teraines the thrust of Soviet art and inseparable connection with the affairs
of the party and the life of the party.

It is also obvious that a rise in art's world-outlook role is inseparably
connected with its active turnabout toward contelporary subjects in the broad
sensing of this word. The conteqorary theme is expressed in diverse manner
in theatrical and nusical works. in song and in fine art.

Evaluating the developnent of Soviet art in the years which had elapsed

since the 26th CPSU Congress, Conrade L.I. Brezhnev said: "It is the business
of literary critics and art historians to pass professional judgment. But I
believe that all readers, viewers and audiences feel that a new tidal wave is
rising in Soviet art. Many gifted works have appeared in recent years, and
in all repwlics, furthermore. This applies to literature and the stage, In-
tion pictures and mic and painting and sculpture.“ This is a high evalua-
tion, inspiring all workers of Soviet culture and personalities of literature
and art to new accowlishaents.

This high evaluation at the same tine sets a responsible task. men we speak
of a "tidal wave" in art, we refer to the definite start of its high upsurge
and the creation of the prerequisites for this. But for the upsurge to be-
cone a reality in all spheres of art a high level of quality of the works and
their ideological thrust, the interpretation of big theses and urgent probleas
and high artistic and professional skill are essential.

____________———
*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress.” p 61.

114

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Under current conditions. as the CPS" Central Cor-Ilttee decree "A Further
Improvement in Ideological and Political Education" observed, it is neces-
sary to pay special attention ”to the creation of significant new works of
literature and art which giftedly portray the Soviet people's heroic accom-
lishnents and the problem of the develop-tut of the socialist society...."*

The CPSU Central Co-Iittee Report to the 26th party congress enphasized the
significance of the works of literature and art in which lofty revolutionary
motives resomd and striking characters of ardent revolutionaries who teach
love for the notherland and stanchneee in trials are created, which show
images of our conteqories and the eagle: inner world of the personality
and pose in depth questions of morality, participating actively thereby in
the solution of the problem lived by Soviet society.

Soviet classics of literature and art are distinguished by the fact that they
have created the inage of a positive hero asserting progressive cont-List
principles and ideals and providing by ennle an answer to key questions—
how to live, for what to fight and the purpose of the life of the builder of
the new society. ‘lhese questions acquire their own specific features and
singularities at every stage of co-nist building. The mswer to them
requires profound reflection, which. stodied in art. convinces people and
helps them find the right path in life. And the fact that a trend toward the
increasingly profound interpretation of current problem, the positive ideal
and the hero of our time has been clearly defined in Soviet art in recent
years is imrtant.

The "He Are Building Co-mism" exhibition devoted to the 26th CPSU Congress
was a very notable phenonenon in this respect in fine art. A fruitful quest
for the typical features of the hero of our tine taken from real life and
contemporary reality can be traced distinctly in the works reppesented at it.
Themes of the heroic feat of the Soviet people and themes of labor and con-
nunist creation, far-reaching in its historical import, were predominant at
the exhibition.

Preparing for the 26th CPSD Congress. all detachments of personalities of the
arts performed a great deal of fruitful creative work. Its results were
reflected in performances and concerts on the stage of theaters and in con-
cert halls of the capital, particularly in the cerenonial concert given in
honor of the delegates to the 26th CPS!) Congress in the Krenlin Palace of
Congresses. In Moscow there was a review of the country's best theaters,
which put on the most interesting performances for the congress.

Behind all this is the creative quest of the Soviet artistic intelligentsia
and its active turnabout toward a sore in-depth portrayal of commist build-
ing. This is, of course, on the whole. a conplex process. It has both- cre-
ative successes and certain difficulties, which are manifested differently
in different spheres of art.

________________—.—————
*"A Further Iwrovement in Ideological and Political Education". CPSU Cen-
tral Connittee decree of 26 April 1979, Hoacow, 1979. p 15.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rate, for example, the Soviet theater. Comrade I..I. Brezhnev showed in a
striking. evocative form in the CPSU Central Coulittee Report to the 25th
party congress the importance of theatrical art's switch to thee”production
theme,“ which acquired a broad social resonance, and also to the theme of the
Soviet people's feat in the Great Patriotic Her and the theme of moral search.
This evaluation served as a powerful stimulus for the appearance of new plays
devoted to this set of probleu. They include such plays concerning the

theme of labor as "Day of Arrival—Day of Departure" by V. Chernykh, "The
Thirteenth Chairman" by A. Abdullin. "Feedback" by A. Gel'mn and others which
may be considered, albeit with certain reservations, creative successes of the
dramatists and also the theaters which performed these plays. The Leninist
theme enjoyed new resonance in a umber of plays. Particular mention should
be made of the fact that many of our producers and theaters have addressed
themselves to productions based on l..I. Brezhnev‘s "Malaya zemlya" [The Small
Land], "Vozrozhdeniye" [Revival] mid ”Tselina" [Virgin Land] trilogy.

The country's theaters continued the further assimilation of Russian and world
classics in the last 5-year period. Although not carried off without certain
difficulties and mistakes at times. this was a fruitful process on the whole.

I would also like to mention such an important particularity of Soviet thea-
trical art as the considerably increased expertise of many republic and oblast
theaters.

At the same r mo. we see clearly that in the main, arterial subject areas the
appearance of plays and performances which may with every right he termed
notable landmarks in the development of the Soviet theater is nonetheless
rare. Why is this? There are several reasons. evidently. But one of them
is a lack of dramatic material. It is not, of course, a question of a quanti-
tative shortage of plays. Approximately 600 plays are turned out annually
along repertory company lines alone. But far free all plays make the stage,
and those which becoee a part of the life of the theater do not always evoke
a feeling of genuine satisfaction.

We also encounter such a phenomenon as the "reiterativeness" of certain plays.
that is, the repetition at a lower artistic level of the basic ideas and
methods of this successful play or the other created earlier. This was the
case with a whole mater of plays on the production theme. which was jmtly
criticized. There is still much pettiness of abject and the focusing of
attention on problems which are on the sidelines. as it were, of the main
areas of communist building and the most acute questions of international life.

Under current conditions there is increased significance in the social demands
on both the dramatist and the theater and the dramatist's closer interaction

with the theater in work on the most important themes. The creation of truly
outstanding works demands even of the gifted dramatist total self-performance,
the cowrehension of big problem and particular philosophical depth in the

interpretation of the phenomena of contemorary social life. The dramatists,
producers and theatrical groups as a whole must rise to the accomplishment of
such tasks. which is the only way to surmount the shortcomings in the work of

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the theater. After all, it is a fact that there are theaters for whose per-
formances it is very difficult to obtain tickets and also those whose audi-
toriums are sometimes empty. It all depends on the nature of the activity of
the producers, actors and creative groups, on the correctness of repertoire
policy and on how skillfully work is performed with the audience.

New problem have also confronted Soviet musical art, although there is no
doubt about its general successes.

The years since the 25th party congress have been fruitful in the sphere of
mmical life. The nuﬁer of meders of the Coqossrs' Union has grown by
almost one-fourth. New composer organizations have emerged in a whole nuiaer
of autonomous republics (Udmurtia, Tova, Yakutia and Komi). The process of
the interaction and mutual enrichment of national and musical cultures has
intensified. Composer schools in the union republics have grown stronger.

Significant works of operatic art like for ample, 0. Taktakishvili's "Kidnap
of the Moon," K. lblcbanov's "The Dawns Here Are Gentle." R. Shchedrin's

"Dead Souls" and Ye. Rakhmadiyev's "Song of the Virgin band,” which have won
deserved recognition among Soviet audiences. have been created. There were
successful premiers of the following ballet compositions: K. Holdobasanov‘s
"The Maternal Field," K. Holchsnov's "nacbeth," T. Khrennikov's "Ballad of the
Hussar" and others. No less than 12-15 works of Soviet authors were performed
on the stages of each of the country's 78 mic theaters in the last 5 years.
New opera theaters were opened in Dnepropetrovsk and Krasnoyarsk. Consider-
able successes were scored in the cantata-oratorio genre and in symphonic music

A great deal of work is being done to popularize Soviet music. The "Helodiya"
firm is endeavoring to record the best words of Soviet cmers and perform-
ers and is performing persistent work aimed at an improvement in the quality
of phonograph recordings. Radio and television are called on to play an import
ant part in the dissemination of the best musical works and the inculcation

of good taste. They have stepped up and improved their work in this field
considerably in recent years. In the formation of a hiﬂn Immical culture
increasingly great significance is attached to the direct co-unication of the
composers, musicologists and performers with the students, constantly expand-
ing philharmonic activity.

Unfortunately, despite all the fruitful work being performed by the philhar-
manic societies, there are still serious shortcomings in the content and
organization of their activity. Re are now takingsteps to bring order to bear
in this important field. Co-Iercisl considerations and a desire to fulfill
the financial plan by easy means are sometimes supplanting the main thing-
tasks of an ideological-educational order. I believe that the work of the
philharmonic societies and concert organizations also merits closer attention
on the part of the party connittees. After all, music is becoming an increas-
ingly effective factor of education, particularly of the youth.

The growth of the popularity of ”1081 culture is closely connected with the
development of the system of the children's and youth's musical-aesthetic

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

education. Music festivals for children and the youth are being held increa-
ingly etcensively, and children's nusic and choral ensedles and art studios
and schools have become widespread. The systen ofnuaical education is being
perfected. A children's mic theater, which has acqmlred a fine new building.
is actively at work in Moscow. Such theaters are now being created in the
mion republics also.

Various song festivals and entertainments are of increased significance in the
developmt of the people's maical culture. These festivals have become
traditional and are held with huge success in the Baltic republics. The
tradition of song festivals is now becoaing increuingly widespread in other
parts of the country also. The Soviet music Pestival in the fall of 1980 in
Uzbekistan enjoyed a big public response. Flore than 2,500 cowosers and per-
formrs participated.

Our music has moved broadly into the world arena. At the same time its popu.
larization and the increased influence of progressive. deaocratic traditions

in world msical art rennin an important task. The international music fes-

tival which was held for the first time this May in hbscow should contribute

to its accolplishment.

The 26th CPSU Congress set our fine art and architecture fundasental new take.

The years that have elapsed since the 25th congress have been characterized
by the further cohesion of the thousands-strong collective of Soviet artists
and the creation of an atmosphere conductive to creativity.

In accordance with the decisions of the 25th CPSU Congress, the Ninth USSR
Suprelse Soviet Fifth Session enacted the law 'Tmcecuonand Use of Historical
and Cultural Honusents“. This was the first all-union enactment on the pro-
tection of our cultural heritage in the history of Soviet legislation. The
law's fundamental provisions were; reflected in the USSR Constitution. The
Regulations Governing the Proaction and Use of Historical and Cultural Monu-
ments were formulated, a single standardized form of the registration of
monuments was introduced and appropriations for restoration were increased on
the basis of the law. Huoeum and exhibition collections have been supplemented
appreciably. Sane 29,827 works of fine art were purchased for more than

R7.S million in the 5 years.

The recent past was marked by a stimulation of exhibition activity. The "Glory
to Labor“ (1976) and "Lenin's Hay" (on the 60th anniversary of the Great
October, 1977) exhibitions. the eadlibition devoted to the 110th anniversary

of v.1. hen'in'sbirth. the "Sport-Axbassador of Peace" exhibition. which was
timed to coincide with the opening of the lbscow Olmics, and others were
important events in the comtry’s ideological and cultural life. The third
international "Satire in the Struggle for Peace" exhibition . which was visited
by LJ. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Comittee and chairman
of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiul, and CPSU Central Collittse Politburo
setters, was a big success. The "He Are Building Commism" exhibition, which
opened at the rise of the 26th party congress, am up, as it were, this rich
and diverse activity.

118 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Monumental art was further developed, and inlementation of Lenin's plan of
monumental propaganda continues. New works of sculpture have perpetuated the
memory of heroes of the civil and Great Patriotic wars. heroes of labor and
outstanding political figures, scientists and cultural personalities. The
unveiling of a bust of LI. Brezhnev in Dnepredzerzhinsk developed into a
big public holiday. Our sculptors have participated in the creation of nonu-
slants in many foreign countries.

Monumental painting has been further developed. The number of installations
adorned with stained-glass windows, nosaics and-paintings has increased. But
a shortage of skilled personnel locally, by virtue of which certain works

are executed on a low ideological-artisitic level, is southes reflected.
This demands increased artistic supervision and the increased responsibility
of the monumental artists for their work.

Considerable successes have been achieved by our best Illtcﬂ of book illus-
tration and easel drawing. A great deal of work has been done to fulfill the
CPSU Central Conittee decree "Polk Handicrafts".

The creation in the USSR Academy of Aits of an architecture and nonumsntal art
department was a notable event. This is exerting a considerable positive
influence on the solution of such an inportant problen as the synthesis of

the plastic arts and architecture.

The 26th CPSU Congras set fine art and architecture responsible tasks. The
task of the formation of an aesthetic environnent surrounding Soviet nan which
influences his perception of the world and his artistic tastes and culture

of work and social life was advanced as a priority. Comrade L.I. Brezhnev
dwelt on this problem particularly in the CPSU Central Comittee Report to the
26th party congress. "We do not have to explain." he said, "how important

it is that everything around us bear an imprint of beauty and good taste.

The Olynpic facilities and certain residential neighborhoods of Moscow, the
revitalized pearls of the past and new architectural enseﬁlas of Leningrad
and the new buildings of Alma-Ate, Vilnius, Navoi and other cities--these

are our pride. Nonetheless. city planning as a whole is in need of greater
artistic expressiveness and variety. best it turn out like the story of the
hero of the notion picture who, by an irony of fate. ending up in another
city, was unable to distinguish there neither a house not an apartment from
his own."*

The formation of man's vital aesthetic environ-ent is a his long-term comra-
hensive task. For its accomplishment it is necessary to create the most
favorable conditions for the joint creative work of masters of monumental
sculpture, painting, decorative-applied art and design. architects and

art historians. Coordination of the activity of the architects and masters of
monumental and decorative art with state and public organizations needs to be
inproved. All this was the subject of interested discussion at a session of

___________.______——-—-——-—
*"haterial of the 26th CPS!) Congress." pp 63-63.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Uﬂ UI‘I'ILIRI. v.1!— UI‘LI

the USSR Academy of Arts which discussed tasks of cultural building in the
light of the decisions of the 26th party congress.

The best achievements of city planning in Moscow, Leningrad,'}iinsk, Kiev,
Alas-Ata, Tashkent, Vilnius and other cities require more attentive study and
propaganda. It is necessary to extend to the utmost the practice of the
creation of works of art directly to the order of the labor collectives and

the artists' sponsorship of indmtrial enterprises and holkhoaes and sovhhozes.
Valuable experience has already been accumulated here. - 111a work of the artists
of lbscow and ‘ryuman' in ‘l'ytnensksya (blast, on the basis of which the "lymen'
Land" exhibition-was organized, may serve as an mle. Approximately 500
works from this exhibition were handed over to clients.

The correct solution of such questions at the same time contributes to the
achievement of the min goal-formation of the aesthetic environment. I be-
lieve that in this respect there are many possibilities and resources locally
which need to he comissioned. He must make man's vital environment high in
moral content and emotionally full and, if it may be so put, "soundtracked" by
the resources of art. For this reason the task of a further rise in the ideo-
logical and artistic level of fine art should be at the center of attention.
It is more necessary now than ever to pay particular attention to the quali-
tative aspect of matters and the creation of njor, outstanding works por-
traying the Soviet people's heroic struggle for cal-union.

Questions of the effective and skillful propaganda of the best works of Soviet
art are being raised to a new level. ‘ we will approach the furnishing of the
new USSR State Picture Gallery and its permanent exhibits most attentively from
this viewpoint. The gallery will be a key center of the propaganda of Soviet
fine art.

Bourgeois art history remains silent about the achievements of our art. And
this is not simply an ignorance of the true state of affairs but a conscious
position. After all, it is a fact that everything which emerges in the "back
yard" of our art and all departure from the principles of socialist realism
are literally snatched up "on the wing" in the West. Extensively publicized
exhibitions are organized here for such, if you will, works, and books and
albuns are published purporting to show the "face" of Soviet art. The ideo-
logical target of all this propaganda fuss is obvious and needs no special cos-
ment.

The further increase in the educative, ideological role of Soviet art is
closelyconnected with two basic prerequisites.

First, the broad masses' interest in culture and thirst for it and the

inner aspiration to familiarization with the achieveunts of art and litera-
ture. He may say that our people have such an aspiration. This is expressed
in the youth 's fascination with contemporary mmic, poetry and literature,

the increased role of the theater, the increased popularity of artistic exhi-
bitions and much else. For example, in the last 5 years the number of theater-
goers increased by 3.5 million and annual museum attendance constituted 11.0
million people, which was 1.5 times more than in 1970. The amateur arts,

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in which approximately 30 million people participate, are enjoying increas-
ingly ms development. He should take accomt here of the extensive spread
of television and household forms of the assimilation of culture which, as it
were, "hind" people to their homes and their apartments.

Second, the correct thrust of the work of ell cultural establishments and per-
sonalities of the arts' understanding of their contemporary social role and
their increased responsibility and. at the same time, an ability to accomp-
lish the new tasks in practice are essential.

The problem of the ideological-political maturity and methodological armament
of the artist, dramatist and composer is becoming increasingly important.
This is inseparably connected with the general cultural growth of the Soviet
audience, listener and reader. It is far from fortuitous that in many dis-
cussions on questions of art it is a question of the philosophical grasp of
reality in works of art. Only via such an in-depth, philosophical comprehen-
sion is it possible to get to the mind and heart of the reader, viewer and
listener, convince him and inculcate in him a correct attitude toward life's
phenomena.

The deepening of the world-outlook content of art is a characteristic phenomenon
of the 20th century. The specifics of the 20th century, if it is viewed through
the prism of the development of man's artistic culture, are that art and
philosophy have begun to interact with one another increasingly profoundly

and organically. There is a natural increase here in the impact of the
Haraist-beninist world outlook on the process of artistic creativity. Uhile

in no way denying and not belittling the significance of an artist's talent

and his creative intuition we at the same time cannot fail to see that with-
out profound methodological and world-outlook preparation an artist's talent
could acquire a wrong, false thrust.

The characteristic trends of the development of bourgeois culture and art

at the end of the 10th and in the 20th centuries and the sywtos of its [sic]
decline and crisis have profound ideological sources. It is no secret that
many directions of modernist fine art, for example, began with the publica-
tion of a variety of mnifestoes which proclaimed certain methodological and
philosophical principles and were accompanied by theoretical quest and refer-
ences to the discoveries of science, technical progress and the latest philo-
sophical ideas. Cubism, expressionism, futurism, abstractionism, surrealism,
pop art, hyperrealism and so forth are proving to be the realisation, as it
were, of a variety of idealistic, stbjectivist philosophical program. They
are becoming a component of the most complex and acute ideological struggle,
entering into the fabric of the spiritual life of contemporary society, in-
fluencing the formation of man's attitude toward life and even pretending
sometimes tmthe transformstionof the modern world. The myth of the artist's
"neutralism" and his apoliticism and imginary lack of party-dadedness can
hardly today be trusted by a person familiar with the characteristic singular-
ities of the development of contemporary artistic culture.

It is essential to inculcate a correct understanding of the party spirit
of art in our creative intelligentsia, particularly the creative youth.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prospects of the development of all Soviet art depend on work with the
creatiye youth. As is hown, the CPSIJ Central (Jo-ittee has paid special
attention to this question. The CPS" Central Co-ittee decree "Bork with the
Creative Youth" detenined the main directions and forms of the active en-
listmsit of young talent in the building of the culture of developed socialism.
The emprgence of experimental theatrical studios and understudy stages, the
creation of creative workshops, youth festivals, competitive reviews and
exhibitions, the organization of sponsorship work and much else predetermined
an appreciable stimulation of the creadve youth and a strengthening of its
positions in art. The youth currently constitutes 60 percent” of the theater
groups. for example. The USSR Artists' Union and USSR Academy of Arts have
held a number of exhibitions of young artists and their graduation theses;

pay has improved, associations of young artists and art critics have been
created and groups are formed which travel to the virgin land and new construc-
tion sites of the country. Closer attention has come to be paid to the youth
in art critic studies and creative discussion. All this has had an appreciable
influence on an improvement in the moral atmsphere among young artists and
their more active familiarization with theme of great ideological-political
and social resonance. Much that is positive ha been done to stimulate the
youth in the sphere of mical art also.

Active work with the creative youth is not a short-term campaign but a perm-
anent task. Far from all problems have yet been solved and matters are not
always as they should be when it comes to the youth's job placement and the
creation of the conditions necessary for its creative activity.

The youth's ideological-moral formation should be at the center of our ideo-
logical work. After all, it bears the responsibility for the directions in
which socialist art will develop in the future. It is extremely inortant
that the system of the instruction and training of the creative youth be in
mison with the progress of our theoretical thought and that the latest re-
sults of studies in the sphere of Harnst-Iaeninist aesthetics be introduced
promptly in the instructional-teaching process.

The entire current situation and the main trends of the ideological struggle
testify that the final 20 years of our century will be marked by particularly
tense ideological clashes and particularly acute confrontation. in the sphere
of culture and art included. It is essential to raise higher and hidler the
banner of progressive culture and art, raise a creative youth which is con-
ditioned ideologically and methodologically and armed with a profound mder-
standing of the characteristic patterns of the development of society's spir-
itual life and raise convinced purveyors of the Herzist-Leninist world out-
look, patriots of their motherland and genuine internationalists.

Much here depends on the level of scientific research in the cultural sphere.
Certain progress has been observed in recent years in the development of
theoretical problem of culture and art. The work on such fundamental lilti-
volume studies as "lstoriya iskusstvs narodov 5851!" [History of the Art

of the USSR Peoples] (USSR Academy of Arts' Institute of the Theory and liistory
of Fine Art) and "Huyke xx veka" [Hmic of the 20th Century] (Institute of
Art) and the work on a smary of monuments is testinony to this. hation

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
should also be made of the extended critical analysis of the main directions
of conteaporary bourgeois art. Mlication of the collective book "lbdernizn.
Analiz i kritika osnovnykh napravleniy" [Modernism Analysis and Critique of
the Main Directions], which is very convincing in its arguunts and accurate
in its conclusions, nay be considered a annifestation of this.

Of course, the practical significance of such fundaaental works cannot be
detersined according to acne i-ediate result. But they are of great world-
outlook simificance and have an iwt on the shaping of the artist's views
and-his attitude toward the min ideological issues of the present day. At
the sane tine we are experiencing incrmingly the need for popular litera-
ture on the main, fund-sental problem of nodern art. There is not enough of
such literature, unfortunately. After all. youth wishes to know and experi-
ience everything. Souetines it is attracted by Western fashion, which is
far fro: always good. Discotheques are spreading rapidly here, new dances
and ttnes are enrging and so forth. Artistic criticisn here is lagging
behind the tines, unfortmately. It sonetines siaply "fails to notice" new
phenomena in the sphere of artiaitic culture.

It should be mentioned for fairness' sake that the closer connection of theo-
retical studies in the sphere of culture with practice has been observed in
recent years. Positive work in this direction has been perforwed by the All-
Union Scientific Research Institute of Art. Probleas of culture are attract-
ing the attention of an increasingly extensive list of research workers. The
USSR Academy of Sciences and USSR Academy of Pedagogical Scimces have begun
to pay more attention to fundamental theoretical questions of culture and
practical questions of the artistic education of the children and the youth.
The Conission for the Cowrehensive Study of Artistic Creativity is opera-
ting under the auspices of the USSR Acadeiy of Sciences' Scientific Council
for the History of World Culture. The VUZ's have increased their attention
to the development of problem of culture. The systen of information in the
sphere of culture and art is being acres-lined. There is hope that all this
will be a good basis for the creation of popular literature on problem of
culture.

leadership of cultural building camot be exercised now without fundaasntsl
theoretical studies. In order to plan the building of culture correctly it
is essential to know the Iain regularities of its develop-ant, conceive of
the prospects of the developuent of society's spiritual requirements and
have scientifically substantiated forecasts and none. Research in the cul-
tural sphere should be coltined increasingly closely with social studies,

an analysis of the singularities of the development of the regions and the
dynaaics of free tine and with an analysis of the nentality of artistic:
creativity and perception and the national, professiOnal and age singulari-
ties of the fornation of the personality's cultural requirenents. mum:
this it is now difficult to conceive of a further inproveunt in the practice
of cultural building and nanagenent of the entire cultural sphere.

For this reason it is essential to strive for the increased effectiveness of
scientific research and the concentration of scientists' attention on the
nest significant problem of cultural building and the development of art. In

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY

this respect the critical rensrks expressed by Conrade I..I. Brezhnev at
the 26th CPSU Congress to the social sciences also apply to research in the
sphere of culture and art.

III

Under current conditions there is an appreciable increase in the role of the
cultural sphere as an iuportant factor of the formation of the Soviet way of
life and satisfaction of Soviet m's increasingly diverse spiritual require-
aents and his harmonious development. It is not fortuitous that the Coenunist
Party's formulation of this new task of cultural building or the other encoun-
ters a broad response in the mass. whether it he a questionof the protec-
tion and use of historical and cultural mnuments, the development of the
auteur arts or sone urgent problen of professional art or the other.

This was also the case in the period of preparations for the 26th party con-
gress. In the course of discussion of the CPS" Central Co-Iittee draft "Main
Directions of the USSR's Econolic and Social Policy in 1981-1985 and the

Period Through 1990" our couitry's working people and personalities of liter-
ature and art put forward my valuable ideas and proposals and displayed great
interest in the correct solution of key problem of socialist culture.

We are now confronted with the task of the more active turnabout of the work
of the entire cultural sphere toward the life of the labor collectives and dif-
ferent social groups of the population with regard for their interests and
require-eats. This leans that cultural-educational work cannot be confined

to a frsnework of the corresponding establish-eats. The tasks of the cul-
tural-educational workers are broader: they must visit the enterprises,

study people's requireaents, develop increasingly active work at the place

of residence and places of recreation, enlist the scientific-technical intel-
ligentsia and the best-trained working people. particularly the young people,
in their activity and sold their own activists.

The experience of conducting large-scale political canaigns such as discus-
sion of the draft of the USSR Constitution. elections to the organs of state
power and the propaganda measures connected with the preparation of party
congresses shows that cultural-mas work, if it is well organized, has con-
siderable ideological potential.

As is known, the residents of our capital participate actively in the move-
ment. to sake Moscow a model cot-mist city. Such nova-ants are becoming
increasingly widespread in other cities also. Culture and art occupy an
important place in then.

Thus various ptblic holidays like harvest festivals, for exasple, and other
uses neasures of a considerable educational inset are becoming increasingly
widespread in practice.

The work of the cultural sphere is becoming an increasingly organic part of
partywide educational activity. Assistance from the party co-ittees in
this inportant work is enabling us to achieve significant results.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In the accomplish-ant of the crucial task of the fuller satisfaction of Soviet
people's diverse spiritual require-ants and in mist education inportsnce
is attached to a further inprovemnt in the activity of the cultural-education-
al establishnents and the increased role of the clubs, nsss libraries, mum
and parks.

The process of the direct codination of art and labor is developing on an in-
creasingly broad scale. Direct contacts of personalities of Soviet art with
the labor collectives, joint discussions of new works and regular neetings of
masters of the arts with the working people are assuming an increasingly
efficient, concrete character. The alliance of art and labor is not only a
slogan but the actual practice of our life.

Culture and art are beconing an increuingly organic part of Soviet people's
life and social existence, inﬂuencing with their specific resources the
fornation of civic sentinents, and beconing an integral part of the Soviet
way of life. The country now has lore than 600 theaters, 138,000 cllbs, more
than 1,500 museum (including branches), 132,000 ass libraries, approximate-
ly 1.100 national parks of culture and rest and eore than 150,000 mvis pro-
jectors. Approxinately 5,000 clubs and lore than 6,000 mass libraries were
cos-issioned, llolo nusem and 36 new theaters were created and many new mic
groups appeared in the 10th Five-Year Plan alone. This is enabling us to
actively bring culture and art to the broadest working people's masses.

The approach to the building of cultural establish-ants is changing. Many of
then adorn our cities and villages, have original architecture and have been
installed with regard for the requirensnts not only of present but also fu-
ture generations. hey will serve people for a long tine and will be a nenor-
ial of our tines, just as the best architectural installations of the past
serve us today.

higher criteria have cone to be advanced with respect to the quality 01' cul-
tural services for the working people. he cultural 'center or club of a
large-scale industrial enterprise, the rayon cultural center in the country-
side, the library and the nuseun should have nodern equipnent and, what is
most inortant, should organize their work sore profoundly and cowrehensively
in term of content, in keeping with Soviet people's increased social and
spiritual requirements.

However, far from everywhere is there a correct mderstanding of the role of
culture and cultural building in the life of conte-porary Soviet society and
Soviet Ian. The mst farsighted managers, kolkhoz chairmen and rayon leaders
have long been aware that culture is an ilportant lever of socioecononic de-
velopnent. In the course of discussion of topical problem of cultural build-
ing in Donetsksya Guest's Volnovakhskiy Rayon, in Sverdlovsksya and Dnepro-
petrovsksya oblasts and in the cities of Gor'kiy, Kaluga and elsewhere at a
board neeting in the USSR Ministry of Culture leaders of oblasts and rayons
and enterprises. kolkhoz chairman and cultural workers euphasized that eco-

nomic successes now largely depend on the extent to which men's cultural
requirements are satisfied.

125.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contemporary nan experiences a need not only for naterial sufficiency but

also the appropriate social and cultural-everyday conditions. This is parti-
cularly. characteristic of the youth and highly skilled specialists. At

the sane tine, unfortunately, we frequently encounter the phaaonenon of people
adopting a negligent attitude toward the building of planned social-everyday
and cultural facilities. disrupting the specified tines of their co-ission-
ing. Such an approach was eqhatically condemned at the 26th party congress.
Conrade I..I. Brezhnev raised the question of the need for tight supervision
of the fact that the resources for the social develop-eat of enterprises,
cities ‘and villages be used precisely as intended, in full and within the
specified tines. "The reports fron the localities." he said, "on the intro—
duction of new industrial facilities usually do not indicate what has been
done for those who will work here and how nuch in the way of housing. kinder-
garten, libraries and dispensariea has been built. Let us make it a con-
dition to consider such reports valid only if the progra- of housing and

cultural-social construction at the project provided for by the plan has also
been fulfilled.“

Social dynamics and the growth of Soviet people‘s education require constant
attention to their spiritual requirenents and the deter-ination of a precise
strategy of cultural building. The initiative of the working people of
Krasnoyarskiy Kray, who have adopted comterpledgea with respect to the de-
ve10pnent of the sociocultural complex in the 11th Five-Year Plan, nerits
active support and disse-ination in this respect. lhese pledges were pub-
lished on 20 March 1981 in the newspaper SOVBTSKAYA KUL'TURA.

Under present-day conditions there has been a considerable increase in the
role of cultural services for the country's new construction sites and regions
of active development. Conrade I..l. Brezhnev paid particular attention to
this aspect. Such all-union tasks as the accelerated developnent of the

areas of Siberia and the Far East and the North and the upsurge of the RSPSR's
nonchernozen zone are directly and i-ediately related to cultural building,
requiring the further stimulation of cultural services for the biggest con-
struction projects and the creation of real prerequisites for the accelerated
develop-ant of professional art and the folk arts in these areas. Huge con-
struction projects like the Baykal-Anur Main Railroad require the enlistnent
of personnel and the youth fro- central, inhabited areas. People go to the
construction sites enthusiastically, understanding that they are doing work
of exceptional significance for the life of the whole country. For this
reason skillfully organised cultural services for the new construction sites
are not only of a purely cultural but also social, ideological-political
significance. They are evidence of thecountry's attention to the people who
sonetines work under the most difficult conditions and lend than tremendous
moral support.

Pretty good experience of cultural services for Siberia and the Far East was
accunulated in the 10th Five-Year Plan. Various form of cultural patronage
and guest performces by the country's best theaters and mic groups con-

siderably enriched the cultural life of this pronising region. Soviet liter-
ature and music festivals in Tytnen' are now traditional, and arts festivals
for the oilnen of the Ob‘ region and the construction workers of the Baykal—
Anur Main Railroad are held regularly. The "Lights of the Main Line" arts
festivals have becone traditional in Buryatia, Anurskaya and Chitinskays
oblasts and in Rhabarovskiy Kray. Brigades of nssters of fine art travel to
these parts with their creative reports, and artistic exhibitions head for
here. me biggest industrial and cultural centers of the eastern regions

of the country have becone the venue for traveling sessions of creative union
board secretariats. ‘lhis is probably the first time that we have achieved such
a scale and level of cultural service of an entire region. This experience
requires that particular attention be paid to it in the light of the tasks of
the equalization of social differences territorially and the surmounting of
the lagging of certain regions in the sphere of-people's cu1tura1-evsryday
conditions.

0n 6 April 1981 the USSR Ministry of Culture Board discussed the question
"Heasures for the Developnent of Culture and Art in-Regions of Siberia and the
Far East in 1981-1985". A program of comprehensive measures was drawn up for
the further development of the tutorial base of the culture of these parts and
an inprovennt in guest appearance activity and sponsorship. It is intended
in the 11th Five-Year Plan here to build 571 club establishments, 30'] libraries,
7 theaters and 6 museuns, create 7 largrscale nusic groups and new parks

and open 6 new higxer and 3 secondary specialized educational institutions.
1he scheduled plan also includes large-scale measures along USSR State Com-
mittee for Cinenatography, USSR State Cor-ittee for Television and Radio
Broadcasting, USSR Co-ittee for Sport, USSR State Committee for Punishing
Houses, Printing Plants and Book Trade, AUCC‘I'U, "Zneniye" Society and creative
union lines. I believe that the realization of this plan will be an inportant
step forward in the further develop-snt of the culture of Siberia and the

Far Bast.

Turning Siberia into an area of high culture is an inortant social task.
And we will assist its accOIIplishnent in every possible way.

As is known, the~.CPSU Central Cor-ittee and the Soviet Govern-cut are paying
great attention to the developeent of the housing and cultural-social construc-
tion of the RSFSR's nonchernozes zone. Some ”.6 billion were channeled to

this end in the 10th Five-Year Plan or 1.9 times sore than in 1971-1975. In
accordance with the CPSU Central Co-ittee and USSR Council of Ministers

decree "The Further Development and Increased Efficiency of the Agriculture

of the BSPSR's Nonchernosen Zone in 1981-1985,” B9.9 billion will be channeled
to this end in the 11th Five-Year Plan. It is important to use these big
resources correctly and as efficiently es possible, having drum up a well-
considered long—tern progra- of cultural building.

It is now particularly inortant to have a clear idea of the areas in which

it is necessary to improve cultural-mass work. Take libraries, for exanple.
With their specific resources libraries can do such. Skillful propaganda of
the decisions of party congresses, CPSU Central (buittee and Soviet Cavem-
ment decrees and sociopolitical literature in close unity with the life of
the labor collectives and their achievements and unsolved-problems and assist-
ance to the development of the creative initiaitve of the nassesnall these
should be the pernanent functions of libraries and other cultural-educational
establishments.

127‘

NI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'VE Ul‘l‘l\.II\A. \u’l. VI\LI

It is essential to sake use of culture's naterial base with the maxim re-
sults. irrespective of the departunt to which it belongs. Certain positive
results have been achieved in this area in recent years. The library system
has been centralized. which has increased the efficiency of service of the
population considerably and ads accessible book collections and the spiri-
tual riches contained therein, to which access was cosplicated for any read-
ers earlier. Highly promising prospects are being revealed by;the process of
the forsation of cultural cleexes and centralized club system, particularly
in the countryside. Comparatively snsll far-s do not have the opportunities
for attracting highly skilled specialists and creating a cultural base for
satisfying the rural workers' increased spiritual require-eats. As experience
shows, unification of specialists' forces and resources sakes it possible to
raise cultural services to a qualitatively new level, create msic schools,
folk theaters, choirs. studios and various special-interest associations in
the countryside also and raise the level of ideoloucal-political work.

Sone 3,900 centralized library system. approximately 10,000 centralised
club systems and over 2,000 cultural cowlexes were created in the 10th Five-
Year Plan. It is essential to continue active support for the process of the
creation of cultural cmlms. which produce not only spiritual but also
considerable social results. Hithout retention of the youth in the country-
side and the enlistnent of hiﬂily skilled specialists it is iwossible to
conceive of the successful develop-eat of sodern agricultural production and
realization of the party's agrarian policy. '

It is fitting to nention here that note concern needs to be displayed for
skilled young cultural worker personnel in thszlocalities. Unfortmately.

the USSR Ministry of Culture frequently receives warnings ”that due attention

is not being paid to the housing and social conditions of the specialists arb
riving for work. Yet without this it is difficult to expect that they will

be retained locally or work with total input. “ho suffers because of this?

The cause, primarily. After all. those who lack education and elenentary knowl-
edge in the sphere of culture and art often work where there is a shortage of
specialists. This alienates people fron the cultural establishmts. And
where there are no people, there is no work.

The new tasks confronting the cultural sphere under current conditions re-
quire a constant inrovenent in planning and nanagenent and consideration of
the socioeconosic trends of the country's develop-ant, the particular features
of different regions and national and demographic specifics. Couade l..l.
Brezhnev's report noted the hiﬂ'l nobility of the population in a number of
republics and the considerable increase in the nulhers of citizens of non-
indigenous nationality with their own specific requirements in the sphere of
language, culture and everyday life. As the 26th party congress ewhasized,
all these problem sust be tackled in the spirit of socialist internationalisn
and Soviet patriotisn and an mderstanding of everyone's membership of the
single great Soviet motherland.

128.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The specific tasks confronting the cultural sphere in this connection should
be tackled in accordance with the principles of Lenin's international cultural
policy, which has already borne truly splendid fruit.

The fruitful results of the international thrust of the party's Laninist
cultural policy were manifested particularly strikingly under the immediate
impact of the decisions of the 2bth and 25th CPSU congresses, the celebration
of the 60th anniversary of the Great October and the adoption of the new USSR
Constitution. The material base of culture in the republics was reinforced
considerably and fine, musical and theatrical art were further developed in
the 10th Five-Year Plan. As I..I. Brezhnev observed in the CPS!) Central Com-
mittee Report to the 26th party congress, "the flowering and mutual enrich-
ment of the national cultures and the formatim of the culture of the single
Soviet people-a new social and international calamity—are under way. This
process is proceeding here as it should proceed mder socialism: on the basis
of equality, fraternal cooperation -and absence of convulsion.“ '

The Soviet multinational culture is the practical. effective elbodiment of
intemationa'lism, the CPSU's leninist policy and the socialist way of life.

At the time of the performance of the Olywics-SO cultural program the foreign
onlooker was presented in reality and graphically with the beautiful garland
of the multinational Soviet culture with theaass performances, national dances
and typical musical rhythms and at the same tinswith its spiritual unity and
exemplary expression of the friendship of the USSR peoples. He may now in

full reassure say that the very fact of the existence of socialist art and

its tremendous force of ideological and artistic attraction and the graphic
example of the fruitful creative interaction of the fraternal national cultures
of the USSR peoples serve as a beacon and point the way to genuine interna-
tional cultural cooperation. The entire historical experience of the develop-
ment of Soviet art proves graphically that it is socialism and the consistent
inlementation-uof the principles of internationalism which provide for the
flowering of the national cultures, their rapprochement and mutual anrichement
and the intensification of their ideological unity.

The Soviet creative intelligentsia is the most populous detachment of
progressive socialist art. In asserting the ideas of reason, humanism and
man's freedom from the opprusion of reaction and the ideas of democracy,
socialism and peace Soviet art is contributing to the strengthening of a heel—
thy international atmosphere and lending moral support to all present-day
progressive forces opposed to imperialist reaction.

International cultural exchanges are intended to promote an improvement in
mutual understanding between peoples and a strengthening of trust. detente

and peace. This role of culture does not diminish but, on the contrary. in-
creases in the current, exacerbated, international situation.

Of course, the sphere of cultural exchange is a sphere of the ideological
struggle which is frequently realized not in the direct form of open clashes

*"l‘laterial of the 26th CPSU Congress,II p 57.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and a confrontation of ideas, as occurs in the press and radio propaganda,

but inf'the more couple: and subtle form, of winning the synpsthies of the broad
nasses or readers, viewers and listeners. It is essential-1y s highly subtle
fern of propaganda of a certain way of life and a certain'attitude toward
reality.

The appearance of Soviet art in the broad international arena has sade it pos-
sible to dispel and snash ssny prejudices which had been isplanted for a long
ties in the capitalist countries by entice-uni“, anti-Soviet propaganda.

It was not fortuitous that when the 0.8. Administration adopted a policy of
reviving the "cold war," it made particular efforts to undermine cultural
exchanges with our country, blocked a new agree-ant on cultural cooperation
and organized a whole series of provocations against Soviet artistes. Re-
actionary circles are beginning to appreciate the force of Soviet art's spir-
itual impact and are attenpting to neutralize it in every possible way. Thanks
to the increased liking for our culture and Soviet art in foreign countries,
we have already achieved such in the sphere of propaganda. of the socialist

way of life. The logic here is simple: apeople which has such a high art.
which is imbued with the ideas of hunanisn and peace, are a truly free people
which live a full-fledged spiritual life, possess a high culture and have
shaped the new man.

Subsequently a leading place in cultural cooperation will be occupied. as be-
fore, by cooperation with the fraternal socialist countries. Cultural ex-
changes with these countries have become highly effective. We also intend

to stimulate our activity considerably in the sphere of cultural cooperation
with the developing countries, with regard for the singularities of individual

countries and regions .

In cultural exchanges with the capitalist countries the Iain thing for us was
and renains contributing to the detente process and nutual understanding be-
tween peoples. political isolation of the "cold war" forces and the winning of

progressive, democratic forces to our side.

The Soviet people have perceived the historic decisions of the 26th CPSU Con-
gress with tremendous enthusissn. Their discussion in the labor collectives
is developing everywhere into a loving denonstration of the indestructible
unity of party and people. Soviet people are adopting upgraded pledges. and
socialist conpetition is becoming increasingly widespread. The magnificence
and clarity of the goals advanced in Conrade I..I. Brezhnev's report are engen-
dering the creative enthusisss of the assess and optinisn and confidence that
the party's plans will unfailingly be put into practice and concrete den-(ls.

The Soviet creative intelligentsia and all cultural workers unanimously approve
of the historic decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress. Rallied around the Lenin
Party and its Central Con-ittee headed by that outstanding Marxist-Leninist

and relentless fighter for peace and the peoples' security, Comrade I..I.
Brezhnev. they will not spare their forces for the realisation of these deci-

siona.

130

ro'somcutussomv
* I. V. Kapitonov, secretary of the CPSU Central Committee. "Questions of Party
Building in the Light of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress"

The 26th CPSU Congress will go down in the annals of the struggle for commun-
ism as an event of truly world significance. It signified a historic landmark
in the life of the party and the people and determined the CPSU's strategy and
tactics for the next stage of communist building. The congress revealed ex-
ceptionally clearly our party's mighty. vital forces and its monolithic inner
unity, indissoluble ties to the people and high international authority. The
results of the congress' work indicate better than anything else that the
party embodies the collective wisdom and creative genius of the Soviet people.
It is invariably faithful to its program requirement-all in the name of man.

for the good of man.
)

The tremendous historic significance and magnetic force of the congress' ideas-
were predetermined by Comrade L.I. Breshnev'a report. This outstanding Marxist-
Leninist document makes a major contribution to the theory and practice of
scientific communism and is a model of a creative analysis of the current stage
of the USSR's development, the entire world situation and the problems of the
further progress of the society of mature socialism. It targets communists and
our entire people toward the accomplishment of two interconnected tasks-
communist creation and the consolidation of peace.

The results of the 26th CPSU Congress were unanimously approved by the entire
party and the entire people. This was distinctly shown by the meetings of
party activists which were held everywhere and the discussion of the congress'
decisions in the primary party organisations, labor collectives, soviets of
people's deputies and trade union and Kamaomol authorities. Soviet people
perceive the plans outlined by the party as their own concern and are fully
resolved to implenent them. The working people's boundless support for the
party's domestic and foreign policy and the activity of the Central Committee
and its Politburo headed by that outstanding continuer of the great Leninist
cause, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev, was displayed with new force at this time.

He all know how great Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's role is in the development and
implementation of the party's general policy and the plans of communist build-
ing. He is investing his entire organising and political talent. inexhaustible
energy and indomitable will in the cause of the building of communism and the
struggle for peace in this world. His relentless fruitful activity for-the
good of our people and all mankind evoke in people profound gratitude and
sincere feelings of love and thankfulness. The tremendous authority and in-
fluence of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev is our party's great property. It is also

an important factor of its fruitful activity.

Questions of the practical realization of the instructions contained in the
CPSU Central Conndttee Report and the directives of the congress are currently
at the center of the attention of our entire party. "The congress armed the
party and all components of our political system with a clear and precise
program," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said, addressing a session-of the USSR Supreme
Soviet Presidium. "The main thing now is to suffuse this program with real
deeds and organize. as Lenin taught, the firm and amicable joint work of
millions of people."*

*PRAVDA 2 April 1981.

131 .
ltllt”ﬂﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂi(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The growing sweep of socialist competition for the successful fulfillment of
the tasks of the first year of the 11th Five-Year Plan, the working people's
onerous patriotic initiatives and the shock creative work of millions of
people are precisely such practical deeds. It may he said that public initia-
tive itself has made work on fulfillment of the decisions of the 26th CPSU
Congress the cornerstone. me party organizations are called on to head this
work and direct the energy of the masses into the necessary channel. Concrete
plans of organizational—political measures which essentially encomass the
entire activity of the party organisations have been formulated in the raykoms
and gorkoss. abho- and kraykoms and onion repwlic Cmmist Party central
co-ittees. These plans are examined and passed at party co-ittee plenum in
many places.

Study and propaganda of Comrade I..I. Breahnev's report, the Main Directions of
the USSR's Economic and Social Development in 1981-1985 and the Period Through
1990 and other docmnts and material of the congress are a priority task.
This work demands an in-depth comprehension of the ideological wealth of the
propositions put forward at the congress. They contain the key to an under-
standing of the current situation lid the prospects of the ongoing movement

of our society. They are a very rich source of political experience. An
important place among then is occupied by the propositions characterizing

the party's develop-ant at the current stage and its role as vanguard of the
Soviet people and leading and directing force of our society. The conclusions
and directives of the 26th CPSII Congress on questions of party building en-
rich Harxist-heninist teaching on the party, increase the co-Inists' theo-
retical armament and lend their practical activity a precise orientation.

I

A basic, fundamentally important question of revolutionary teaching--that of
the Con-mist Party's leading role in the socialist society and the ways and
methods in which it is exercised—was further developed at the 26th CPSU
Congress. Particular significance is attached to it in our time, and it is
increasingly becoming the key point of the theoretical and, frequently, acute
political struggle of Harrist-Leninists against the overt and covert enemies
of socialism in the world arena.

Suturing up the path that has been trodden, the 26th CPSU Congress confirmed
the conclusion drawn earlier that the party's role in the life of the Soviet
society increases constantly in the period of developed socialism. This
conclusion. which reflects a most important regularity of the historical
process, has become a firm part of our party's ideological-theoretical arsenal.
It has become a fundamntal conclusion in the conception of developed social-
ism which has been developed in recent years.

As is known, the role of the party increases with the increased scale and
comlexity of the tasks of mist builidng. The country's present-day
socioeconomic development corroborates this as evidently as can be. Concrete
data were adduced at the congress showing what tremendous wealth we now pos-
sess. It is sufficient- to say that by the start of the l9w's the country's
gross social product was in excess of kl trillion and that national income
used for consumption and accumlation had reached M37 billion. The entire
system of social relations and the socialist way of life have been perfected

1 32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
on the basis of a steady upsurge in the economy. The gigantic economic,
scientific-technical and spiritual potential has been created by the selfless
labor of the Soviet people headed by the Col-mist Party. The CPS!) is proving
in practice its capacity for being the collective leader and political Organ—
izer and educator of the working class and all working people.

As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev mhasired at the congress. the core of the entire
activity of the party and the state is leadership of the economy. Proceeding
from the requirements-of socialist development, the 26th party congress put
forward new tasks of tremendous voltnse and comlexity which include accelera-
tion of the intensification-of social production, a further increase in its
efficiency, an improvement in the quality of work and the more rational use
of available resources for the purpose of the constant growth of Soviet peo-
ple's well-being. For their accolplishment it is necessary to enlist even
more extensively the mltimillion-strong people's masses in conscious and
active historic creativity, which, in turn, requires great attention to the
problems arising in the sphere of the Soviet society's sociopolitical and
spiritual development and the formation of the net man. These problems also
occupied an inortant place in the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee Report to the
26th party congress. The congress thereby reflected the close mity of eco—
nonic, sociopolitical and ideological factors of com-mist building.

Such is the chain of interconnected prerequisites bringing about a further
increase in the responsibility of the CPSU and its role at the current stage.
This gives rise to the need for a constant rise in the stmdard of party
leadership, without which the economic and sociopolitical system of developed
socialise cannot function efficiently. The 26th party congress revealed the
singularities and form and mthods of the leadership of society with refer-
ence to the new tasks of commist building and determined the role and
place of each component of our social organism in their acconlishment.
Tremendous sipificance is attached to the fundamental instructions formulated
in Comrade l..I. Brezhnev's report targeting the party toward the fuller use
of the economy's intrinsic possibilities. Among these are the conclusion that
the economy must be economical. propositions on the need for the mobilization
of the creative potential of our society, the struggle against sluggishness
in economic thinking and practice, a refinement in management methods and
the entire style of management activity and others.

Foreign policy tasks also demand a rise in the level of the party's leading
activity. They also, as the congress showed, are beconing increasingly
couple): and critical. huge efforts and high foreign policy assertiveness

are needed here. Our party is constantly developing its political farsighted-
ness and its capacity for grasping faultlessly all the cowlexities of world
politics and is confidently leading the ship of state through a policy of
peace and international detente.

Thus when we speak of the increased role of the CPS", we must keep in mind
an entire complex of internal and external conditions. And this very process
is not spontaneous and not automatic. It depends on what policy the party is
pursuing and how closely it is connected with the people's moses. ”We

know full well from past and present experience," Comrade L.l. Brezhnev said

at the 26th party congress, "that the role of leading force of society does

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIVLV

not case about of its own accord. This role is earned and won in the course
of constant, incessant struggle for the working-people's interests. And this
role is consolidated by the fact that the party is constantly extending its
relations with the people's nasses and living their needs and concerns.”*

This is how our Lenin Party operates. The CPSU is inseparable from the people
and sees service of them as the highest purpose of its activity. The party
treasures the trust of the nasses, aspires to closeness with then and is
raising their political consciousness and developing creative energy in every
possible way. It listens attentively to the voice of the nasses, sensitively
catches their mood and knows what disturbs and omoerns peeple. The party cor-
rectly expresses the working people's fundanental vital interests, serves the
people loyally and pursues a principled class policy always and in all things.

It nay be said that the process of the growth of the party's leading role is
sinultaneously a process of its ever greater rapprochement and cohesion

with the people and the growth of its authority and influence among the work-
ing people. This was demnstrated by the 26th CPSU Congress, which was in
all respects the highest expression of the party's leading role and its in-
destructible unity with the people.

Great significance for the strengthening of the CPSU's leading role is attached
to the state of the party's own forces and the entire organization and at-
nosphere of its internal life. The party is given strength by its pernnent
fidelity to Leninist standards and principles, which serve as the dependable
foundation of party building.

II

Our party grew, strengthened and natured even more in-the last 5-year period.
As Conrade L.I. Brezhnev declared, the 26th CPS!) Congress showed once again
that the CPSU is a powerful, healthy and nature collective. The co-Iunists
are the truly unbending pivot of our society and its living soul and the
genuinely revolutionary vanguard of the people.

The party's composition has been for-ed in recent years fully in accordance
with the regularities of social development at the stage of nature socialism.
To highlight the Iain trend, it may be said, in F. Engels' evocative expres-
sion, that the party is becoming edadded increasingly deeply in the people.
The CPSU is growing and developing as the party of the working class and the
entire Soviet people. It has stronger roots than ever in all classes and
social strata of our society.

Our party now has 17.5 nillion columnists. This means that approximately
every 11th USSR citizen is in the CPSU. Workers constitute 1.3.6 percent of
communists, kolkhoz unbers 12.8 percent and representatives of the technical,
scientific and creative intelligentsia, education, health service, cultural

*"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," pp 218F219.

1310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and management machinery workers and servicemen 43.8 percent. 'lhese data
show that the directives of the 23d end subsequent CPSU congresses concerning

the formation of a social composition of the party conforming to its class

nature and all-people character are being fulfilled successfully, on the
whole.

People are admitted to the ranks of the CPSU in accordance with these dire¢>
tives. It is particularly inortant to note that the proportion of workers
in the new party intake increases from year to year. Workers constituted

- 59.6 percent of those entering the party in 1980. In the period between the
22d and 23d congresses they constituted “.7 percent of those accepted as
party candidates. These fects attest the hiyn consciousness end political
assertiveness of the working class and its devotion to the ideals of cot-sun-
ism. They reflect the consistency with which the party is pursuing the policy
aimed at ensuring that workers occupy the leading position in its social com-
position. He will continue to adhere strictly to this policy.

The replenishment of the party ranks with progressive kolkhoz meders cor-
responds to the interests of the strengthening of the alliance of the working
class and kolkhoz peasantry end the successful implementation of the party's
agrarian policy. They constituted 10 percent of the new intake in the last

5 years. This was somewhat lower than previously, the reason for which was
the decline in the number of workers employed in kolkhoz production. None-
theless. the overall number of communist kolkhoz masters continues to increase.
There are now more than 2.2 million kolkhoz masters in the CPS!) as a whole.

The influx into the party of representatives of the Soviet intelligentsia
continued in the last 5-year period. They constituted 25.6 percent of those
accepted as CPSU candidates. The overwhelming njority of these were engineer-
ing-technical personnel and other specialists connected with production and
science. The party attaches great significance to the enlistment in its ranks
of brain workers, primarily national economy specialists, taking account of
the important part played by the intelligentsia in the acceleration of
scientific-technical progress, the development of culture, the constraint
education of the masses and in the entire life of society.

One out of every four or five engineers. technicians, agrommists. animal
specialists and teachers and one out of every six doctors is a co-unist.

It should also be mentioned that having shown their worth in social work and
in production and having acquired an education and experience, many workers
and kolkhoz members reinforce the ranks of specialists and are promoted to
executive work. This is a natural process and is taken into accomt in
regulating admission to the party.

Progressive representatives of Soviet youth--Komsomol metersnconstitute al-
most three-fourths of the new party intake, which serves as a striking ex-
pression of our youth‘s hiya mral fiber and its readiness to devote itself
to the cause of communism. This is very important. As Comrade L.I. Brezh-
nev said, young people who are aged 18-25 today will tomorrow form the back-
bone of our society. They will also tomrrow form the backbone of our party.

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In admitting Konsonol raters to the party the party organizations at the
sane tine pay attention to the selection for their ranks of older people who
have graduated from a good school of production and life.

There has been a lurked increase in the adnittance of women to the party in
recent years. Their proportion of those accepted as CPSU candidates rose to
33.5 percent in 1%. Women now constitute tore than one-fourth of all cot.-
munists and from 36 to 65 percent in the Latvian and Estonian republic and
Vladinirskaya, Ivanovskaya. Kalininskaya and certain other oblast party organ-
izations. Our party will continue to give this inportant matter the nest -
serious attention.

The composition of the CPSU strikingly reflects the Leninist policy of the
internationalisn, fraternity and friendship of the peoples. There are repre-
sentatives of none than 100 nationalities in the party ranks. In the union
and autononous reptblics and autonomous oblasts and okrugs the party organi-
zations are being reinforced with the best representatives of indigenous
nationality. At the sane tine the party co-ittees are watching to ensure
that other nationalities be represented anong the co-mists. It is inert-
ant to continue to take account of this, considering the trend of the further
internationalization‘of production and social life in our country.

A worthy replenishnent is entering the party, as a whole. It nay be said
that the current correlation of workers, kolkhoz nenbera and the intelligent-
sia along those being adnitted to the CPSU ranks corresponds to the social
structure of our society. Also ilportant is the fact that the party is
growing, as before, nainly thanks to people working in the material produc-
tion sphere. Alnost one-half of all col-mists employed in the national eco-
nony works in industry, construction, transport and cousunications and one-
fifth in agriculture.

The nudaer of those wishing to join the CPS!) is growing. While appreciating
this highly our party is at the sane tile invariably guided in regulating

the growth of its ranks by Lenin's well-known proposition ooncerningthe
correct correlation of the party, class and the mess and the inpernissibil-
ity of the blurring of the distinction between the progressive detachment

of the working class and the retaining mass of the working people. The main
point for it always was and retains concern for an inprovenent in the quali-
tative composition and an increase in the fighting efficiency of the party
ranks.

The Cent ral Connittee and the party co-ittees locally constantly analyze

the state of work on strengthening the CPSU ranks and keep as yet unsolved
problems in View. Instances of the accelerated growth of the party ranks

are being allowed to occur in places. Hhereas in the lat 5 years the in-
cmase in the nutter of communists in terns of the party as a whole constitutes
2.3 percent a year, this percentage is considerably higher in certain party
organizations. Re need to continue to strengthen the party stratun in the
decisive areas of social production, particularly in heavy industry, capital
construction, railroad transport and other important sectors.

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Take, for eagle, aninal husbandry, which is the shock front in the country-
side. Sone 404,000 co-unists work here currently. This is over 23,000 lore
than at the start of the 10th Five-Year Plan. At the sane tine, however,
there has been a decline in recent years in the umber of co-nnists in the
aninal husbandry units on the kolkhoses. despite the increase in the overall
nuber of kolkhoz party orgniz'ations. If we take the party stratun anong
all stockbreeders, it is lower than for agriculture as a whole.

The 26th CPS!) Congress directs us toward a further increase in exactingnsss
toward those joining the party. The approach to adnittance to its ranks has
becone nore stringent in recent years. A positive role here was perforned

by the corresponding CPSU Central Co-ittee decree on the work of the Kirghiz
party organizations. Better use is being nsde of the candidate's probationary
period for checking out the entrants' political, professional and oral gul-
ities. Not everyone passes this test. Sons 91,000 candidates were not ac-
cepted u CPS!) mm in the last 5 years. As nentioned at the congress,
this was a are or less nornal elinination. At the sane tine it has to be
acknowledged that certain niecelculations and blunders both in the organiza-

tional and in the educational work of the party organizations were reflected
here.

The high quality and fianting efficiency of the party ranks are ensured not
only by their replenish-eat with the best representatives of the working
people but also the daily ideological and noral training of the mists.
Every party newer lust be distinguished by fitness of conviction, high
scrupulousness and discipline. noral purity and an aspiration to labor without
sparing efforts in the nane of the triumh of co-unisn. Raising the con-
mnists in such a spirit and nolding than as political fighters is the prinsry
duty of the party organizations. They have great opportunities for this.
Talks with party nenbers and candidates. their reports on performance of
their statutory duties and the young co-Inist schools have given a good ac-
count of thenselves. It is inportant to asks fuller use of such for-s. per-
forn concrete educational work in all party organizations and reach every
co-unist. It is essential to sake better use of the systen of party training
for the ideological conditioning of the communists. Unfortunately, there

are commists, particularly along executives. who do not engage in system-
tic study.

It was nentioned at the 26th CPS!) Congress that chance. unworthy people esse-
tines get into the party. Alnost 130,000 persons were expelled fro. the CPSU
in the period under review for behavior incolpatible with the title of con-
nunist. Concerning this question. Conrado L.l. Brezhnev esphasized as force-
fully as could be: "...our attitude toward those who conduct theuelves in an
unseemly nanner and violate the party Rules and the standards of party sorel-
ity was. is and will he implacable. No leniency for anyone when it is a
question of the honor and authority of our party and the purity of its ranks!“

;"Hateria1 0? the 26th cpsu Congress," 1) 68.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

High enactingness toward party asters and candidates ensures the CPSU's .
Dnolithic unity and its capacity for heading the Soviet society and confident-
ly leading the Soviet people along the path toward comics.

III

Great attention was paid at the 26th CPSU Congress to the problen of an
irprove-ent in the nethods of party leadership. his is entirely natural.
Ae Conrade lul. Brezhnev ewhaaiasdg the style and netth of leadership are
a question of inortance to the entire party and the entire people.

‘lhe CPSU's entire historical experience testifies that the significance of the
party's leading bodies, prinrily party congresses, increases at each stage.
The 26th CPSU Congress was a striking eagle of this. The conclusions and
directives set forth in the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee Report express the collec-
tive opinion of the entire party and all consciom and active builders of
mien. They are distinguished by an all-around. conprehensive and pro-
foundly scientific character reflecting the experience and urgent tasks of the
party and the people. . '

Conrade L.I. Breehnev's report convincingly revealed the multifaceted fruit-
ful activity of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee. The work of plenuns of the party
Central Co-ittee and the Politburo and Secretariat is constructed on the
granite fomdation'of Harsisn—Leniniss. is of a purposeful nature and is dis-
tinguished by high organization. the concrete discussion of issues and conplete
maninity in their solution. Such a style he evolved in the CPS!) Central
Co-ittee under the influence of the personal exanple of I..I. Brezhnev, who
consistently inlenents the Leninist principle of the collective nature of
leadership.

Since the first days following the 26th party congress the CPSU Central Con-
nittee has been inplenenting its directives persistently. A ntnber of najor
national econonic and social questions has been eulined and resolved. The
decree "All-Union Socialist Cowetition for the Successful Pulfillsent and
Overfulfillnent of the llth Five-Year Plan Quotes" and decisions affecting

the further develoth and increued efficiency of agriculture. the rational
use of fuel-energy resources and metal, an inprovenent in capital construction
and other questions have been adopted, inter alia. Concrete steps have been
taken in inplenentation of the social progrsa outlined by the 26th party con-
gress.

The CPSU Central Comittee depends the sane businesslike approach of all
central and local organizations. The party cot-itteee have initiated a great
deal of organizing and political work on mlenentation of the congress' deci-
sions. Many of then have exanined specific areas of this work at routine
plenum. The discussion of the tasks for an inprovelsent in organizational-
party work at a Moscow Corkon plenu- shonld be nentioned in this connection.
This was a businesslike, mbilizing plenul which will undoubtedly perforn

a big positive role in the activity of the city party organization.

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The CPS!) Central Co-ittee regards the party authorities locally a their
sure support, interacts with then closely and skillfully directs their work.
The network of local party conittees has widened since the 25th party con-
gress. It includes 1!. union reptblic Con-11st Party central co-ittees, 156
krayko- and obkoms, 10 okrushko- and 6,384 gorkou and raykoms. The ful-
fillment of party and govern-ant directives is organized via this raeified
network of party bodies. which affords the (1’80 the opportunity to exercise

at the center of the attention of the CPS!) Central Couittea, which since
the 25th party congress has examined the reports of 3 union republic Con-
Iunist Party central co-ittees, 13 kraykons and ohko- and 3 gorkons and
raykoms on questions of organisational-party and political-educational work
alone. The CPS" Central Co-ittee directs the party cos-ittees toward a
creative approach to the implementation of party policy and the dynamic,

comprehensive econonic and social development of their regions, with regard
for all-state interests.

The creative ventures and initiatives of many party organizations were sp-
praised highly at the 26th CPSU Congress. It should he mentioned that behind
every valuable. instructive experience stands an entire system of diverse
procedures, ferns and methods of party-political impact on the economy and
other spher . They have been perfected in the course of creative quest and

nation nedia making their contribution to this matter. which is useful for
the entire party.

It was reelphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress that energetic and competent
party leadership is of decisive significance. "If every party organization,"
Comrade LI. Brezhnev observed, "in its own area makes use of all resources
and brings due order to hear in all things. the affairs of the whole country
will be further advanced. For this reason an increase in the role of the
obkom end raykom is a crucial, serious and, I would say, permanent task."*
The CPSU Central Co-ittee plans in 1981 to examine the work of certain party
cal-ittees iron the viewpoint of the requirements of the 26th party congress.
These reports will undmbtedly serve not only an improve-eat in the work of
those party organizations but will enable us to draw conclusions of all-
party significance.

The directives of the 26th CPSU Congress on questions of party leadership
oblige In to continue to enhance the role of the primary party organizations
in the accomlishment of the manifold tasks of twist building. The

CPSU now has 616,000 primary party organizations and more than 1 million shop
party organizations and party groups. This is a big force. Thanks to their
activity, the party's ideas and decisions are deeply penetrating the con-
sciousness of millions of Soviet people and being translated into the lan-
guage of concrete arts.

*"h—aterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 71.

139 .

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The priaary party organisations have favorable possibilities for influencing
all aspects of the life of the labor collectives. They are endowed with the
ridit of control of the activity of the addnistration or the work of the
staff. The congress demanded the Inim- stimulation of all these eleaents
in order that they operate fully and energetically everywhere, make better
use of their ridnts and display scrupulousness and firaly inlelent the party
line in every question of the life of the collective. It is in this smut
that the min tasks of people‘s education are tackled. They are tackled the
sore successfully the more consistently the principle of the unity of
organizing. political. economic and ideological work is pursued.

The CPSU Central Codttee Report to the 26th party congress paid great atten-
tion to the work of the ninistry and depart-ant party co-ittees. The Central
(lo-ittee is endeavoring to increase their role in the surnounting of various
departmental and bureaucratic barriers which are still encountered in the
adainistrative bodies, hindering the accouplishmnt of iwending tasks.
Ministry and departmt party committee must display lore initiative and
scrupulousness and stand sore resolutely and unconpronisingly on guard of all-
state interests. There my be no doubt that the congress' directives will
impart new iqetus to the entire work of the primary party organisations and
raise still higher their leading, vanguard role in the life and affairs of

the labor collectives.

The selection, assign-eat and training of personnel and supervision of the
fulfill-eat of scheduled plans and party and state directives constitute the
essence of party leadership. These are not only organizational but also

aost inortant political functions of our ruling party. It is well known

that v.1. Lenin considered people's selection and the verification of perform-
ance the centerpiece of all work and all policy. he saw this as a condition
of the party winning authority and trust in the people's masses: "-...select
the necessary people and verify practical performance. and the people will
appreciate this.“

In recent years our party has been enriched with new experience in the sphere
of a further inproveaent in the qualitative cognition and assignment of
executive personnel and an increase in their qualifications. National econon
specialists are being proaoted actively to party work. Currently three-
fourths of union republic Com-list Party central co-ittoe and kraykon and
obkoa secretaries and two-thirds of gorkoa and raykon secretaries are indus-
trial and agricultural specialists. This policy contributes to an inrove-ent
in party leadership of the econouy, and the 26th CPS!) Congress approved it
coupletely. At the same time it was noted at the congress that sole of the
specialists who have joined the party aechinery fro. production lack suffi-
cient political experience and at tines introduce adlainistratiwe-nanagenent
methods to the party authorities. For this reason the task that has been

set is that of increasing the party-political training of these workers of the
party Iachinery and helping the. acquire the necessary skills of party work.

*V.l. lenin, I'(zotaplete Works,II vol (05. p 112.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is iaportant to strive to ensure that all those when we consider a reserve
for promotion to executive work graduate free the good school of life and
practical activity in the asses and acquire the necessary political condi-
tioning. ﬁnch is being done in this country to create a dependable personnel
reserve. The work of the higher party schools and educational imtitutions
training personnel for aanagsnent of the scone-y has been reorganized. In
the last 5-year period the party schools and CPSII Oentral Oo-ittee Academy
of Social Sciences graduated 32,000 persons. lbre than 250,000 party, soviet
and ideological workers underwent tuition at corresponding courses.

Practice shows that where work with the reserve is performed in a well-con-
sidered unner. difficulties in the selection and pronotion of personnel
usually do not arise. This is the case, for example in the Ukraine's party
organizations. here people when it is intended to promote to executive work
are attentively studied in practical setters, are enlisted in the fulfill-eat
of public assign-ants and are recomded for election to party, soviet,
Komsomol and trade union bodies in good time. All this has ends it possible
to increase the efficacy of the reserve and sharply reduce the number of in-
stances of cooptation to gorkon and raykoa secretary position. Such exper-
ience could profitably be adopted by other party organizations also.

A good executive personnel weition has now taken shape in the party and
the country. These are, for the lost part. politically mture. skilled work-
ers. But life does not nark tins, and the demands on the personnel and, con-
sequently, on work with then are growing constantly. Under current conditions
it is important that the executive personnel have not sinply hidner education
but also he specialists of the appropriate profile. There are still instances
of the mwarrsnted replaceability of workers. Certain leaders becoae ac-
customed to shortcoaings and lose their initiative owing to insufficient super-
vision and assistance on the part of the party couittees. Unpromising work-
ers are sonetines sent for training to party educational institutions. Parti-
cular nention should be ads of the promotion of woaen to executive positions.
As the 26th CPSU Congress pointed out, the possibilities for their promtion
are not being realized in full. This is a serious rebuke to any party and
soviet authorities. It is necessary to rectify this situation and promote
women to leadership in various fields sore boldly and actively.

The question of how the composition of executive personnel in the union and
autonomus republics is formed also xerits attention. lhe:vpopulation of the
Soviet reptblics is multinational. And, naturally, all nations have the
right to representation in their party and state bodies. Of course, given
strict consideration of each person's professional and ideological-soul
qualities.

These t'undanental instructions of the 26th CPSU Congress mat constantly be
taken into consideration in our personnel policy.

Under current conditions there is a nsnifold increase in the significance of
the discipline and personal responsibility of the personnel, particularly
the party and soviet leaders and managers. "Rights." L.l. Brezhnev said.

1101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"and big rights are granted leaders in order that they asks full use of them.
But every leader here must also constantly rel-extent his bid: responsibility—
responsibility to the people whom he is entrusted to lead and to the party
and the people."*

Such responsibility is characteristic of our executive personnel as a whole.
The basis of it is high awareness and devotion to one's people and the ideals
of commisn. The party never has built and does not now build discipline
on fear and compulsion. But at the same tine this does not mean that we lay
try to persuade and convince people who forget their duty ad infinitua. He
still have workers who adopt an mconscientiom attitude toward their work',
disregard all-state interests and abuse their office. They allow breaches of
official discipline and legality, mismagenent and extravagance and the
defrauding of the state. Such acts are sonetimea perpetrated in view of the
party organizations and the public. but aeasures to put a stop to then are
not adopted in good tine. lbre acmpulomnesa needs to be displayed here.
When a person begins to stray froa the correct path, it is better to rectify
bin inediately and point out his shortconings in comradely fashion. The
party co-ittees should give the'lead here.

Demands should be particularly strict on party meters. It is fitting to
recall here how v.1. Lenin put this question. A Central Co-ittee circular
was passed on his initiative 60 years ago which determined that a co-unist
should be doubly answerable for a breach of official discipline and Soviet
law and order—to the party and to the law. We abide by this principle
strictly today also.

Supervision and the verification of performnce are intended to serve to in-
crease personnel responsibility and ilprove all our work. They -are an essen-
tial condition of the success of party leadership and all nanagerial work.
Mention was made at the 26th party congress of the positive work on this nat-
ter done by the CPSU Central Co-ittee. local party cousittees and soviet
authorities. At the same time it was pointed out that the verification of
performance renains a bottleneck in the activity of a considerable nulber of
party organizations. This serious critical conclusion of the congress makes
it incudaent upon us to attentively investigate the shortconings emerting a
negative influence on the state of verificationo'f performance. This is
frequently a lack of the proper professionalism, inadequate exactingness too
ward the executants and the absence of a precise system of supervision. Super-
vision is often nade more difficult because an unjustifiably large nmber of
decrees is adopted in places. This also applies to certain party conittees.
As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said, mfortunately, not everyone hm yet grasped 'the
sinple truth that the art of leadership consists not of producing and lavish-
ing directive instructions on every pretext. Having made a decision, it is
necessary to strive for its unswerving fulfillment within the specified
tine.“

_________,_______.___——
*"Haterial of the 26th CPS“ Congress,“ p 50.
**Ibid., pp 72-73.

1’02

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is essential that supervision be exercised systesatically and proQtly and
free above and below si-thaneouslyu-such is a crucial task set all party
and state authorities by our party's 26th congress.

IV

The 26th CPSU Congress paid great attention to questions of a further iaprove-
sent in intraparty relations. It consolidated and continued our party's
policy of undeviating observance of the principle of deaocratic centrelisa and
the develop-cut of intraparty desocracy, which always vu and remains an
essential condition of ensuring the high fighting efficiency of the party
organizations and the develop-ant of the comists' creative assertiveness. .

The results of the report and election caspaign in the party conducted on the
eve of the congress were a striking reflection of this process. It was
evaluated highly in Canada LJ. Breshnev's report. The report and election
meetings and conferences were held in a businesslike mar. Cos-mists'

groups was higher than ever. Altogether are than half of the co-aunists

who attended the aeetings spoke in the debates. They adopted an attitude of
high exactingness to an evaluation of the activity of the elective bodies

and criticized onissions and shorten-lugs. The party couittees collated

any different proposals and observations on the basis of the results of the
meetings and conferences. The report and election caIpaign stimulated the
developuent of the activeness of all elensnts of the party; in the course there-
of the mighty force of the party's collective wisdon and the mired will of

the co-unists and their close cohesion aromd the CPS!) Central Connittee

were displayed anew.

the professionalisn and critical spirit which distinguished the report and
election asetings, conferences and congresses held prior to the 26th CPSU
Congress becone fir-1y established in the entire life of the party organiza-
tions. It is important to further refine the practice of party neetings and
plenuns and enhance their fruitfulness and efficacy. "The party nesting,"
Conrade l..l. Brezhnev pointed out, "as also the plemns of any party cot-it-
tee, is a place where all burning issues aust he discussed seriously and in
depth."* However, it is not yet everywhere that the matings and rplenu.
are conducted in businesslike fashion. They are at tines flared hy ostenta-
tion and excessive "advance organization". The speeches of nsny speakers
are reniniscent of self-accounts. An attitude of due attention is not
adopted everywhere to the judpeuta of party neinrs and the observations and
proposals which they express. Of course. not every proposal can be realized
innediately, while sons nay prove unacceptable altogether. But everything
which is useful and nay serve to iwrove astters should undmbedly he used.
This is also necessary to inculcate in every cos-unist the feeling of naster
of his own organization and the party as a whole.

*"Eterial of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 73.

143

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I would like to emphasize the important role of the party's elective activists.
They currently constitute over 6.8 million columnists, of whom 1.9 million
are workers and peasants. They are memers of the bureaus of practically all
raykoms and gorkou and the vast majority of obkon. The elective activists
link the executive authorities with the party masses, help them accurate

the thoud'uts and experience of party members and the working people and repre-
sent an inexhaustible persomel reserve. This is a big force, which largely
determines the state of affairs in the party organizations. And it. is neces-
sary to me it as fully as possible and strive to ensure that everyone who

is elected to executive party bodies participate in their work most actively.
In a word, our elective activists mat in their entirety be truly combat
activists.

Intrqarty information is an inalienable component of the party's democratic
life. Much has been done in recent years to perfect it and expand publicity
in the work of the party organizations. But there is much that can and :should
be improved in this respect. Inadequate use is made in a umber of party
organizations of such effective for. as reports at plenus about the work of
the bureaus, the fulfillment of decisions adopted earlier and the realisation
of critical remarks and proposals. Some 2,466 union republic Oo—unist Party
central conittee, kraykom and obkom plenms were held altogether in 3 years.
Intonation was presented at only 313 of these on various questions of the
activity of the party conittees. Party couittee briefings on the work done
in the period between conferences directly in the primry party organizations
are not organized systematically. Some 58 obkoan gave no such briefings at
all in the past 5 years. He also have to considerably inrove the quality of
the intonation coming fron below, from the party organizations. It is in-
tended to catch in good time the new trends in the development of the party
and society, truthfully reflect the phenomena of life and the mood of the
masses, warn of shortcomings and pose questions which need to be solved.

The working people's letters and proposals are a most confidential and valuable
source of infomtion. These are a modindicator of Soviet people's civicism
and political culture and an important channel of the party's live comica-
tion with the masses. As from an invigorating spring, the party constantly
draws from the depths of popular life fresh thought and experience, which it
sunsequently accuulates in its policy and edaodiea in practical deeds.

The CPS" Central Committee received over 3 million of the working people‘s
letters in the last 5-year period. A special department was set up in the
CPS!) Central Committee machinery for an improvement in the work with the
letters. Letters, greetings and labor reports were addressed to the 26th
party congress in a broad stream. Over 270,000 were received. A significant
proportion of the letters and petitions was examined by the congress'
secretariat. Many of the working people's proposals and observations were
taken into consideration in the preparation of the docuents of the congress,
while others, in accordance with its decree, were forwarded for examination
in the CPSU Central (Io-litres.

110 4

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
The party congress desanded of all party, soviet and eanageeent authorities

a furtherieproveesnt in the work with Soviet people's letters and proposals.

It is essential to ensure a sensitive. attentive attitude toward their letters,
increase officials' responsibility for investigation of the citizens' coqlaints
and petitions and be sore stringent in respect of those who permit for-alien
and bureaucratise in this ieportant political latter. Theuinstructions of

the 26th party congress were nade the basis of the recent CPSU Central Coe-
eittee decree on this latter.

A sure leans of a rise in the level of party work and a proven method which
always helps our progressive advance is criticise and self-criticise. "The
party of the revolutionary proletariat ," v.1. Lenin wrote. "is sufficiently
strong to openly criticise itself and to not since words in calling a eistake
a mistake and weakness weakness." Our party possesses this quality in full
eeasure. The extensive spread of criticism and self-criticise in recent years
is an indicator of its increased strength and fighting capacity and the
mturity of intraparty relations. The 26th CPS!) Congress orients us toward
intensifying this positive trend in every possible way, establishing-Ia

spirit of self-criticise and irreconcilability with shortcoeings in all party
organizations and increasing the efficacy of critical protests. It is some-
times the case that there is a goodchal of criticise in this organization or
the other, but that practical results are not in evidence. It is for years.
a question of essentially the ease shortcoeings. Yet criticise is not an'end
in itself or a play on words. It is an instrument of an ieprovenent in work,
and it is necessary that deeds unfailingly follow concrete and substantiated
criticise. People's assertiveness will then grow, and their interest in the
solution of problem which arise and reeoval of shortcoeings and gaps will
increase.

In the develop-eat of criticise and self-criticise ever increasing activeness
is being displayed by the ease infatuation eedia. The CPSU Central Conittee
orients the local party authorities and our personnel toward an attentive
approach to the critical articles of the press and support for healthy criti-
cisn in print and television and radio broadcasts. The party organizations
are obliged to be uncoeproeising in sureounting an incorrect attitude toward
criticise when it is encountered. And, of course, all attespts at persecution
because of criticise nust be sephatically repulsed. Our party's position on
this question is clearly enshrined in its Rules and is also reflected in the
USSR Constitution.

The 26th party congress was a real school of a highdeinded approach to all
matters. The CPSU Central Co-ittee Report and the speeches of the delegates
noted with legitieate pride the great achieveeents of the party and the
people. At the sac ties there was such blunt. candid and constructive criti»
cise of shortcomings. criticise which leaves people with a sense of confi-
dence in their own powers and evokes a resolve to strive for the best re-
sults. The congress thus objectively showed how the style of work of coe-
Ilunists should costine a critical attitude toward shortcoeings with a convic-
tion as to the rigttness of our cause and the historic advantages of our
chosen path.

qw—
WJ. Lenin, Coqlete Works. vol 26. p 172.

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The CPSU's inner life becomes increasingly full-bloodied and meaningful with
every passing year. And this is exerting a salutory influence not only on
the activity of the party but also on the development of social relations and
the extension of socialist democratisn in general. The healthy creative
atmosphere in the party also predetermines to a decisive extent the overall
atmosphere and the favorable political climate in the country and is creating
a good businesslike mood in Soviet people. The relations taking shape within
the party and the democratic principles and forms permeating its inner life
are being generally acknowledged and are being adopted by state and public
organizations and the labor collectives. Every new step along the path of
the extension of intraparty democracy is leadi g to the further unity of the
party and the people and contributing to the all-around development of the
democratic foundation of the Soviet sociopolitical system.

It is fitting here also to enmhasize attention to the role being performed by
the press, literature and art in the portrayal of the party's inner life and
the depiction of the forms and methods of party leadership. An ever increas-
ing number of works of fiction and poetry. motion pictures, stage performances
and television broadcasts on these themes have been appearing recently. They
evoke interest and help party workers and all readers and viewers to see life
more fully. I would like to express the wish for greater depth in the por-
trayal of the entire diversity of party work.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress set the soviets, trade unions and the
Ko-omol new tasks. The essence of the congress' directives is raising their
entire work to an even higher level corresponding to their position in the
political system of the Soviet society and the. demands of the time. The

CPSU Central Co-ittee, USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium and USSR Comcil of
Ministers decree on the increased role of the soviets in economic building
extends their rights appreciably and is a good incentive to a further stimula-
tion of the activity of the soviet authorities locally. The party conitteea
must constantly improve the practice of leadership of the soviets and the
working people's ms organizations.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev‘s report at the 26th CPSU Congress showed comrehen-
sively and in depth how our party is living and developing under the conditions
of developed socialism and what tasks it is tackling. Enriched with new
experience of work, the party organizations are concentrating their forces on
the successful fulfullment of the congress' historic decisions.

»' K.V. Rusakov, secretary of the CPSU Central Committee: "The 26th CPSU Con-
gress on the Development of the World Socialist System"

The time separating us from the memorable days of the 26th CPSU Congress testi-
fies convincingly and impressively that its solutions and conclusions were an
event of historic significance.

This is true in respect of our internal affairs. The 26th CPSU Congress de-
termined both the new frontiers which we are to reach in columnist building

and the appropriate methods and means for their achievement within the scheduled
times. The creative, critical spirit of the congress gave not only the right
direction but also a good lead for the work of'the entire party and the entire

Soviet people .

146

ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
This is also true in the foreign policy sphere. There has been a lurked
exacerhation of the international situation in recent years as a result of the
actions of i-perialisl, primarily American. 'nze previous 0.8. Adninistration
contrived to destroy much of that which was positive which had been created
with such difficulty in Soviet-American relations in the preceding years.

As far as the new 0.8. Administration is concerned, it announced, right off,
so to speak, that the United States nuat restore its lost world leadership and
achieve military superiority over the Soviet thion and the socialist co-nity.

The CPSU Central Conittee Report delivered at the congress by Conrade L.I.
Brezhnev cited a systea of masuras whose inlsmsntation would impart new
life to detente and make our world a safer place. Of course. realization of
the congress' foreign policy initiatives will take both tins and strenuom
efforts. But it is a fact that they are even now contributing to a recupera-
tion of the international political climate. Bast-Heat dialogue is beginning
to be stimulated, to which the recent talks of l..l. Brezhnev and A.A. Crosyko
with ll.-D. Genscher, minister of foreign affairs of Heat Germany, the results
of the visit of ILA. Tikhonov, chairman of the USSR Council of llinisters. to
Austria and the decision concerning I..I. Brezhnev's visit to the me at the
invitation of this country's govern-ant testify.

We have a right to speak of the historic significance of the 26th congress in
respect of the affairs of the big, comic: and growing socialist world also.
”The congress of the party of Lenin, and this can be said with complete justi-
fication," Comrade E. lionecker said at the recent 10th 831) Congress. 'hvas an
event of tremendous simificsnce for the Soviet people's further advance
toward co-unism and for the entire socialist comity and all international
developuent." The fraternal parties are evaluating with gratitude the con-
trihution which the 26th CPSU Congress nade to the theory and practice of
scientific co-mnisa.

As Conrade 6. Russ]: enphasized at the congress of Czechoslovak columnists,
"the 26th CPSU Congress enriches our knowledge, implants confidence in us and
inspires us to the further building of the developed socialist society.” Con-
rade T. Zhivkov, leader of the Bulgarian cos-mists, observed at the 12th
Bulgarian Commist Party Congress: "The decisions of the zath, 25th and
26th CPSU congresses, the new Soviet Constitution and the 0883's far-reaching
achievennts in economic and cultural building, the development of science and
technology and the solution of Ian's material and spiritual problem—all
these theoretically and practically daternina the nain landmarks of the new
path along which other countries and peoples will proceed."

The socialist world today is nade up of countries which are largely dissimilar
in political and socioeconoaic development level. Individual states have
distinctive traditions. Etch has its own national color, and, of course, in
policy there are both features which are coupon to a nuber of countries and
specific features. The situation and tasks of, say, Czechoslovakia and Laos
and Cuba and the GDR are very dissimilar. It also happens that. unfortunately.
national color is deliberately laid on inordinately thickly. It is than
necessary to speak not of color but of nationalistic nanifestations in policy.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are examples of this. however. the dominant trend in the socialist

, world is the trend toward the cohesion, strengthening of the interaction and
expmsion of the cooperation of the socialist states. This is of truly
historic significance for the fate of world socialism.

It is fitting to recall Lenin's idea, which Conrade L.I. Brezhnev enphasized
at the 26th CPSU Congress, concerning the fact that the existence of general
regularities of the building of socialism, and this ha been proven by his-
torical practice, by no means sipifies some "standardization" of ways and
methods of accowlishing the tasks of building a new society. Both similar
phenomena of the sane type and inimitdale individual features are neighbors
in the practice of social development. Pointing to this nature of social
progress, v.1. Lenin wrote: "...different nations take an identical histori-
cal path, but by zigzags and hyways which vary to the highest degree...."*
But it was a fundamental idea of Lenin's that "the unity of the international
tactics of the comunist workers' noveunt of all countries requires not the
removal of diversity and not the extirpation of national differences (this is
an absurd dream for this time) but such an application of the basic prin-
ciples of conunisn...as would correctly modify these principles in details
and correctly adapt and apply them to national and national-state differ-
ences. **

To the great credit of our party and other fraternal commnist and workers'
parties in power is the fact that they have been able to create a strong,
cohesive family of socialist states. The tasks of the development and
strengthening of our all-around interaction with the fraternal countries

were and remain a principal concern of the 09811 Central Conittee and Central
Coumitteel’olitburo. Concerning the development of the socialist world,
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev spoke thus at the 26th CPSU Congress: "All these years
the party and its Central Col-litres and Politburo have paid unflagging atten-
tion to strengthening friendship and cooperation with the socialist countries.

"together with then we are building a new, socialist world and an unprece-
dented type of relational-betwemstates which are really just, equal and fra-
tcrnal."***

What are the results of this work, in what areas are the efforts of our party
and country in nutual relations with the socialists countries concentrated
and what is seen to be the future of the socialist world?

1

Speaking of relations with the socialist.co-unity countries—Bulgaria, ﬂun-
gary, Vietnam, the GDR, Cuba, Laos. Ibngolia, Poland, Romania and

—- —————;;——-——-n———_
*V.I. Lenin, Conplete Works, vol 38, p 184.

**lbid., vol 101, p 77.
***"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 5.

1108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Czechoslovakia--L.I. Brezhnev observed that "a fundamental unity of view
has been established anong us on all najor problens of socioeconomic develop-
nent‘and international policy."*

. This, of course, is a very important achievement. It did not cone about of
‘its own accord. It was necessary "to work up to it." in Lenin's expression.

A trenendous contribution to this was ads and continues to be node by our
party's Central Co-ittee Politburo and Conrado L.I. Brezhnev personally.
'lhe reports of L.I. Brezhnev's neetinp with the leaders of the fraternal
countries nerely give a dotted outline of the transom and nultifnceted
work which is being done at the hidaest level to strengthen the interaction
of the socialist states.

L.I. Brezhnev Inde 11 trips to the fraternal countries at the head of party-
governnent delegations in the period between the 26th and 25th congresses
alone. Sons 37 meetings were held in the Crises. L.I. Brezhnev headed the
Soviet delegation at three tastings of the Warsaw Pact's Political Consul-
tative Conittee held in this period. He also headed the Soviet delegation
at the 5 Decedaer 1931 Moscow nesting of leading figures of the states of the
military-political defense alliance of the socialist countries. In the inter-
ests of the pronpt solution of problem which arise L.I. Brezhnev regularly
exchanges letters and co-nmicates by telephone with the leaders of the
fraternal parties and countries. Almat every session of the Central Con-
nittee Politburo and Secretariat emines diverse questions connected with
our nutual relations with the socialist countries. And, of course, not only
exanines but also resolves in conradely and internationalist fashion. And
the lead here is given by L.I. Brezhnev.

The neetings and talks with the leadership of the fraternal parties always re-
quire an in-depth understanding of their probless, difficulties and plans and
great political tact. After all. every socialist country has its own parti-
cular features and its own national concerns. Serious questions have to be
broached at tines. Such, for crawls, were I..I. Brezhnev's talks at Crinea
meetings in recent years with B. Gierelt. Ihfortunetely, our tinely warnings
were resented by the previous Polish leadership as the fruit of incorrect
infornation, and the appropriate conclusions were not drum.

The Crinea tastings and the exchanges of opinions thereat lent ispetus to the
formulation of long-tern questions of fundamental significance for the develop-
nant of the socialist countries. They discussed in high-ninded manner the

key tasks of the extension of socialist economic integration, which was sub-
sequently reflected in the develop-ant and adoption of long-tern goal-oriented
program of cooperation and bilateral program of specialization. and coopera-
tion between the USSR and the European cm countries. Invariably appreciable
attention was paid to the key problens of world politics and the fraternal
countries' joint foreign policy actions were coordinated and specified.

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 5.

169

FOR omaAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Collating the results of the Crimes meetings, I..I. Brezhnev put forward the
idea of the creationofa wide-ranging energy program incorporating together
with the accelerated development of atondc power engineering the stepped-up
development of the rich gas and oil deposits in West Siberia. These neat.
ings pronpted the presentation at the 26th CPSU Congress of such a major
task as supple-eating the coordination-of the socialist states' national eco-
nonic plans with the coordination along then of economic policy as s whole.

Heetings of the Political Consultative Courittee have an exceptionally
important role in the extension of the interaction of the socialist countries
in the foreign policy sphere. The paving of the way tovard the All-European
Conference in Helsinki, the advancement of a set of constructive proposals
aimed at liniting and winding down the am race, including the nuclear ans
race, and consistent efforts ained at codining the possibilities of the
states of different social system in the interests of the solution of global
problems such as power engineering, transport and environmental protection say
be put down to the credit of the Warsaw Pact in recent years alone.

The very emergence and development of the process of the actual relaxation of
international tension was possible to a decisive extent thanks to the purpose-
ful peace-loving policy of the fraternal states. It is not out of place to
emphasize that the fact that the socialist countries possess dependable de-
fensive resources for protecting their peoples' peaceful labor is connected
with the activity of the Warsaw Pact.

The creation within the ﬂarsav Pact frsmrk of the Foreign Ministers' Con-
nittee was a very inortanh step. Sessions-of this coalittee are held twice
a year, as a rule, vhich makes it possible to pronptly coordinate the so-
cialist countries' approach to the nest important international probless.
Collective deputy foreign minister meetings are also held regularly. As be-
fore, and this was nentioned at the 26th CPSU Congress, inportant work on the
organizational development of the Joint Araed Forces is performed by the De-
fense Hinisters’ Couittee.

Full-fledged, close relations along party lines are undoubtedly the pivot of
the socialist states' entire cooperation. It is precisely the interaction of
the fraternal commist parties which determines the successful developmt
of the socialist countries' cooperation in all spheres and all directions and
the enlistment of the broad working people's leases in this cooperation. l..l.
Brezhnev said clearly and accurately at the 26th CPS]! Congress: "Relations
between states have been called international fros of old. But it is only

in our tine, in the socialist world, that they have really become relations
between peoples. Millions and nillions of people participate in than directly.
This, cogrades, is a fundamental gain of socialism and its great service to
Iankind. *

Relations and cooperation with our foreign socialist friends have becom an
inalienable part of the party work of practically every republic, kray and
ohalst and party organization.

————'——n—
*"Haterial of the 26th CPS!) Congress. p 6.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The field of our cooperation with the socialist countries is expanding con-
tinuously. And. what is particularly inortant. the fruit of this cooperation
is mltiplying. It say be said with cowlete justification that the friend-
ship, interaction and mtual assistance of the socialist countries have become
an organic ingredient of the successes of each fraternal country and the entire
socialist connity as a whole.

This has been corroborated impressively by the recent period, and it has not,
as is known, been easy. “me socialist world is not hersetically sealed off
fron world scone-1c conditions. There was a sharp increase in the price of
energy carriers and raw Interial in the 1970's, which, in turn, entailed a
considerable increase in the costs of the finished product. particularly the
technically coqlu product. Conditions on the world urkat been-e tougher
and bleaker, and competitive struggle became more acute.

0n the other hand, it was in this period that it was revealed in the majority
of socialist countries that extensive factors of the development of the econ-
omy are being increasingly exhamted and that the tasks of intensification
of the national econoaies are arising in full nautude.

It should be added to what has been said that the international situation was
by no means even. The crisis situations which arose diverted part of the
socialist countries' resources into defense needs and assistance to their
allies. whereas under different. more tranquil conditions these resources
could have been used entirely in the interests of the development of produc-
tion and a rise in the people's living standard.

But even under such difficult conditions the socialist co-Inity countries
were able to take a significant step forward. This applies fully to the
Soviet Union, whose impressive achievements were strikingly presented in the
reports and speeches at the 26th 6280 Congress. National incons incremed,
and increased in all the fraternal countries. moreover. It increased 67
percent in the period 1971-1930 in the cum countries as a whole, industrial
production increased 86 percent and agricultural products increased 17 per-
cent. There wu a 60-percent replacement of fixed production capital on
average. Labor productivity in industry and real incoae per capita grew by
a factor -of approxinately 1.5.

"Must has been done by the socialist countries in econoaic development and in
a rise in people's living standard is an entire ers,"* Comrade L.I. Brezhnev
rightly gymnast the 26th 0280 Congress.

The socialist calamity countries' achieve-ants in the economy are in marked
contrast to the unsure, hesitant rhythm of the developaent of the capitalist
economy. If there is something that has been growing, and growing rapidly.
in recent years in the capitalist countries it is inflation and unemployment.
The crisis phenomena are striking not only individual enterprises or sectors.
they are shaking the entire economic organism of the capitalist states.

15—-—————————
* Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," 9 7.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The can countries' econonic growth rate in the decade was twice as high as
in the developed capitalist countries. It is the socialist co-xnity which
was and retains the noat dyna-ic developing group of states. "hence the new
correlation of econoaic potentials of the socialist and capitalist comtries.
Currently, for exasple, the cm radars produce 1.!» tines sore electric
power, .1.6 tines mre steel and twice as such mineral fertilizer as all the
Conan Market states together. song which are the m, hence, britain,
Italy and other highly developed European capitalist states.

All these data eloquently attest the real value of the claims of imperialist
propaganda concerning the econoaic crisis which has allegedly swept the
socialist cot-runny. Under the coqlex and far from favordue conditions of
recent yea: : the advantages of the econowy's organisation on socialist prin-
ciples have been perfectly clear and convincing.

The socialist atates' successes are connected to a decisive extent, naturally.
with the national efforts of individual countries. In Bulgaria, Hungary. the
GDR, Romania, Czechoslovakia and other socialist states a great deal of work
has been and continues to be perforled on involving all national resources

in the economic turnover, aanagesent of the econoly is being streaalined and
additional opportunities for stiaulating and increasing labor productivity
are being sought. Much is also being done in the sphere of the econonicsl
expenditure of energy, raw material and internediate products.

I will cite just one exaaple. In 19!) the GDR achieved a national incoae
growth of 4.2 percent and m industrial production growth of 6.7 percent with
a 1.2-‘percent reduction in the consulption of fuel-energy resources. Good,
instructive results, without dowt.

We rejoice in frienda' achievements as our own. ‘lhe stronger each socialist
country, the stronger our entire socialist comunity also. '

An exceptionally valuable addition to the national potential of the social-
ist states is the develop-ant of socialist economic integration. It has
become an irreplaceable factor of the successes of the econoaic growth of
each fraternal socialist country. It was said at the 26th CPSU Congress with
coaplete justification that it is now difficult to iaagine the sure develop-
nent of this socialist country or the other and its successful solution of
such probleas as supply of energy resources and raw mterial and the introduc-
tion of the latest achievements of science and technology without relations
with the other fraternal countries.

Reciprocal couodity turnover of the cm countries is characterised by con-
otant and unswerving growth. This is mutually profitble co-Jdity turnover,
in the Iain. Thus supplies fron the USSR cover one-third of the fraternal
countries‘ aschinery and equipment and, to a considerable extent. hose
appliance import requirelents. The Soviet Union supplies the socialist coun-
tries with energy carriers and other asst valuable raw nterial in great
volue. In the last 5 years the Soviet Union supplied the socialist countries
with approxinstely 463 aillion tons of oil and petrolem products and 96
billion ctbic Inters of natural gas. Despite the certain lilitednsss of
natural resources and the increasing difficulty of their extraction, in the

1.52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
new 5-year period also our country will naintain supplies of petrolem prod-
ucts to the fraternal socialist countries at a high level.

In turn, the socialist countries are supplying the 11881! on an ever growing
scale with s variety of industrial equipnentp machinery and transport facili-
ties. Equip-ant obtained fro- Czechoslovakia, the one, Hungary, Poland, bul-
garia and Ron-nia is operating at thousands of Soviet enterprises. Many ships
of our maritine fleet were node in Poland and the m. Particular mention
should be made of the consuer goods which we receive fron the fraternal
countries. the selection and quantity of which is being replenished and en-
riched considerably thanks to cooperation within the CEHA framwork. Thus

the proportion of co—oditiss from the socialist states constitutes 17 per-
cent of furniture, clothing and footwear sales in the 0883.

For the satisfaction of mutual requir-nts the socialist countries enharked
in the 1970's within the franework of integration on the creation of joint
large-scale projects. Sons of these have already been co-issioned. These

are the Kiyedaayevskiy Asbestos works, the Ust'-llilnkiy Cellulose Plant.

the "Brdenet" Mining-Concentrating works in lbngolia, a coupler for gas ex-
traction and treatment based on the Orenbnrg deposit and the unique "Soyuz"

gas Iain. The list of such projects could be continued. Work on their instal-
lation is being perfornsd in a nunber of comtries, and there is no doubt that
it will increase in scale in the years to con.

In illustration of how the socialist countries are approaching questions of
econonic integration we may quote 6. husak's state-ent at the 16th Czechoslovak
Commie: Party Congress. He said: "Foreign economic relations”! an inalien-
able cosponcnt of our economic policy. The mre extensive incorporation of the
Czechoslovak economy in the international division of labor is an objective
necessity. The basis of this process is prinrily the all-around develop-
aent of nutually profitable trade, economic and scientific-technical relations
within the CDIA framework and the extension of our participation in socialist
economic integration. An irreplaceable role is perforud here by comprehen-
sive econonic cooperation with the Soviet lhion."

In speaking of socialist econonic integration it should also be mentioned that
the capacity of the socialist market is growing thanks to its develop-ant.

The countries producing this product or the other are acquiring the opportunity
to organise really large-scale world class production. Sons concrete facts.
The distribution of orders among aviation industry enterprises has given
socialist Poland the position of the Iain supplier of agricultural aviation
among the (INA countries. This has enabled Poland to develop production
capable of withstanding conpetition on all urkets. It has emerged in first
place in the world in the manufacture of aircraft for agriculture. The Polish
aviation industry has become the biggest producer of aircraft of the air Dedi-
cal service and certain types of passenger airplane. There is a multitude

of sinilar examples with reference to various socialist countries.

There is one further inportsnt eleaent which is undoubtedly reflected positive-
ly in the socialist states' achieve-ants, namely, the great. diverse experience

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

of work on the building and strengthening of the new society that has been
accumulated by the fraternal parties. This experience includes questions of
party and state leadership. It concerns a refinensnt of socialist planning.
nnageaent of the national scone-y and rich and diverse form of ideological
work.

The socialist con-unity countries possess many channels for autual study of
one another's uperience. Exchanges of visits by party-government delegations.
Regular aeetings of party central co-ittee secretaries dealing with interna-
tional and ideological probleas and questions of organisational-party work.
The plan-based exchange of party delegations of various levels. The close
contacts of departments, the ease inforaation media, pdalic organisations and
creative mione. And. undoubtedly. local cos-mications. "The party organ-
izationa of the Soviet Union and the socialist col-unity countries are linked
by a aultitude of threads," Conrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Con-
gress. "They are linked at all levels—fro- repdalic, tray and oblast through
rayon and large enterprise. Cooperatives between state authorities, public
organizations and production collectives has assured a lively. fruitful na-
ture."*

The aggregate experience of the socialist countries in the accoaplishnent of
the manifold tasks of socialist building is lost valud>le capital, and we
should learn how to avail ourselves of it. It is well known how highly the
Soviet exane and our experience of socialist and columnist building is
valued in the fraternal countries. Our socialist friends are applying it
skillfully and creatively to their sum conditions.

when everything of value that has been fond in Soviet practice becoees the
property of the fraternal states, we can only rejoice at this. And it is worth
our while, in turn, inculcating in ourselves a good, necessary "thirst" in
respect of the positive experience of friends. Ll. Brezhnev said with all
certainty at the 26th CPSU Congress: "let us, coarades, study mre attentive-
ly and sake nore extensive use of the experience of the fraternal countries."”
This is a task of state inportance.

A special interdepartmental council headed b Conrade N.K. ha

of the USSR Gosplan, and his deputies, Courage 6.1. Harchuk, $323.1???
USSR State Comittee for Science and Technology, and Conrade N.V. Talyzin

the USSR s permanent cm representative. was for-ed recently for the sore
in-depth and systematic study of the practice of socialist nanagenent in the

fraternal countries and the proper preparation of proposals on the use of
their positive experience. This council has been set the tasks of analysing

and comprehensively evaluating the results and consequences of the changes
occurring in the economic nechanisa of the fraternal countries and the de-
velopnent of production. science and technology and preparing proposals on

ate-expediency of the use of friends' positive experience in the 0588's prac-
ce.

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 5.
“ma” p 7.

1510

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
At the sane time there are significant opportmities for studying the exper-
ience of the socialist countries along local party relations and production
collective direct contact lines. The union republics ad nore than 100 krays,
oblmts and cities of the Soviet Unim are participating in friendly relations.
The work volune here is growing continuously. And lid! is being done.

Here are just a few exaspla. Sons 120 plants and factories in Czechoslova-
kia'a West Slovak region are working in accordance with the so-called Saratov
systea of an incruse in product quality. The Bulgarian conrades have ob-
tained a big saving by having introduced the Soviet technique of the mechan-
ized harvesting and processing of cotton. They are making good use of the
Rostov workers' experimce of socialist coapetition in the organization of
"work without stragglers". The Bostov workers, in turn, have applied with
great benefit the Bulgarian experience of vegetﬁle growing, horticultureand
viticulture. Having studied the work of agrochenical centers in the out, our
comrades fron Lipetsk have created an agrochenical service in accordance with
their ennple, having organised rayon agrochenical associations. The Huscovites
have borrowed fron their Berlin colleagues a new neth of finishing residen-
tial buildings. which provides a saving of sore than 10,000 nan-days annually
for one house-building works alone.

These are to some extent individual angles. But they are becoming increas-
ingly nunerous, and the task is to proceed along this path in a broad front.
If everything of value is aade the property of all our party and ssnagensnt
organizations, the profit will be enormous.

The problem of the study and use of the valuable work experience of each Era-
ternal socialist country and each fraternal party is also a central problen
in ideological and organisational-party cooperation.

The tasks being tackled by the socialist countries are creative and largely
new tasks. He recall the respect with which Conrade I..I. Brezhnev spoke at the
congress about the concrete positive experience of individual fraternal
countries. This experience is wide-ranging. And party alertness to all that
is new and interesting energing in the socialist countries is undoubtedly
justifying itself.

Tdmnin all its fullness, the picture of the contemporary socialist world
indicates convincingly that world socialise is advancing confidently in the
developaent of the econony and culture and in the refine-ant of social rela-
tions and socialist desocracy—in literally all spheres. This conclusion,
which L.I. Brezhnev drew at the 26th CPS!) Congress, is corroborated by the
entire practice of the developmt of the socialist commit)! countries.

11

Performing a tremendous snout of work on theextension of cooperation with
the socialist countries, our party organizes it in differentiated manner, with

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
we OFFICIAL USE ONLY

regard for the singularities of the domestic and international situation and
the tasks of each socialist state.

Without «boiling in detail on the Soviet Union's bilateral relations with
all the. socialist states, I will describe the relations with just a few of
them.

First of all. Poland and the serious and dangerous crisis which it is exper-
iencing. .

The 26th CPS]! Congress provided the essential clue to an in-dspth understand-
ing of the causes and political content of the Polish crisis.

The PZPR and the fraternal Herrint-heninist parties are unanimous that the
train cause of the crisis development in Poland were the big mistakes and
miscalculations of the forur Polish leadership in economic and social policy
and the flagrant departures from the regularities and principles of socialist
building in Poland in recent years.

Economic policy was pursued volmtsristically and in violation of the elem-
tary laws of socialist management concerning the plan-oriented proportional
development of the economy, the substantiated nature of capital investments,
the correlation of accumulation and consmtion. the distribution of national
incone, implementation; of the necessary'socisl measures and so forth.

The financial-economic relations with the Heat were extremely risky. Credit
was accepted there recklessly, it may be said. and at big! and often siwly
exorbitant rates of interest. at a result the comtry's foreign debt has
now risen to $27 billion. But this is not the whole trouble. The technology
purchased in the capitalist comtries for the production of finished output
requires constant imports. again froe abroad. for foreign exchange of con-
ponents, rm: asterials and intermediate products. As a result all of Polish
exports must now go toward paying off the debts and interest on the debts.

The departures fros the Leninist standards of party life and the principles of
party leadership and the breaches of legality, socialist democracy and the
requirements of socialist morality were also seriously reflected in the sit-
uation in the oomtry. They greatly undermined the party's relations with the
masses and prepared the soil for the stinulation of opposition antisocialist
forces. "The events in Poland persuade us yet agein," I..I. Brezhnev enha-
sized at the 26th CPSU Congress. "how inportant for the party and the strength-
ening of its leading role it is to sensitively heed the voice of the masses,
enphatically oodnt all manifestations of bureaucratisn and volmtarism.
actively develop socialist democracy and pursue a weidxed realistic policy

in foreign econonic relations.“ '

Underestintion of the danger of the subversive activity of outside forces
and antisocialist groups within the country and ideological carelessness were
manifestly reflected in the developmnt of the Polish events. Even such a

______.____.__.______.“—._—————

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congras, p 10.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
grouping as the Kos-xouu, an avowedly counterrevolutionary grouping. had a
chance to operate essentially legally in the country. The inerialist centers
lent their hand to the kindling of tension in the country. There is today
no doubt that Poland, with such of its particular features as the existence
of an influential church, an uncooperativised agriculture and an extensive
foreign colony (over 10 million Poles live in the United States and a matter
of other Heaters countries). was long since selected by the inerislist cen-
ters as a kind of "uteak link" of the socialist co-Inity for large-scale
oounterrevolutionary sabotage.

Thus it is not socialism which was the cause of the crisis situation in Poland,
as antico-uusuist propaganda attempts to portray it, but the departure from

its laws and principles and also the ideological sdmtsge against it of
foreign and internal enemies. And it is perfectly justifiable that it is on
the paths of the strengthening of the socialist system, its economic basis

and the political and ideological superstructure that the PZPR is-seeking a

way out of the crisis.

Unfortunately, the crisis in Poland continues.

The economic situation in the country, which was extrenely grave as it was,
has deteriorated in recent months. Strikes which lasted many months and the
tension and conflicts continuously created by the antisocialist forces have
most seriously deluged Poland's economy and the country's entire state and
public life. The fact that the country's national income ha declined for
the third year running is taking its toll, and there are serious shortages
in the consumer goods' market. And at this same tine the party and govern-
ment are being oppressed by the burden of the co-Iitments ensuing from the
agreements signed with the strike oo-ittees in Gdansk, Ssczecin and '.
Jastrzebie. Their fulfillment is becoming difficult owing to the disorgani-
zation of econoaic life.

The ideological atmsphere in the country is aggravated by nnifestations

of nationalism and anarcho-syndicalism and the spread of petit bourgeois
views. Antisocialist elements are increasingly breaking through to the

mass information media. Having obtained a variety of printing and duplicating
machines in the Heat. they are literally filling the country with leaflets of
a hostile. inns-story nature. It is no wonder that a considerable propor-
tion of the workers, peasants and intelligentsia is confused. A concentrated
campaign of slander against the party and its personnel is being conducted.
The opposition is attacking the public-order services.

'lhe situation resaina grave in the political plane also. The new Solidarity
trade union association, in many regional branches and organizations of which
the leading role has been seized by advisers from the [OS-XOR counterrevolu-
tion organization, has in fact become an organized political force essentially
paralyzing party and state activity in the country. In creating one crisis
situation after another Ros-XOR figures are bringing matters to the point of
snatching power fron the PZPR. They are operating insidioualy and resource-
fully here. elploying the well-known- msthods of silent, creeping counterrevo-
luution.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The opposition's recently chosen tactics aimed at deoomosing— the party organ-
izations from within is exceptionally dangerous in this plane. Endeavoring
to regenerate the party "on legal gromds.” so to speak, the opposition,
taking ‘advantage of mstable opportunist elenants in the party itself , has
initiated subversive work in the local party organisations to thus send its
own people as delegates to the Ninth PZPR Congress and also foist its on pro-
gram on the congress.

Anticipating events, Solidarity nde public its own draft prograsl document in
order to initiate the precongress discmsion on the basis of this. Its
criticise of Poland's political and economic system and the deannds for the
lifting of restrictions on private property and, essentially, legalization of
the opposition leave no dotbt that the personalities operating under the
Solidarity signboard set a their goal the transfer-stion of the socialist
systen in the country.

The unfolding situation is such that whereas in putting forward the "renewal
of socialise" slogan the present Polish leadership is endeavoring to restore
and strengthen the relations with the nssses, overcone the mistakes of the
previous leadership and nor-slice the situation in the country, certain fi-
gures operating on behalf of Solidarity and clutching at the "renewal" slogan
are moving in a different direction and endeavoring to erode the socialist
system.

To this is added the provocative and instigatory position of the United States
and other capitalist states also. western personalities, primarily American,
have gone as far as to attempt to prescribe for the Polish leadership what

it may and may not do in its own country. The crisis in Poland, and this
lust be seen. is not confined to a national Polish framork. It is virtually
inperialisn's biggest attenpt in recent years to change the correlation of
sociopolitical forces in Europe in its favor.

In the situation that has come about the CPSU Central Couittee is taking
constant and energetic efforts to help the Polish conrades overcome the tins
of crisis. The convening at the start of last December of a meeting of lead-
ing figures of the Warsaw Pact states was dictated by the interests of as-
sistance to fraternal Poland. has neetings and contacts of L.I. Brezhnev
and other ne-bers of the CPS]! Central Omittee Politburo and the. Soviet Go-
vernaent with the present Polish leadership were also subordinated to this
goal. The Soviet Union and the fraternal socialist countries have rendered
and continue to render Poland considerable economic assistance.

It would be a mistake to believe that the whole Polish working class follows
the Solidarity trade union association and, even less, its extrenist figures.
Yes, Solidarity has millions of people. But the views and beliefs of the
absolute najority of then are far fron the antisocialist purposes of Solidar-
ity's counterrevolutionary advisers. Polish working people treasure the gains
of socialism. Headed by the co-mists. they have built a strong, sovereign
Poland since the war. Socialisa in Poland has given the worung people much.
And it is not fortuitous that the extrelists' views are now beginning to
encounter increasingly great repudiation in different strata of the Polish

158

roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
people. The PZPR has people it can rely on and those with when it can strug-
gle together for the consolidation of the socialist gains.

The CPS“ Central Conittee continues to keep an attentive eye on the develop-
nent of events in Poland. reacts appropriately to all, in any way important,

peripeteias in the continuing political struggle there and actively supports
the Polish coarades' efforts to overcons the crisis.

I would also-like very briefly to mention our relations with two socialist
comtries located on the distant flanks, as it were, of the socialist system-
Cuba and Vietnam.

Born in the fire of the natiowide struggle against the pro-imrislist re-
gin, the Cuban revolution has becone a shining torch lighting the path to
the future for the Latin Alerican peoples.

Cuba today is living the selfless labor of socialist creation. The decisions
of the Second Cuban Commie: Party Congress. which was held last December,
outlined new prospects of socialist building. Course has been set toward
the develop-ant of the country's nterial-technical base, an increase in-
labor productivity and the growth of production efficiency. The process of
cooperativization of the Cuban peasantry also continues. The party is con-
sistently pursuing here a policy of observance of voluntariness in the crea-
tion of cooperatives and of ensuring their efficiency.

It should be said that the international situation in which Cuba lives is very
comlex. As is known, the new Hashington Adninistration hm taken the path
of unconcealed threats and provocations against Cuba. A systenatic anti-
Cuba canpaign in Latin America is being conducted by 0.8. ruling circles. But
Cuba is standing firn. Given the situation. the Second Cdaan Cos-mist Party
Congress adopted a decision to create territorial people's volunteer detach-
ments. Hundreds of thousands of Cubans have joined their ranks, devoting part
of their free tine to military training classes. "We are entirely devoted to
creative work, but are preparing to defend the homeland with the sane re-
solve...." Conrade F. Castro declared fron the platforn of the 26th CPS"
Congress. "We will defend to the death each inch oiland if inerialisa dares
to attack our socialist honeland."*

The CPSU, the Soviet country and the entire socialist co-aunity are solid
with revolutionary Cuba. This was authoritatively said by LJ. Brezhnev fro-
the platform of the 16th Czechoslovak Commist Party Congress. This poli-
tical statement has been heard where needed.

Another such country whose people have had to withstand so nany trials and
who have borne so nuch in the life of a single generation as the Vietnanese
people is probably not to be found in modern history. In the harshest war

.3_______——-———-———-——--——-—
* Greetings to the 26th CPSU Congress Pro- Connunist, Horkers' and National-
Denocratic Parties," p 28.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

against the American iQerialists and their Saigon puppets they achieved the
reunification of the homeland. but then as early as the spring of 1979 were
having to ward off the aggression of the Glineee expansionists. The single
socialist Vietnam has been in existence only 5 years. And the Vietnamese
people1have not yet sucweded in healing the wounds of war.

As our Vietnamese friends mention, in addition to the objective difficulties
they lack experience of socialist management. They are striving hungrily for
a study of Soviet practice and attentively scrutinizing the experience of the
other fraternal socialist countries. As in can, so in Vietnam great and
valuable assistance in the mastery of the socialist science and practice of
state and economic management is being rendered by our advisers and special-
ists.

The Vietnamese communists say candidly that for many years they underestimated
economic problems to a certain extent. The consequences of such views continue
to be reflected today also, in respect of the use of cost accounting and ma-
terial incentive included. The leadership of the Co-unist Party of Vietnam
Central Col-ittee understands the importance of this problem and is making
active efforts to solve it. The necessary personnel shifts are being rude. the
extensive retraining of executives of all levels of party, state and economic
management is under way and the Conunist Party of Vietnam Central Co-ittee
and the government have adopted corresponding decisions and practical measures
with respect to economic questions.

It is believed that the Vietnamese comrades' real. energetic quest for the
best, optimal solutions for the all-around strengthening of socialist Vietnam
and also the firm orientation toward the multiplication of ties to the Soviet
Union and other socialist community countries will enable the Mist Party
of Vietnam to tackle the tasks confronting the comtrysuccessfully.

It is very important that the Cont-list Party of Vietnam has frustrated all
Beijing’s attempts to bring about a split in its ranks. The Vietnamese com-
munists are proceeding as a strong and cohesive party toward their fifth con-
gress, which will most likely be held at the end of 1981.

As far as Soviet-Vietnamese relations proper are concerned. they are char-
acterized by a clearly expressed trend toward intensification. This, inci-
dentally. was confirmed by the talks of LI. Brezhnev and other Soviet leaders
with the Vietnamese leadership in March 1981 in Moscow.

As we know, the CPSU Central Committee Report raised specially the question
of China. This approach reflects China's real place in the modern world.

Following the victory of the revolution in 1969, China elbarlted on a period
of transition to socialism and was advancing successfully. However. over the
last two decades the PRC's socioeconomic development has been disfigured.by
a distort ion of the principles and essence of socialism. At the same time it
is wrong to believe that the PRC is finally lost for socialism. 0n the con-
trary, the struggle for China's return to the positions of Hardse-beninism

will cont inue .

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Perfectly understandable in this connection is the attention which the 26th
CPS]! Congress paid to the Chinese problen.

First, the congress, and this is the main point, daaonstrated the consistency
and high-mindedness of our party's line in respect of China. The soundness
and promising nature of the CPSU's policy. as. equally, the correctness of
the evaluations which the party made of the policy and ideology of Maoisn,
have been corroborated by practice.

Secmd. L.I. Brezhnev's report enphasized that the experience of the PRC's
socioeconomic development in the last two decades is a serious lesson. It
shows to what a departure from the principles of socialism in domestic and
international policy leads.

Third, the report observes that changes are under way in China's internal life
whose true meaning tine hu still to show.

And fourth and finally, there was a precise exposition of our policy, the
essence of which amounts to the fact that we firmly oppose Beijing's ideology
and policy, which is hostile to our country and the cause of socialisn, and at
the sane time invariably advocate the organisation of good-neighborly relations
with the PRC based on the principles of peaceful coenstence.

The development of the situation in China will largely depend on the extent to
which it succeeds in surmounting Mao's legacy. This legacy is weighing as a
heavy load on the Chinese people. There is stagnation in the national econ-
ouy. Inflation is growing, prides are rising and 130 million people are suf-
fering from a shortage of food. The masher of unemployed has reached 30 I11-
lion—alaost one-fourth of the country's entire urban population.

The factional struggle in the party and the country is not abating. It is
being waged primarily between different groups in the Guinness leadership. But
in the power struggle both are advocating China's conversion into a strong
military-industrial power and both stand on a single ideological-political
platform, which includes "Sinicized Harman," hegenonisn and anti-Sovietisn.

The Haoists' distortion over my years of the principles of socialists have
led to increased dowts amng party aesbers and the working people of the

PRC concerning the policy of the Beijing leadership and its capacity for lead-
ing China onto a healthy development path. A kind of "crisis of faith" has
arisen.

China's present leaders themselves call the practices of their country of the
period of the so-called cultural revolution "the cruelest feudal-fascist
dictatorship". Admission of the tremendous damage inflicted on China by the
"great leap forward” and the "eel-\mization" of the countryside at the end
of the 1950's may also be encountered in the Chinese press.

While agreeing that Ibo Zedong aade nany mistakes the present Chinese leader-

ship nonetheless protects him. declaring that his aerita should be put first
and his nistakes second. Mao Zedong's thoughts, which actually lcd Chinese

161
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is aired, as before, at exacerbation of the international situation, is

linked with the policy of iaperialism and is of an avowedly anti-Soviet na-
ture. Our mass information aadia illmtrate extensively and in detail the

international activity of the Orinoco leadership and daily reveal its anti-
socialist content. For this reason I will dwell only on certain features.

Despite certain differences, the trend toward rapproche-snt is predominant
in the “16's relations with the capitalist world. The rough patches. part'i-
cularly on the Taiwan issue, which emerged with the assuaption of office in
the United States of the Reagan Administration are being smoothed over.
Hashing. n sent to Beijing former President Ford, who assured the Chinese

leaders that the Reagan Administration would work to strengthen Glinesa-
American relations.

As a whole. the Chinese leadership's foreign policy runs counter to the inter-
ests of the cause of peace and social progress. The PRC's joint andparallel
actions with the imperialist powers are aimed at disrupting the existing
military-strategic balance between the two world systems to the benefit of
imperialism. This is a dangerous partnership for the cause of peace.

A few words about Soviet-Chinae relations. They remain virtually frozen.
Beijing declines to continue talks on the normalization of relations between
the USSR and the PRC. The border talks were suspended in July 1978. Trade
is declining. Beijing does not, to judge by everything, intend to seek paths
leading to a normalization and. even less, a real ilprovenent in relations
with the Soviet Union. The mass propaganda organs in China are intensify-
ing the anti-Soviet hysteria. The Chinese side is advancing knowingly un-
acceptable demands concerning our country's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and its international comitaents. It is sufficient to list just a
few of the claims being put forward by the Chinese leadership to get an idea
of its "appetite". Thus Beijing demands the unilateral pullback of Soviet
troops from the border with China, recognition of o nunber of areas on USSR
territory as "disputed" (in fact belonging to the PRC), withdrawal of Soviet
submits from lbngolia and Afghanistan, where they are at the request of the
governments of these countries, and an end to'support for Vietnam, Laos and

Kampuchea .

None of this, of course, gives any grounds for speaking of the possibility

of an improve-ant in relations with the PRC in the inediate future. Nor can
we ignore Beijing's increased hostile propaganda. Exposing the anti-Soviet
intrigues'of the Beijing rulers, cogently showing the harsh lessons to which
the distortion of the principles of socialism in China's domestic and foreign
policy lead and revealing the antipopular essence of Hao's legacy, including
the current "mdifications" of Haoism, are important tasks of our ideological.
and propaganda front.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
III

The clear Hardst-Ieninist analysis of the state of affairs in the socialist
world and the scrupulous presentation of all the urgent problem of its de-
velopment contained in the CPS!) Central Conittee Report-to the 26th CPSU
Congress are an action program for the party and all Soviet people in such
a key direction of Soviet foreign policy as is the strengthening of mutual
relations with the fraternal socialist countries.

In the light of the results of the recent Second cwan Commist Party Con-
gress, 12th Bulgarian commist Party Congress. 16th Czechoslovak Comamist
Party Congress and 10th SBD Congress and the decisions of the executive party
bodies of a nudaer of other fraternal parties it is clear that the socialist
countries have outlined precise reference points and are confidently taking
the Mar-adst-Leninist course in their domestic and foreign policy. The stra-
tegic thrust of their policy is invariable and it concurs in what is basic
and most important with the cardinal directions of the activity of the CPS"
and the Soviet people for the l9m's.

But confirmation of the chosen course and fideuty to it do not mean merely
repetition. The 19w's confront the USSR and the other socialist community
countries with tasks which are in acne respects different from those of the
1970's. The heights which have to be scaled in couunist building and in the
building of a developed socialist society are, of course, somhat steeper
and higher than those scaled hitherto. And it has to be mentioned that in
the 1980's the socialist comtries are planning to overcome so-called bottle-
necks, remove certain disproportions in the development of the economy and,
what is most important, transfer the economy to the tracks of intensive
development. .

Assessing the particular features of the present stage, L.I. Brezhnev said

at the 26th CPSU Congress: "We are far from painting the picture of the pre-
sent-day socialist world in completely festive tints. There are also dif—
ficulties in the development of our countries. The transition to the inten-
sive development of the economy and the realization of large-scale social
programs and the molding of a co-unist consciousness—none of these comes
about imdiately. Time and unflagging creative search are necessary here."*

The tremendous amount of work being performed currently in the socialist coun-
tries cncompasses the most inportant spheres of social life.

The center thereof in the political sphere is the task of a further increase

in the leading role of the ruling cos-unist and workers' parties. And the

path toward this is well known and does not have to be sought. It is an all-
around increase in the efficiency of party leadership of all areas of state.
economic and social life, strict observance of the Leninist standards of

party life and the assertion ofa beninist style in all work. It is the further

* Material of the 26th CPSU Congress, pp 6-7.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mltiplication and expansion of the colnunists' ties to the masses. It is an
imminent in socialist democracy and constant concern for the active role of
all state and public organizations of the working people in the accomplishment
of the tasks of socialist and comunist building.

There are also many inortant tasks in the ideological sphere, and they do
not amount merely to counteracting the dirty ”psychological warfare" being
conducted against us by the subversive inperialist centers, although this

is, of course, a very important task. In the light of the conclusions of the
26th CPSU Congress it is essential that we continue work on the theoretical
interpretation of socialist practice, constantly enrich Marxist-Lenin“
theory and seek out and support everything new which is born in the creative
activity of the socialist world.

men it is a question of the socialist states' nutual relations and their
mutual influence, there are no trifling, insipificant issues. After all,
millions of people are directly involved in relations between socialist coun-
tries. Live contacts with foreign comrades are made on festive dates, in a
day-to-day work atmosphere, in the process of familiarization with progres-
sive experience, at the tire of cultural measures and on vacation even. In
all cases we must ask ourselves to what extent do the fem of our cooperation
and its quality correspond to the significance of the established contacts

and their diversity and how flexibly is a search being conducted for ferns of
mutual relations which would reveal new opportunities for strengthening friend-
ship and propaganda of the Soviet way of life.

The answer to these questions would not necessarily, I believe, be unreservedly
positive. Unfortunately, there is still a gravitation toward the old forms
of relations, which do not entirely take sccomt of presentﬂay requirements
and where the accent is on showy meetings and official reports, although life
demands a more businesslike approach and a more in-depth and lively study of
each other's experience.

The party organizations are called on to display particular concern for Soviet
people's sound preparation for trips to the fraternal socialist countries. It
is not only purposefulness, smartness and good manners which are needed-
none of these are out of place at home. It is essential to know the histori-
cal traditions of the comtry one is visiting and take accomt of then and to
display the necessary tact and, at the same time, party scrupulousness and
civic pride. None of these are trifling matters.

Tasks of a large scale and complexity confront the socialist countries in the
economic sphere. Questions of the intensification of production and its in-
creased efficiency and an improvement in product quality are undoubtedly at
the center of all economic work.

The CPSU and the fraternal parties are setting course toward making the up-
coming two 5-year plans a period of the intensive production and scientific-
technical cooperation of the socialist countries. L.I. Brezhnev put forward
very important questions oflong-tern significance in this plane at the con-
gress. "Life itself," he said, "sets the task of supplementing the coordina-
tion of plans with the coordination ofeconomic policy as a whole. Such questions

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
are the rapprochement of the structures of the economic mechanism, the further
development of direct relations between the miniseries, associations and
enterprises participating in the cooperation, the creation of joint firns

and other possible fort. of the codiination of our efforts and resources are
also on the agenda."*

Our foreign friends are endeavoring-and this can be seen clearly in the deci-
sions of the recent congresses of the fraternal parties—to make fuller use
of their national resources and at the same time. in cooperation with us. to
take an ilportant new step forward in the development of socialist economic
integration. This is undoubtedly a promising orientation.

The socialist countries have entered the 1980's with strong production and
scientific-technical potential. The skillful coﬁination of the efforts of

the socialist community countries will make it possible to successfully tackle
nany urgent tasks.

I will not cite a large nuﬁer of examples. I shall dwell on power engineer-
ing. 1'th is, it may be said, the problem of problems; Its realization mw
has a solid foundation. The socialist countries have concluded, inter alia,
an agreenent on the international specialization and concentration of produc-
tion and reciprocal supplies of equipment for nuclear power stations for the
period 1981-1990. More than 50 useciations and enterprises of seven coun-
tries of the maturity and Yugoslavia are participating in this agreement.
Its inplenentation provides for the construction of nuclear power stations

in the fraternal countries with a total capacity of 37 nillion kilowatts.

The role of flagships of atomic engineering of the socialist comity coun-
tries hss been assumed by the Soviet "Atonassh," the Czechoslovak Skoda
Association and the Hagdeburg Heavy Engineering Works in the GDR.

It may be expected that the fraternal socialist countries will also partici-
pate in accelerated development of the very rich oil and gas deposits in
Heat Siberia and the creation of the corresponding transport facilities and
processing industry capacity outlined at the 26th CPS!) Congress. And the
deposits in West Siberia are truly unique, particularly the gas deposits.
According to scientists' calculations, they are the equivalent of approximate-
ly 504-100 trillion cubic meters of gas, and 1 billion cubic meters of gas is
the equivalent of 1 million tons of oil. If we take fron these deposits

1 trillion a year, nerely the reserves that have been prospected will be
sufficient for a very long period. Such that their developmnt will create a
strong energy base both for the Soviet economy and the economy of the frater-
nal socialist countries.

L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress: "We are all interested in
seeing the socialist market capable of satisfying the growing requirements of
the countries of our co-unity. And the benefit from the addition to each
other's economic possibilities is not. of course, measured rarely in purely
consercial terns. The scconplishunt of this task requires a responsible ap-
proach on the part of economic planners and party workers and a profound un-

derstanding of the inseparable comaunity of interests of the fraternal coun-
tries."**

*"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 8.

**Ibid.. pp 8-9. 165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The socialist community and each fraternal socialist country has vast crea-
tive plans. In the interests of their realization the socialist col-unity
is persistently and firmly pursuing a policy of the consolidation of peace
and the strengthening of international security. This work is being performed

today on the basis of the peace program for the l9m's put forward and approved
by the '26th CPSU Congress.

Operating amicably and cohesively and multiplying cooperation with present-day
peace-loving forces, the socialist countries possess the opportunities for
the creation of foreign policy conditions conductive to the realization of
everything outlined in the plane of socialist and communist creation.

Tremendous and strenuous work is being perforned by the CPSU Central Cos-lit-

tee. Central Condttee Politburo and l..l. Brezhnev personally to strengthen the

unity and cohesion of the socialist countries and intensify the interaction of

the fraternal socialist states. This work is of truly world-historical signi-

ficance. Its success is the guarantee of a better future for unkind for this
will be the success of the great ideals of co.unism and peace.

"VJ. Hakeyev, deputy chairman of the- USSR Council of Ministers: "The 26th
CPSU Congress on a mrther Rise in the Soviet People's Hell-Being"

It is impossible in a single speech to reveal in depth all aspects of the
rise in Soviet people's material and cultural living standard and provide

an exhaustive description of the truly far-reaching and diverse program ad-
vanced by the 26th CPSU Congress for the further growth of the people's well-
being. For this reason I will dwell merely on certain urgent questions of
party policy in this sphere.

The decisions of the 26th party congress are now being actively implemented
and concretized in the quotas of the 11th Five-Year Plan and the plan of the
current year. The USSR Council of Ministers, ministries and departnents and
union republic oomcil'sof ministers are performing a great deal of work on
realization of the directives of the 26th CPSU Congress and the propositions
and conclusions of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report aimed at a fundamental in-
provement in the population's provision with food, consumer goods and the
various mterial and spiritual benefits afforded people of a socialist society.

The USSR Council of Ministers April 1981 session analyzed comprehensively and
in depth the nain results. of the economy's development in the first quarter
and urgent tasks for fulfillment of the quotas of the first year of the llth
Five-Year Plan. The USSR Council of Ministers denuded that the USSR nin-
istries and departments and union republic councils of ministers adopt the
most decisive neasures for the increased nanufacture of products of all see-
tors of the economy, particularly for the increased production of consumer
goods and an improvement in trade and consumer services.

"The invariable progran requirement of all in the name of man, all for the
good of man has served and continues to serve," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev euphe-
sized in the CPSU Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th party congress,

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"as the point of departure of a party and political approach to economics.”
This political course was consistently implemented by the party in the 1970's
and will remain the basis of party policy in the 1980's. It was this program
requirement which objectively sulaoned into being the CPS!) directive con-
cerning a decisive transition to a predominantly intensive type of economic
growth. an upsurge in social production efficiency and the increased quality
of all our work. Briefly put, the main line of the CPSU's socioeconomic policy
determined by the 26th party congress for the long term consists of the organic

coabination of the growth of the people' s well-being and the further intensi-
fication of production.

In the formulation of this fundamental direction of the CPSU's economic stra-
tegy at the current stage and the mobilization of the co-Iunists and all
working people for its iamlenntation a tremendous part was played by the 24th
and 25th CPSU congresses, party Central Coamittee plenums and Comrade Ll.
Brezhnev, outstanding figure of our party and state, personally. The CPS!)
Central Committee Report to the 26th CPS!) Congress, the report of Comrade

N.A. Tikhonov, chairman 0f the USSR Council of Hinistere, the Main Directions
of the 0588's Economic and Social Development for 1981-1985 and the Period
Through 1990 and all thenterial of the 26th CPSU Congress elbody the continu-
ity of party strategy, take sccomt of the concrete conditions of the iwending
period and determine the tasks and main paths of their accomplishment in

the 11th Five-Year Plan and the long term.

The work done by the party and the country in the 1970's to raise Soviet peo-
ple's material well-being was exceptionally great, diverse and impressive.
Without a realization of its scale and a precise picture of what was achieved
it is impossible to conceive of the magnificence and complexity of the tasks
put forward by the 26th CPSU Congress. The congress stated that our country
had edurked on the 19w's with strong production and scientific-technical
potential. The gross social product in 1900 was in excess of R1 trillion,
and industrial output constituted 3627 billion. The technical-economic in-
dicators of the production of my types of product inroved in recent years.
The scientific-technical revolution is developing in breadth and in depth.
Large-scale changes occurred in the location of the production forces on the
country's territory. All this and, primarily, the growth of the Soviet
state's economic night enabled us to fulfill in the 1970's a wide-ranging
program of an upsurge in people's well-being.

The basis of the rise in our people's mterial and cultural living standard
and the degree of satisfaction of Soviet people's requirements was the con-
stant growth of national income. Total national income used for consumption
and accumulation amounted to R637 billion (in comparable prices) in 1980.
were we to speak of the resources channeled into consulption and nonproduc-
tion construction, they increased by R135 billion in the decade and consti-
tuted R3510 billion in 19m. Whereas in recent years national income in-
creased 55 percent, the resources of national incone channeled into consump-
tion and nonproduction construction increased 62 percent. This indicates the
constant preference given by the party and government to the solution of
questions of a rise in Soviet people's well-being.

”Material of the 26th crsu Congress," p 31.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some R32 billion were allocated merely for all-state measures for an increase
in wages. pensions. benefits and so forth. The average monthly wage of workers
and caployees increased by a factor of aluost 1.10 cmared with 1970 and was
in excess of R168 in 1980. Kolkhoz medaers' pay grew at an even higher rate.

Let us now take another indicator of the people's well-being--payments and
benefits from the social consuayoion funds. They almost doubled and in 193)
amounted to 11638 per capita. After all, it is from the social commtion
funds that the public is provided with free education and nedical assistance
and free or concessionary passes to sanstoria and recreation centers. and they
cater for the payment of benefits, pensions, student grants and paid annual
leave. The miniaun pensions for workers. employees and kolkhoz members were
raised in the Ninth and 10th five-year plans. The material-everyday living
conditions of participants in the Great Patriotic Har were iaproved and allow-
ances for the children of needy families were introduced. Grants for W2
students and secondary specialized educational institution and technical
school trainees were increased. Students of the first five grades acquired
free textbooks.

It is possible to imagine how tangible the payments and benefits received by
the public from the social consumption funds are on the basis of the follow-
ing example: the annual cost of keeping a child in creches is more than

R580 and in kindergarten about R500, and 80 percent of this cost here is borne
by the state.

Understandably. well-being is determined not only by monetary payments alone
but by the totality of material resources and services channeled into con-
sumption. For this reason the manufacture of consuer products and the volume
and selections! the commdities supplied the public are directly-related to
the living standard. Compared with the previous decade consumer goods' pro-
duction almost doubled in the 1970's as a whole. There was a pronounced in-
crease in the consumption of many types of comodities. For example, 9 kilos
more meat, 79 nore eggs. 3.6 kilos more sugar, almost 2 kilos note vegetable
oil and 8 kilos more vegetables were consumed per capita= in 1980 than in 1970.
At the sane time there was a decline in the consumption of potatoes and bread
products, which testifies to an improvement in the structure of Soviet people's
diet. The provision of homes with cultural-everyday durables increased.
Whereas in 1970 there were 72 radio receivers and radio phonographs per 100
homes. in 1980 there were 86, the figures for television receivers were 51
and 85 respectively and refrigerators 32 and 84. The levels of urban and
rural hones’ provision with consmer durables were brought significantly
closer here.

We have not yet achieved rational norm in the consumption of a whole nutter
of foodstuffs and nonfood item. it is true, and much work needs to be done

to ensure that their consumption approximate such norm. But despite all this,
the adduced figures testify to considerable inrovements in Soviet people's
living conditions and a marked rise in their material well-being.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He cannot. of course, in speaking of our social achievements fail to mention
the gigantic proportions which housing construction has assumed in our coun-
try. Apartment houses were built in the 1970's whose area is greater than
that of all urban housing at the start of the 1960's. This is a convincing
fact of the constant concern of our party and state for Soviet people.

For an integral, synthesized characterisation of the people's naterial living
standard we use the real income per capita. indicator, that is, the popula-
tion's total receipts and services both in the form of wages and via the
social consumption funds. Real income per capita increased almost 50 percent
in the Ninth and 10th five-year plans. This means that Soviet man has begun
to eat and dress considerably better and avail hinelf of better medical and
cultural services than 10 years ago. Such are some of the results of the work
which the party has performed to raise Soviet people's well-being.

The people's well-being is a category of general social meaning and sipifi-
cance. The changes in the level of the people's well-being are being accom-
panied by shifts in the social and class structure of society and the stand-
ard of the population's culture and education.

In the past decade the Soviet working class became not simply the most populous
class, but, which is most inortant, its ideological-political maturity,
education and vocational skills increased. Three-fourths of workers now have
secondary (complete or incomplete) and higher education. The number of kolkhoz
members with such education is increasing constantly. There is an ever
increasing water of workers in the comtryaide whose labor is connected

with the use of the latest equipment and technology. There has been a con-
siderable increase in the nunbers of the Soviet intelligentsia-~people of

high education and culture who are boundlessly devoted to the party's cause.

Sue-ling up the work to raise Soviet people's well-being, Comrade l..I. Brezhnev
said: "The CPSU Central Committee sees as the sociopolitical meaning of these
results the fact that the entire system of social relations and our socialist
way of life continued to improve on the basis of the steady tpsurgeofthe econ-
omy."* The 26th CPSU Congress provided an in-depth and objective characteri-
zation of the country's soecioeconomic development in the last decade. Evalua-
ting the path that had been trodden, the congress observed that there were
also many difficulties in this period brought about both by objective and ad)-
jective factors.

0! the last 5 years, only 2 were more or less favorable in terms of weather
conditions. A negative influence on our economic ddvelopment was exerted by
the deterioration in world economic conditions and the steep jusps in world
prices. The growth of the people's well-being was held back by the consider-
able expenditure which our country was forced to bear owing to the arm race
unleashed by inerialisn and the braking of the process of the relaxaticm of
international tension.

*"ﬁterial of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 36.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘K 1M. USE ONLY

Among the reasons why we did not succeed in reaching all the frontiers charted
by the 10th Five-Year Plan the congress cited the loose ends in planning and
nanagement, the insufficient exactinpess of a number of party bodies and man-
agers,’-the still frequent instances of breaches of discipline and manifesta-
tions of remiss management. But perhaps the main thing is, as Conrade L.I.
Brezhnev observed in the CPS!) Central emittee Report to the 26th party con-
gress, ,that the force of inertia, traditions and the habits which took shape
at the'tine when it was not so much the qualitative as the quantitative

aspect of matters which was of paramount inortance have yet to be fully over-
come. '

In outlining the tasks of the further development of the country's economy and
the people's increased aaterial well-being the party takes into consideration
the particular features of the present stage of the 5-year period and the
1980's as a whole. In the comtry's socioeconomic development in the long term
a number of factors will appear which will conplicate the accouplishnent of
the tasks outlined by the 26th CPSU Congress in the sphere of a rise in the
people's well-being. Among such factors we should put primarily the inpending
decline in the growth of labor resources. This decline, which has been
brought about to a considerable extent by distant consequences of the Great
Patriotic War, will be, as demographers put it, a "second echo of the war,"

as it were.

The decline in the increase in labor resources will complicate the develop-
ment of the entire economy. However, it will particularly affect the labor-
intensive works, trade, constner services and sectors of the nonproduction
sphere, that is, health care and culture, where the mechanization of labor is
either conplicated or practically impossible. This will be a serious factor
holding back the growth of prosperity and limiting the possibilities of an
inprovement in public services.

In connection with the intensive development of the natural resources of the
East and the North of the comtry there will be a sharp increase in expendi-
ture on the extraction of raw material and energy generation. Hhereas 20 years
ago it was necessary to spend R2 of capital investments for the additional
production of R1 of raw material, we currently need to spend approinIately

R6 and in the future will have to spend 95-6. Even naintaining the volume of
the recovery and processing of raw uterial which has been achieved requires
ever increasing capital investments. And this is, naturally, money which
could have been spent on a rise in our people's naterial and cultural living
standard.

There will be an appreciable increase in the 11th and 12th five-year plans in
expenditure on protection of the natural environment. The scale of this ex-
penditure is truly enormua. In the 10th Five-Year Plan state capital invest-
ments in measures for nature conservation and the rational use of natural
resources were in excess of 119 billion, having increased by a factor of 1.5
compared with the Ninth Five-Year Plan. This expenditure will mdoubtedly
determine our living conditions and habitat, so to speak.

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We cannot live without clean air and without water that has not been poi-
soned by industrial waste. Therefore this expenditure is in a certain sense
also an element of prosperity, despite not bringing us are food, clothing
or shelter.

The country has a large number of old enterprises in need of fundamental
modernization, particularly in the sectors of food, flourdmilling' and light
industry. Considerable resources will have to be spent on the construction and
modernization of motor roads and railroads and the development of ceramics--
tions and other elements of the production and social infrastructure. All
these are also additional limitations on the resources which could have been
channeled into a direct increase in the production of food and co-nodities,
services and the construction of housing, stores and cultural centers.

The particular features of the foreign policy situation in which our country
and the fraternal socialist countries are operating and the aggressive trends
in the policy of reactionary circles, prinrily American imperialism. forcing
us to bear a heavy burden of defense spending, are also not facilitating our
accomlishnent of the tasks of a rise in the people's well-being. But a
vitally important condition of our people's well-being is peace. Soviet
people understand this full well and wholeheartedly support the party's policy
of strengthening the comtry’s defeme might and its valorous armed forces.

Thus. evaluating realistically and objectively, as the great lenin taught.
both the tremendous possibilities of our economy and the influence of exist-
ing and impending difficulties. the 26th party congress determined the main
tasks of socioeconomic development and the main ways to accomlish then. The
party has put forward as the main task of the llth Five-Year Plan, as you
know, a further rise in Soviet people's well-being. The basis of this will be
the steady progressive developsent of the national ecommy, an acceleration
of scientific-technical progress and the utmost intensification and the in-
creased efficiency of social production.

A wide-ranging program of a further upsurge of the Soviet people's well-being
whose realization will create even more favorable conditions for the all-around
development of the personality is outlined for the 11th Five-Year Plan and

the 1980's as a whole. Even sore will be done to strengthen Soviet people's
health and iwnove their recreation and to develop education, science and
culture and everything that constitutes our socialist way of life.

“me total amount of national income used for consmtion and accuaulation—
the main source of the growth of Soviet people's material well-being—is to
have increased by a factor of 1.10 by 1990 as a minimum. It is planned here
that the consumption fund's proportion of the national income will be in ex-
cess of 77 percent by 1985. The average monthly wage of workers and employ-
ees will increase 13-16 percent in the llth Five-Year Plan and amunt to
[090-195. Kolkhoz meabers' income from public farming will increase 20-22
percent. As a whole it is planned to allocate R16 billion for centralized
measures to increase wages and other payments and benefits to the population
in the 11th Five-Year Plan.

1 71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The social consumption funds will grow appreciably. They will have amounted
to R138 billion by 1985. Minim- retirement and disability pensions for ‘
workers. employees and kolkhoz members will be increased and other memures
will also be implemented for a further improvement in the population's social
security. As a whole real income per capita will grow 16-18 percent in the
11th Five-Year Plan. Despite the effect of all the cowlicating factors
which we have mentioned. this is practically the same increase in real income
as we had under the ore favorable conditions of the 10th Five-Year Plan.

For the purpose of an impmvement in the work and domestic conditions of
women. primarily those with children, a new wide-ranging system of measures
will be implemented in the llth Five-Year Plan and subsequent years. There
will be a considerable increase in state assistance to families with children
and newlyweds. A special CPS” Central Conittee and USSR Council of Ministers
decree was adopted on these questions, as is known.

What is the main thrmt of this decree? It is primarily to create conditions
facilitating the birth and raising of children in Soviet families. There
will be increased appropriations for the further development of the network
of children‘s preschool establishments. lbre than R9 billion will be allo-
cated as a whole in the llth Five-Year Plan alone for measures to boost state
assistance to families with children.

A most important feature of the 11th Five-Year Plan is that, in accordance
with the Main Directions of the country's economic and social developunt
adopted by the 26th party congress, the rate of growth of the production of
consumer goods (industry's group "B" sectors) will outpace the rate of growth
of the production of producer goods (group "A" sectors) in 1981-1985. I would
recall that in previous 5-year plans the sectors producing producer goods
were developed more rapidly than the sectors manufacturing consumr products.
The fact that under the present very complex conditions a course has been set
toward the accelerated development of the group "B" sectors points to the
tremendous attention which the party, its Central Conittee and Comrade L.I.
Brezhnev personally are paying to questions of a rise in'ISoviet people's
well-being.

As emphatically as could be the party and its 26th congress placed on the
agenda the task of a fundamental improvement in the public'a provision with
food and also industrial consumer goods. The urgency ofu. these questions

is increased by the fact that in the last decade the rapid economic growth
brought about a high rate of increase in the population's mnetary income.
This is an objective regularity of our economic development and the increased
material living standard of the members of the socialist society. At the
same time the growth of nominal monetary income has not always been under.
pinned in due measure by the corresponding development of the production of
consumer products. We experienced a considerable shortfall in various consumer
products in the 10th Five-Year Plan. and the actual growth rate of industry's
group "B" sectors proved lower than that scheduled by the 5-year plan. The
production of consumer goods constituting the bulk of co-aodity turnover-
food products. clothing, footwear and clothwincreased at a pace slower than
envisaged by the 5-year plan quotas.

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev has emphasized repeatedly, the problem of providing
the population with food col-odities is very acute. Together with the. signi-
ficant overall growth of the consuwtion of the main food products in the
country many areas are still experiencing difficulties with respect to supply-
ing the population with food, prinarily net and meat products. This is

attested by, inter alia, working people's letters to the 0380 Central Com-
mittee and USSR Council of Ministers.

For a radical solution of the problem of the uninterrupted provision of the
population with food products the 26th CPS!) Congress recognized the need to
draw up a special food program. Fulfillment of this program will make it
possible to develop more concertedly all the sectors engaged in the produc-
tion, storage and processing of food and also trade. Almost one-third of
total capital investments in the economy is allocated for the development and
streamlining of the agrarian-industrial coupler in the new 5-year plan.

The basis of the development and implementation of the food program is a fur-
ther upsurge of agriculture. more will be an appreciable expansion of the
product ion of neat and other animal husbandry products here. which will afford
us an opportunity of drawing considerably closer to the level of their
rational consumption norms.

It should, however. be said that even the present volume of agricultural pro-
duction would permit um to appreciably raise the level of consumption of its
main products were there no losses. In the 10th Five-Year Plan, for example,
the average annual per capita consumption of vegetables and fruit increased
at a considerably slower pace than their production. Consequently, it is
necessary not only to build up the production of agricultural products but
also sharply improve their transportation, storage and processing. It is
planned to allocate n15 billion of capital investments for this purpose in
the 11th Five-Year Plan or 1.6 times more than in the past 5-year plan. Pro-
cessing industry capacity will be developed particularly strongly here. A
special union-republic Ministry of Fruit and Vegetable Industry has been cre-
ated whose main task will be the organization of work on an increase in

the production of fruit and vegetable products.

The subsidiary farms of the population and also industrial enterprises have
great possibilities in an improvement in the population's supply with meat,
milk and certain other agricultural products. he potential of the subsidiary
fares in the solution of the food problem is far from exhausted, and it is
the task of the party organizations, ainistries and departments and enter-
prise managers to do everything for the development of this important factor
of the strengthening of the country's agrarian-industrial complex.

It is intended in the 11th Five-Year Plan to increase the production of meat,

. dairy and other food products on the basis of an upsurge in agriculture. In
the 5-year plan as a whole the production of food industry sector products will
increase 23-26 percent, that is, an average annual increase of lads-4.7 per-
cent.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the party's efforts for an upsurge in Soviet people's well-being paramount
significance is attached to expanding the production and iwroving the quality
of industrial consumer goods and developing the services sphere. Great atten-

tion was paid to these questions at the 26th party congress and subsequent
CPSU Central Comaittee plenums.

As Comrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized, the cardinal solution of the proqu

of supplying the populadonwith industrial co-Iodities is to set up the really
modern production of consumer cosmodities and public services corresponding

to the people's requirements. For this purpose it is intended in the 11th
Five-Year Plan to implement a set of important measures and draw up and inle—
unent a program of the development of consumer goou‘b' production.

It is planned to increase light industry production 18-20 percent. This sec-

tor is furnished with mdern equipment; supplies to it of raw material, inter-
mediate products and dyes will be improved. . ‘l'aut quotas have been determined

for the construction of new and mdernization and retooling of operating light
industry enterprises.

A big role in the increase in consumer goods' production is assigned heavy
industry sectors, where more than 50 percent of all nonfood consumer products
is produced. It is intended in the 5-year plan to increase the manufacture
of cultural-everyday conndities and home appliances by a factor of 11-15. And
it is extremely important that enterprises which are technically the most
modern and which have highly skilled personnel—and these are primarily heavy
industry and engineering enterprises--be in the vanguard of the accomplish-
nent of the tasks set by the 26th CPSU Congress.

The provision of municipal-consumer service and local industry enterprises
with equipment will be increased considerably in the 11th Five-Year Plan.
It is planned to extend the training of skilled personnel for these sectors.

Fulfillmnt of the set tasks will require considerable efforts from the union
ministries and departments and union republic councils of ministers. The

party organizations must mobilize all co-Iunists and all the working people

for a decisive improvement in the use of manpower, equipment. rm: material

and intermediate products and all available forces and resources. As Com-

rade LJ. Brezhnev esphasized, it is necessary to fundamentally improve the
style and methods of leadership of the work of enterprises and organizations
manufacturing consumer goods and make the maximum use of all available resources

and potential .

The CPSU Central Conittee and USSR Council of Ministers regularly examine
questions of an increase in the production of consumer goods, particularly
those in short supply on the nrket. Supplementary quotas are being deter-
mined for USSR ministries and departments and union republic councils of
ministers for the production of comdities in higher-than-ususl demand.

The work that has been done has already produced certain results. In 19w
the public was sold No.6 billion of goods over and above the basic plan

1710

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compared with the supplementary quota of R2.8 billion. But this cannot re-
assure us in the least. Considerﬂly more. better and more efficient work
needs to be done. The 26th party congress called for this from us. And it
is first of all necessary to do away with the shortcomings in the work of the
ministries and departments responsible for the-mufacture of consumer goods
and in the trade in these goods. There are still many such shortcomings,
unfortunately.

Many enterprises failed to cope with the quotas of the 19% plan and of the
10th Five-Year Plan as s whole even for consumer goods' manufacture. As a
consequence, the trade network was supplied with less of basic col-Iodities
than planned and trade's supply with commodity stocks declined. As of 1 Jan-
uary 1981 they were below the norm in retail trade, which cannot fail to
disturb us. Thus stocks of cotton cloth, linen mderwear. stocking-hosiery
items, radio goods and certain others were considerﬁly below the norm. The
plan and supplementary quotas were not fulfilled with respect to all goods in
ms demand in 1980. Nor have we yet managed to do away with many of these
shortcomings in 1981 either, unfortunately. Trade's requests for a nuaber of
goods in mass demand are not yet being satisfied.

L.I. Brezhnev has repeatedly expressed the party Central Cot-ittee's concern
at the increasing interruptions in the trade in the simplest medicines, soap,
washing powders, yarn. needles, children's clothing and certain other conno-
dities. The 26th party congress and the CPSU Central Committee have set the
USSR ministries and departments and union reptblic councils of ministers the
inortant task of putting an end to the strained situation that has been
created in the provision of the population with certain comodities in daily
and mass demand.

The production of industrial consI-er goods is growing from year to year. But
the need therefor is growing also, and increased demands are being made on the
quality and selection of the goods. Conn-er donnd is overtaking what in-
dustry is supplying, and this, frankly speaking, is giving rise to a short-
age of certain co-odities, particularly those in use demand.

Take, for example, the work ,of light industry. A considerable proportion of
the letters to the CPSU Central Comittee. USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiul and
USSR Council of Ministers concerns the shortage of cotton cloth, underwear for
children and adults, socks. leggings and bed linen. The working people ask
why if we cultivate a great deal of cotton there is shortage of cotton cloth
and cotton products? There was indeed in 1980 somathat of a decline in the
sale of cotton cloth to the public. The production and sale of gamnts and
knitwear increased here. Considering the high dennd for cotton cloth, an
increase in the sale thereof of more than 8 percent compared with 1980 is
scheduled for 1981.

How has the shortage of cotton cloth come about? The main reason, of course.
is the inconplete use of the resources and potential of light industry. The
workers of this sector themselves, engineers. chemists and construction work-
ers are to blame here. Judge for yourselves. Capacity for 500 nillion

square meters of cloth was underinstalled in cotton industry in the last 5-year

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plan. The reasons for this were prolongation of the specified times of con-
structi'on and underfnlfillment of the plan for the introduction of new spindles
and loom. Further, the average use of capacity for the production of cotton
cloth controlled by the 'USSR Ministry of Light Industry was 88 percent in

1980. The extent of the use of capacity can and rust be higher than this
indicator, not to mention the fact that it was considerably below the sector-
ial average even in a number of republics. It has been calculated that if

the capacity available in the union republics were used at the sectorisl
average level, it would be possible to produce an additional 200 million-p118
square meters of cloth.

The USSR Ministry of Cllemical Industry, which failed to supply synthetic
fibers and yarn in the necessary quantities, also "assisted" the USSR Hin-
istry of Light Industry in the creation of the cloth shortage.

These are just a few facts which help us get an idea of the reason for' the
cloth shortage. Despite the conditional nature of the adduced calculations,
it can be seen what unutilised potential our light industry possesses and what
big tasks confront the-collectives of its enterprises and also the engineers.
chemical workers, construction workers and the corresponding party organiza-
tiona.

Local industry is also called on to play a big part in providing the popula-
tion with goods in daily demand. Enterprises of reptblic and local juris-
diction are obliged, for example, to fully satisfy the need of the population
of the republics for the simplest small-scale cornodities such as school and
writing accessories, kitchen utensils, pottery products and so forth. How-
ever, even today there are not enough of such very simle products on sale.

A reason for this is the fact that local industry enterprises are attempting
to produce instead of simple commodities more intricate and costly products
not from local but allocated raw material. Certain local industry enter-
prises, for example, have organized the production of motor vehicle-type

truck cranes and metal-cutting and forging-pressing equipment. This is prob-
ably necessary. But a reduction in the production of cultural-everyday comm-
dities and various utensils and implements mst not be permitted here. The
leaders of local industry and the consumer cooperatives must engage most
seriously in an increase in the production of the simplest connodities, parti-
cularly those manufactured from local raw material and production waste. The
thorough and purposeful work of the party organizations is needed more than
over in the solution of these questions.

The CPSU.0entra1 Conittee and USSR Council of Ministers have recently been

paying special attention to an inrovement in trade services for the popula-
tion. A session of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presiditm in April 1981 addressed
by Comrade l..I. Brezhnev was devoted to questions of an improvement in trade.

The removal of interruptions in the sale of goods in daily and mass demd
undoubtedly depends primarily on an increase in their production. However,
many questions would not be as acute if our trade also operated more asser-
tively. The trading organizations' request for 1981 was not catered for in
respect of cloth from natural silk and staple fiber for clothing, decorative

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cloth and artificial fur. At the sane tine cloth from acetate rayon and
synthetic silk is piling up in large quantities in trade. Demand for footwear
is not being satisfied. Yet 3250 Iillion of unnarketable and old footwear

has piled up in trade. Purtheraore, the trading organizations have rejected

the purchase of a large quantity of footwear owing to its unsatisfactory se-
lection and quality.

Such is yet a further ingredient of the shortage on whose removal industrial
and trade workers must work jointly.

Trade is called on to play more assertively the part of min client of in-
dustry and increase the demands nade on the quality and selection of consumer
goods. At the sane tine it is necessary to adopt urgent measures to iwrove
the location of couaodity resources on the country's territory. develop the
network of stores and inprove their operating schedule. The solution of
these questions will largely depend on the persistence of the republic and
oblast party organisations, union republic oomcils of ministers and krayis-
polkoms and oblispolkolls.

Work is now under way in the USSR Council of Ministers on fulfill-eat of the
decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress on the preparation of decrees determining
concrete tasks for an increase in the llth Five-Year Plan in the production
of goods in daily and mass demand and cultural-domestic comdities and home
appliances. These decrees will be integral components of the progran being
drawn up for an increase in the production of industrial consular goods.

The Soviet people's well-being is a wide-ranging concept. It is by no means
exhausted. despite the importance of these questions. merely by provision of
the population with a sufficiency of food products. clothing, footwear, shel-
ter and consuer durables. As the society of nature socialists develops,

increasingly great significance is attached to catering for the full-fledged
recreation and the increased cultural and educational level of Soviet people
and an improvement in medical services for then.

Take, for exawle, book publishing. In the developnent 'of the socialist so-
ciety the book is a lost important co-aodir" in mass demand and a source of
the satisfaction of Soviet people's ever growing spiritual require-eats.

Some 1.8 billion books and brochures are now published annually in the coun-
try. Nonetheless, there is still a shortage of books. The entire serious-
ness of the problem of catering for the demand for many types of literature

is well known. The work of the‘publishing houses, book-trade organizations
and book stores is constantly within the sights of the party authorities; they
themselves frequently have to participate in the distribution of the subscrip-
tion publications and the most popular books allocated the republic. oblast
or city.

The current situation is disturbing to the CPS!) Central Co-ittee and USSR
Council of Ministers. L.I. Brezhnev spoke with great concern at the 26th

party congress of the fact that buying an interesting book is sometimes
difficult.

177

FOR OFFICIA' ‘ k‘ZE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The congress recognised the need to provide for the further developent of
publishing and satisfy more fully the public's printed prcduct needs. As in
the 10th Five-Year Plan also, the entire increase in paper will be channeled
into the publication of fiction and poetry and children's literature, the
proportion of which in total book publication will increase even further. The
most popular works will be published in editions running into the millions.

The overall increase in 'the publication of literature is very iqressive. But
calculations show that even this is insufficient to fully satisfy demand.

The Iain reason :for the impossibility as yet of ensuring satisfaction of the
demand for literature in full is the shortage of paper owing to the slowing
of the rate of development of the paper industry. For this reason we ask
that the leaders of the party organizations of the oblasts where timber is
procured and where pulp and paper industry enterprises are located contribute
to an increase in the publication of literature in the country by establish-
ing strict supervision of the fulfillment of the plans for the shipment of
felled timber and the production of pulp and paper, putting the haulage of
timber and paper under special surveillance.

It is also necessary to increase the attention paid to economies in paper.
Much is being done in this respect: the size of books and my journals has
been limited, specifications concerning the design of the printed product have
been tightened and the waste paper norms at the printer's have been revised.
On a countrywide scale this is releuing thousands of tons of paper. A great
paper saving is being produced, for exasple, by the transition of the general
educational school to the free use of textbooks. Re are saving many thou-

sands of tons of paper as a result of the creation of sdlool textbook collec-
tions.

The commission trade in books, the purchase of books from the public and
their subsequent sale via the book stores are usuming increasingly large
proportions.

The union republic Commist Party central cousittees and councils of ministers
must pay more attention to the developnent of. the printing industry, the
training of persmnel for this sector and the-creation of good conditions
for the work and social life of printing workers. Recently the Azerbaijan,
Lithuanian and Estonian Con-mist Party central comlittees and councils of
ministers adopted decisions on an expansion of the physical plant of book
publishing and printing. And the attention to the printers' work and social
conditions on the part of the local party authorities and assistance to the
state committees for publishing houses, printing plants and book trade and
enterprises in the solution of questions of the social development of the
collectives will undoubtedly be positively reflected in an expansion of book
publication.

A few words about an inprovsnent in medical assistance for the population.
The 10th Five-Year Plan for the introduction of hospitals and clinics was ful-

filled for the country as a whole. But in certain union republics the plans
for the introduction of new hospitals thanks to state capital investments

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were underfulfilled; considerable resources allocated by the state for this

purpose were not fully assimilated. It is absolutely necessary to rectify
this situation.

As in previous years, the comunist unpaid Saturday work day in April 1981 was
conducted successfully. In accordance with pod tradition, the considerable
resources derived from the voluntary Saturdays: are annually channeled into
the construction of nedical establislnnnts. Leading scientific medical
centers have been and are being built on the basis of these resources:
oncological and cardiological hospitals, a other and child care hospital

and also a large amber of children's hospitals, clinics and obstetric estab-
lishnents. However, in certain instances the construction of health care
establishments thanks to the resources derived on the voluntary Saturdays

is not being undertaken quickly enough. For example, a start was made on the
construction of a hospital building for 120 beds in Kirovogrsd (Ukrainian SSR)
in 1977 and was to have been completed in 1979. But as of the start of 1981
it was only 36 percent ready. The construction of a hospital for 500 beds

in Chita which was begun in 1976 shouldhavebeen coqleted in 19w. Yet

this construction is being carried out so slowly that if decisive measures
are not taken to speed it up, the introduction of the hospital will not be
possible before 1990.

The party organizations need, I believe, to step up supervision of the con-
struction of health service facilities.

The 26th CPSU Congress set the health care authorities big tasks for an in-
provemcnt in the organization of the activity of the outpatient-general
health clinic establishments and the introduction of new for. and methods
of preventive. diagnostic and therapeutic work. The activity of the outpatient-
general health clinic establishments in each city must be organized such as
to ensure medical assistance in accordance with the population's require-eats
and the operating schedule of enterprises, organizations and establish-ants.
It is also necessary to raise the level of first aid and energency nedical
assistance. Supervision of the health care authorities' implenentation of
these measures and also active usistance to then on the part of the local
party authorities are essential.

Measures have been implemented in recent years to improve the health care
establishments' provision with the prisary level of medical personnel and
its retention in these important areas of work. However, questions of pro-
viding medical workers with living space, particularly in the countryside,
are not yet being tackled satisfactorily. Lack of housing is a principal
cause of the turnover of medical personnel. Over 16,000 doctors--medical
institute graduates--are sent annually to health care establishments render-
ing medical assistance to the inhabitants of rural areas. After the obliga-
tory 3 years of service, many of then leave the republics in connection with
the lack of suitable housing-everyday and work conditions.

The local party and soviet authorities should approach the solution of the
very imrtant question of medical services for the population with the measure
of responsibility required of all of us by the 26th party congress.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

The social program outlined by the 26th CPSU Congress provides for the com-
prehensive and concerted development of all aspects of the life of society
and a rise in both the naterial and spiritual living standard of Sovietnpeo-
ple. And in this ongoing process an increasingly active part is being played
by the party's ideological work and the formation is Soviet people, parti-

cularly the younger generation. of a sense of public duty and s conunist
world outlook.

while attaching such great importance to a rise in the people's well-being
the party is at the sane time actively codiating individual nanifeststions
of a consumerist mentality, the thouditless following of Western trends and
an aspiration to personal gain, particularly at the expense of society.

Concrete concern for the concrete man and his needs and requirenents—this

is, as Comrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized, the begining and end of our economic
policy. The great meaning of the activity of the Lenin Party is that it has
always fought and worked in the name of a better life for and the happiness
of the people of labor.

The program of the country's socioeconomic development outlined by the 26th
CPSU Congress for the 11th Five-Year Plan and the period through 1990 reflects
the people's fundamental. vital interests. Pulfillnnt of the congress'
directives for the future and. primarily, the unconditional fulfill-eat of
the llth Five-Year Plan quotas have now been put at the center of all efforts
of the party and the country. Our social optinism is based on the firm con-
viction that under the wise leadership of the Lenin Party our country's work-
ing people will honorably fulfill the magnificent plans of the historic 26th
CPSU Congress.

' C.£. Harchuk, deputy chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers and chairman
of the USSR State Comittee for Science and Technologya "Problen of the
Acceleration of Scientific-Technical Progress"

Considerable successes were scored in the last decade in the development of
fundamental and applied scientific research and a rise in the technical level
of production. Soviet science currently occupies leading positions in nany
of the most important areas. Such modern sectors as atonic engineering,
space technology, electronics and microelectronics industry. laser technology
and the production of artificial diamonds and other synthetic materials have
been created on the basis of its achievements.

The scale of the use of scientific-technical achievements in the national
economy has grown. The nanufacture of approximately 17,500 new types of
machinery. equipment. instruments and materials was assimilated in the 10th
Five-Year Plan coqared with 16,500 in the Ninth. Intensive factors, anong
which scientific-technical progress plays a decisive part, are responsible for
three-fourths of the increase in labor productivity in the national economy.
'mis neans. as enphasized at the 26th party congress. that the investments

in science and new technology are a most effective condition of an increase
in social production efficiency and the intensification of the economy.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An analysis of the development of scientific-technical progress shows that
currently it is no longer sufficient to control merely the sphere of scien-
tific research and the development and assimilation ofnew technology, it is
also necessary to contribute to its speediest introduction in series production.
The pace of scientific-technical progress is frequently held back currently

not by a lack of promising ideas, discoveries and-”inventions but by their slow
mass introduction.

The coming decade, and this must be emphasized, will he a stage of the exten-
sive practical implementationnof fund-ental results of scientific research.
These years will be a period of the mass introduction of the nost significant
scientific achieveaents which nidnt contribute to the accomplishment of key
national economic tasks and a fundanental change in production. In the l9m's
the country will have to take a new step forward in coinining the achievements
of the scientific-technical revolution with the advantages of socialism.

The evolved practice of the control of scientific-technical progress is lead-
ing to the theoretical and experimental research, planning and design develop-
ments, the creation of new types of equipment and technology and their honing
and introduction in production being undertaken by organizations of different
sectors and spheres of activity. The entire "science-production" cycle is
thereby being split into a number of corresponding independent stages. each of
which has its own list of tasks and its planning, financing and management
procedure. Rnence the most appreciable delays in the solution of scientific-
technical problems arise. as a rule. upon the transfer of the results of com-
pleted developments f roe one stage to another. It is at this moment that

it is discovered that the next stage of the cycle cannot be started owing to
the inadequate preparation of the executents and production for assimilation of
the new equipment and melon. the lack of component products and materials
and many other reasons engendered by the uncomprehensive solution of large-
scale intersectorial problem. It needs to be considered here that frequently
up to 80-100 organizations belonging to various ministries and departments
participate in the development of najor problems. ~

Currently an effective means which could provide for the concerted activity
of different elements of the science-production coqnlex is the program-goal

method of planning. whose chief merit is a precise orientation toward end
results.

The specific practical thrust of scientific developments is organizationally
ednodied in comprehensive scientific-technical program. Such a program repre-
sents a coordinating mechanism which, proceeding from the planned national
econoadc end result, coordinates the efforts of all coaponents, from research
through series production. The comprehensive programs make it possible to
concentrate scientific forces and material and financial resources on the
achievement of the present end results in industry, agriculture and consumer

goods' production.
For 1981-1985 the USSR State Committee for Science and Technology, USSR Gosplan

and USSR Academy of Sciences have drawn up and confirmed 160 program, among
which are 38 goal-oriented comprehensive program for the realization of the

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

most significant scientific-technical achievements, and 122 programs are
geared to the solution of problems of national economic importance and con-
nected with the creation of fundamentally new types of equipment and technology
and their realization in practice and also with the develop-at of scientific _
research and technical developments with respect to the most promising area
of science and technology.

Thus for the first time in planning practice comprehensive goal-oriented
scientific-technical program encompassing the entire cycle—from scientific
developments throudn the practical realization of results, including the
series production of new products-will be introduced in the llth Five-Year
Plan. The transition to the new stage of program-goal planning is not a
mechanical transformation of the current system of plans but a qualitatively
new form of organization and management making it possible to raise the pur-
posefulness of the work of the scientific research, design and planning-
engineering organizations and to accelerate the honing of completed research
and developments to the point of series production.

Comprehensive plans of the acceleration of scientific-technical progress have
been drawn up and are being implemented in many regions of our country. ﬁne
increased attention to the regional aspects of the development of science and
technology has been brought about by life itself. It is now clear that the
comprehensive development of the natural wealth in a region and the efficient
use of equipment and material and labor resources are tasks whose accolplish-
ment cannot be packed solely into the framework of the sectorial principle

of management and organization. A comprehensive scientifically substantiated
approach which takes fuller account of the specific features and interests of
the development of the production forces of this region or the other is essen-
tial.

The regional scientific-technical progrann are aimed at providing production
with scientific developments which take account of local social, economic

and natural-climatic conditions. It is essential here to make extensive

use of the territorial cooperation of science and production and the coordina-'
tion of academic. VUZ and sectorial science. Perfection of the regional organ-
ization of scientific-technical potential contains great possibilities of the _
increased efficiency of the entire national economy.

The most efficient results are achieved when the regional and sectorial plans
are organically coinined with the comprehensive scientific-technical programs.
Their unity will make it possible to link scientific research and planning-
design work more closely with production and make fuller use of the advan-
tages of the socialist system of magement.

As is known, realization of the tasks of scientific-technical progress depends
to :n certain extent on the skills, education and responsibility of the per-
sonnel and its attitude toward work. lbdern production perceives more acutely
than before the significance and complexity of the humn factor. And if in
some area the human factor proves less reliable than the equipment, there has
to be manifold compensation for these losses. For this reason a balance be-

tween the creative capabilities and responsibility of present-day workers and
(V

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the potential afforded them by production is so inortant now. Only in the
event oft-their concertedness and her-any does scientific-technical progress
produce the maximum results.

The 26th CPSU Congress valued highly the role of science in Soviet society.

"No one‘has to be convinced of the great significance of science," the CPS!)
Central Cosmittee Report to the 26th party congress says. "the party of
comunists proceeds fron the fact that building the new society without science
is simply inconceivable.”* This evaluation inspires all Soviet scientists

and at the sane tine mkes Inch incuﬁent upon then.

A.G. Yegorov. director of the‘ CPS" Central Couittee Institute of Marxism-
Leninisn: "The 26th CPSU Congress' Creative Contribution to the Development
of the ‘meory and Practice of Scientific Conuniam"

I

There are events in the life of peoples and the activity of the oo-IIunist par-
ties which reveal as if in focus the Iain trends of social development and

the prospects of social progress. The 26th CPSU Congress was among precisely
such events. It collated the experience of the Soviet people's creative
activity in fulfillnent of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and revealed
the international significance of the great achievements of the Soviet Union's
working people. It made a new contribution to the analysis of the world revolu-
tionary process, armed the connunists and all working people with a clear under-
standing of the tasks of the struggle for peace. democracy and socialism and
enriched Harxisn-Laninism with new conclusions.

As observed in many documents of the fraternal cos-unist parties and the for-
eign press, the 26th CPSU Congress is of tremendous international signifi-
cance and is having a multifaceted impact on the development of the world
revolutionary process and relations between peoples. Evan eocialism's enem-
ies are forced to admit that the humanistic ilport and optimism of the de-
cisions of -the 26th CPSU Congress and the confident nature of our party's
policy are inspiring all the world's working people and increasing the mag-
netic force of real socialism on all continents.

The world-historical sipificance of; the 26th CPSU Congress is determined by
the role perforned by the USSR in the world arena, the contribution which the
Soviet people are making to the social progress of all mankind and the author-
ity which the CPSU enjoys anong cosmunists and all the world's revolutionary
forces.

"In fact...the appearance of our motherland at the end of the 20th century and
on the threshold of the third millennium," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the
congress, 'ﬁvill largely depend on what we decide at this time."** This is a
very important, fundamental proposition. After all, in our era scientific
cosmunism is not only an ideal and the highest goal to which the working
class and broad people's masses aspire and not only a theory affording the

*"Heterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 42.
**Ibid.. p 79.

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Harrist-beninist parties the possibility of erecting the nsgnificent edifice
of a new society in accordance with plans verified by science. Scientific
cos-unison in our day is the visible practice of nillions and nillions of peoo
ple building a new life.

Increasingly new problem arise and new tasks are advanced in the process of
socialist and cos-mist building, and this requires a creative approach both
to the study of life fron the standpoints of Marxisn-Leninisn and to Harriet-
Leninist theory itself and a consideration of the collective eaperimce of
the noses and their creative activity.

The exceptional significance which our party attaches to the development of
Harrist-leninist science as its instrument of theory we corroborated at the
26th CPSU Congress both in the analysis of what had been done by Soviet so-
cial scientists since the previous congress—an objective, strict and bene-
volent analysis oriented toward the development of the cardinal problem of
the present day—and in the determination of the key problens of social
science for the future. And, of course, in the foundation of the most in-
portsnt question of changes and additions to the party Progra- with regard
for an interpretation of the great experience of socialist and cousunist
creation in the USSR accumlated over 20 years and also the new phenoneoa
and processes in the international arena based on Marxist-Leninist methodology.

In speaking of the contribution of the 26th CPS" Congress to Marxist-Lenin-

ist aethodology it has to be enphasized that the single line of ascent of

the Soviet country's developnent in all periods of its life and the continuity
of the party's Leninist policy appear distinctly in the history of the CPSU.
And at the same tine every one of our party congresses narks a net level of the
society's progressive developnent and, accordingly, a new level in the de-
velopnent of Harrist-Leninist science.

If we examine fron this viewpoint the documents of the 26th party congress and
priaarily the CPS“ Central Couittee Report delivered by Conrade LI. Brezh-
nev, it will be clear that the development of Harrist-Leninist science is

not confined here to individual questions, each of which is very important
both theoretically and practically. be they questions of the country's domes-
tic life or international relations and the world revolutionary process. The
creative developnent of Marxists-Lamina as a whole and in the unity of its
theory and method is provided here.

The 26th CPSU Congress teaches us the in-depth, skillful application of
Harxist-Leninist nethodology to the cognition of new phenonena and its en-
richnent on the basis of the new historical experience of our country and

the entire socialist commity. It is a question, of course, of the collation
not only of positive enperience. As indicated in the 6981! Central Coalittee
Report to the 26th party congress, the history of world socialism also knows
of difficult, crisis nonents which also have to be taken into consideration.

The all-conquering force of Marxian-Leninisa also consists of the fact that,
not confining itself to the experience of certain countries, it affords an

opportunity for hhe in-depth conprehensioo of the dialectics of the entire
nodern era and its nain features and the struggle of the trends of different

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
social-class forces and affords an opportmity for separating the positive
and the negative in social life and also taking account of the concrete-
historical, national singularities in the manifestation of the col-on
regularities of the building of a new life and revealing the essence of these
regularities, outside of and beyond which it is iwossible to cowrehend the
concrete phenomena and processes in certain socialist countries.

‘lhe consistently implemented historical method, this not important require-
ment of Harxist-laninist methodology, forms the basis of all the main con-
clusions of the 26th CPS!) Congress, helping m not only to correctly evaluate
the past but also outline the prospects of the country's further development
and determine the leading trends of the social process as a whole.

Comrade L.‘I. Brezhnev's report nentions the continuity of the socioeconomic
strategy of the 24th. 25th and 26th congresses of our party—congresses of
the period of developed socialism—reveals the inspiring prospects of the
country's socioeconomic development in 1981-1985 and the period through 1990,
determines the main tasks which have to be tackled and the ways to accomplish
then and shows the world-historical significance of the problems which are
being and will be tackled by our party and our people.

This neans that in formulating its social and economic strategy the CPSU
always deternines the main stages of progress, the intrinsic connection be-
tween then and the tasks which are tackled at each of these stages and the
methods of their accomplishnent in order, by relying on accmulated exper-
ience, to create the conditions and prerequisites for the next twist to the
spiral of ongoing development. "Looking S, 10 years ahead today," Comrade
L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th party congress, "we cannot forget that it is
in these years that the national economic structure will be laid and created
with which the country will dark on the 21st century. It should elimdy
the main features and ideals of the new society, be in the vanguard of prog-
ress and personify the integration of science and production and the indes-
tructible alliance of creative thought and creative labor."*

In general. progressive movenent—and this was shown strikingly in Comrade I..l.
Brezhnev's report—is impossible without continuity of the specific goals,
means and methods of the solution of economic, social, political and all other
problems. However, progressive developmentuand this also was strikingly
revealed in the report—enriches and concretises then with reference to the
new conditions and the requiremnts and possibilities of social life.

This is why questions of the materiel-technical base, planning and management
of the economy. the growth of the working people's well-being, development of
the social-class structure and national relations, the formation of the new
man. developnent of the political system and intraparty life and so forth

were raised at the 24th, 25th and 26th congresses of our party. But each

time they appeared with new facets and in the light of the growing possibilities

7"ﬁterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p M.

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and new factors of scientific-technical. acoustic and social progress. And '
the scientific concept of the asterial-technical base of contain and the
economic-political concept of the planning and control of social processes
thereby develop and all other problem are extended, with regard for material.
political, noral and all other aspects, that is, cosprehensively, further-ore,
fron congress to congress.

Coaprehensiveness is also s that iwortant principle of Harrist-Laninist
methodology. which has acquired particular significance under the condition
of nature socialism-4 society whose characteristic feature is the intregity
and her-onions development of all its aspects, although not without contra-
dictions of a nonantagoniatic nature.

Comrade L.l. Brezhnev emphasized particularly forcefully in the CPS" Central
Couittee Report to the 26th party congress that "the interconnection of the
progress of the econolly with the sociopolitical and spiritual progress of
society is becoaing increasingly close under the conditions of nature social-
isn."* Not confining himelf to this conclusion, he went on to show objec-
tively and concretely what significance is attached to the balanced growth

of all sectors of the economy, the increased interrelations between the basis
and superstructure, the development of the territorial-production coaplemes
and the econonic relations of the kolkhozes among theuelves and with industry
within the framework of the country's single national economic coupler, the
rapprochement of the classes and social groups in the process of co-nnist
building and so forth. 'l'hus thadntegrity, unity and interconnection of all
social relations are strengthened sinultaneously with the coqrehensive devel-
opment of the econon under the conditions of mature socialism.

However, the coaprehensiveness, integrity or, as it is now customary to say,
the systeaic nature of social developunt under the conditions of developed
socialism by no aeans signifies that all eleaents of our social system are
developing at an equal pace. There are system-forming elements which deter-
nine the action of all the others and ensure intensive factors of growth.
They are developing more rapidly than others. And for this reason it is very
important to find in the chain of pheno-sns, as v.1. Lenin taught. "at each
particularlnonent the special link" which "needs to be grasped with all our
powers in order to maintain-the entire chain and sake fir- preparations for
the transfer to the next link...."** And this central link say only he as-
certained on the basis of an in-depth analysis of social phenonena with Harx-
ist-Laniniat science as the guide. It is this that Lenin had in mind when
he said that "for us theory is the sibstantistion of the actions we embark
on...."*** It reveals not only the regularities and trends of social develop-
nent but also how to nastar the nechanisa of this development.

—1——-——-————-————ﬁ——_
*‘Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress. p 52.

**V.I. lenin. ”Complete Works," vol 36, p 205.
***Ibid., vol 35, p 172.

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The problem of the objective criteria of the society of suture socialism

viewed in the unity of its quantitative and qualitative characteristics is
of interest in this connection.

It is coll-on knowledge that the developmt of the production forces is the
highest criterion of historical progress. It determines to a decisive extent
the dynamics of all other spheres of social life. It was for this reason that
v.1. Lenin said that labor productivity is the principal and most important
thing for the victory of the new social system. And this conclusion of v.1.
Lenin's was further developed in the report of LJ. Brezhnev and other docu-
ments of the 26th CPSU Congress. At the same time not only the level of the
production forces which has been reached but also how. thanks to this, the
working people's material and spiritual requirements are being satisfied and
their capabilities are being developed are important for a characterization
of society's socioeconomic development and the progressive social changes.

Consequently. only a criterion which eabraces all the most important aspects
of social life can provide an integral idea of mature socialism. The are
so in that mature socialism represents an integral system of social conner
tions and relations which on the basis of a high level of growth of the so-
cialist production mde affords scope for the action of the laws of society
and the extensive use of the scientific-technical revolution.

It is natural that the objective criteria of the society of mature socialism
in its quantitative and qualitative characterization presuppose the attentive,
in-depth study of each sphere of social life with regard for its specific
features. Nonetheless, it would appear that the interconnection of all
aspects of social life is reflected most fully primarily in the satisfaction
of the requirements and the development of the capabilities of man, the es-
sence of whom. in Harx's words, "is not an d>straction characteristic of a
single individual. In its reality it is the totality of all social relations."*

Back in 1902 v.1. Lenin pointed out that our goal is "the total well-being
and free all-around development of all members of society."** And in all its
activity the CPSU is guided by precisely this supreme purpose and is imple-
menting it consistently and unswerviugly. "The invariable program require-
ment of all in the name of man, all for the good of man has served and con-
tinues to serve," Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, "as
the point of departure of a party, political approach to the economy."***

And indeed. whatever aspect of the life of Soviet society one takes. our

party operates everywhere in the name of man and in the interests of the peo-
ple. In the sphere of the economy. increasing production efficiency and work
quality and displaying concern for the growth of Soviet people's material well-
being. In the sphere of social relations, developing socialist democracy and

Winn, r." Engels. "s'och_”—". [vo'm"—1, vol 42, p 265.

“41.1. Lenin, "Complete Works," vol 6, p 232.
1“1*"!1aterial of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 31.

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enhancing the role of public opinion and collectively adopted decisions. In
the sphere of culture, raising the general educational and cultural-technical
level of the assess and refining their spiritual, noral qualities. In the
sphere of international life, raising the country's defense capability .and
struggling consistently for the cause of peace throughout the world and the
tritnph of commiat ideals in this world. "Concrete concern for the concrete
individual and his needs and requirements“ is thereby the start and finish of
party policy. And this is also an important nethodological principle of the
Marxist-Leninist approach to an examination: of problem of the socialist
society: whatever is the final goal should also be the point of departure
of the examination of its problem; it is necessary to proceed from the
final goal toward that which is to ensure its achievement.

It should be emphasized finally that the CPSU Central Cosmittee Report to the
26th party congress directs us once again and very forcefully toward the
consistent inplenentation of the principle of col-mist 'psrty-mindedness in
science, in art and in the sphere of spiritual culture in general. And

this is understandable. “were there are no firm Haraist-ieninist principles,
there is bourgeois theoretical thought, a plunging fro. extreme to extreme
and serious mistakes and delusions. It is necessary, as Conrade l..l. Brezhnev
emphasized. to put right in good tins and skillfully those who slide to this
side or the other and display irreconcilability with those who discredit our
Soviet reality.

In short. it is a question of consistently defending in knowledge. in culture
and in all spheres of social activity the purity of the Harxist-Leninist
world outlook and being primed with the theory and practice of scientific
col-muss. This is particularly important now. under condition wherein the
ideological struggle in the international arena is becoming aggravated and
more comlex.

There is no doubt that the social scientists need to pay lore attention to
problem of Harxist-Leniniat methodology, particularly with reference to
specific spheres of knowledge and applied research. And not only because
Marxist-leninist methodology is not yet- being developed sufficiently at these
levels. The main point is that the enrichannt and development of Marxist-
Leninist aethodology are possible in constant contact with life and practice
and on the basis of the collation of the latest social experience and the
achievenents of the scientific cognition of nature. It is the connection with
practice which is the guarantee of social science's surnaunting of the short-
comings to which Comrade L.l. Brezhnev pointed at the 26th party congress,
particularly the tendency toward scholastic theorizing and pedantry. It is
this connection which helps science not only keep pace with life but also
light up the road ahead, correctly solving the most iaportant problems of
scientific-technical, sociopolitical and spiritual progress.

The CPSU Central Comittee Report to the 26th party congress says that a
Marxist-beninist party cannot fulfill its role if it does not pay due atten-

tion to the creative developaent of Marxist-Leninist theory. It eaphasizes
anew and most forcefully that the theory of Marxism-Lenin“. and its prin-
ciples are oriented toward a concrete analysis of a concrete situation and

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the collation of the real experience of the building of socialism and commie:

and the practice of a truly uses and really revolutionary move-ant, as v.1.
Lenin taught.

Thus the (7380 Central Conittee Report to the 26th party congress delivered
by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev is a progran party document whose propositions
and conclmions represent the consistent application of Marxian-Leninisa to

life and its creative develop-cut in accordance with new historical exper-
ience.

II

The 26th CPSU Congress made a new contribution to the theory of developed
socialise, the creation of which is a most important achievement of contempor-
ary Harxist-leninist thong-t, and thereby considerably expanded the horizons
of the theory and practice of scientific comics. The congresa' documents
expand Marxist-leninist theory of nature socialise in all aspects: economic,
social, political and ioeological.

Let us first exanine in the light of the decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress
the theoretical principles of the party's economic strategy.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report at the 26th CPSU Congress disclosed principled
directives in respect of all fundamental questions of the party's economic
and social policy. And disclosed then in unity and with regard for the entire
nultifaceted practice of the Soviet people and world socialism. The report
teaches us how we must take account of the urgent requirements of. social
development in good time and how, relying on historical experience, to pro-
ceed toward an in-depth understanding and explanation of new phenomena in

the life of Soviet society, the socialist co-mity countries and the world
social process.

Let in take the question of the main task of the llth Five-Year Plan, which
"consists- of ensuring the further growth of Soviet people's well-being
based on the steady. ongoing development of the economy, the acceleration of
scientific-technical progress and the transition of the econony to an inten-
sive development path, the lore rational use of the country's production po-
tential. the utmost economies in all types of resources and an itprovement

in work quality."it If we compare this formula with the Iain task of the

10th Five-Year Plan, we see such that is commn. And this is not fortuitous
for it is a question of the party's consistent inlenentation of its economic
strategy, whose highest goal is an unswerving upsurge in the people's mater-
ial and cultural living standard and the creation of the best conditions for
the all-around development of the personality on the basis of a further in-
crease in the efficiency of all social production, increased labor productivity
and the growth of Soviet people's social and labor assertiveness.

*"Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 38.

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The formula of the main task of the country's economic development distinctly
manifests theJinseparable fusion of the economic and social policy of the
CPSU. It provides a clear Harxist-Leninist understanding of the relationship
of production and consumption, emphasizing that the problem of income level-
ing cannot be posed abstractly and in isolation from production and labor
productivity growth. Not confining itself to a general theoretical inter-
pretation of the question of production and consumption, it reveals it with
reference to the current stage of thsSoviet society's development and the
conditions of mature socialism, when the main problem, which ed>raoes all
spheres of the economy, is to couplets the transition to a predominantly
intensive development path corresponding mat fully to the requirements of
mture socialism and leading to columnist abundance.

The congress observed that the roots of the shortcomings in our economy are
connected to a considerable extent with the fact that the force of the inertia,
traditions and customs which evolved in the period when not only the qualita-
tive but also the quantitative aspect was of prime importance has yet to be
fully overcome. Oriented, as before, toward a high rate of growth of produc-
tion, our party believes that it is now essential to increase its efficiency
and provide for expanded socialist reporduction mainly by way of the fuller
and more rational use of fixed production capital and capital investments,

an acceleration of thelabor productivity growth rate and an improvement in
all qualitative indicators. Properly speaking, all the measures currently
being iwlemented in the national economy are geared precisely to the accomp-
lishment of these tasks.

"We are now, comrades." Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress,
"capable of tackling the biggest and most complex tasks. But a seemingly
simple and very routine matter is becoming the pivot of economic policy-

a proprietorial attitude toward public property and the ability to make full
and expedient use of everything that we have.... 'ihe party Central Co-ittee
calls on the congress' delegates to assert this conclusion as a most inortant
principle of the CPSU's economic strategy for the coming period."* It is

this that is a most important principle of the CPsu's economic strategy

at the current stage. The huge scale of production (the country is the world
leader in roughly 20 of the most iuportant products) and the economic potential
which we now possess make the quality of the product and its rational use the
cornerstone. In addition, there has now been a marked acceleration of the
rate of the scientific-technical revolution worldwide, and in this respect
also our country met outpace capitalism and in no event be inferior to it.
"We cannot and must not." Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said, "agree to anything less
than conformity with' the best world and national models."**

In concentrating forces on an increase in production efficiency and the mobi-
lization of all factors contributing to this the party pays daily attention
also to an improvement in the system of distribution of material and cultural
benefits. 'lhis is a very important, crucial task. It was with good reason

———-——-———"'_T—_—

*"Haterial ofI-the 26th CPSU Congress, p 62.
**Ib1de. p ‘3e

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that Canada FLA. Suslov, addressing our “ﬁner-conference. focused atten-
tion on this. It is at this very point—an increase in the material well-

being of the nasses-uhhat the econonic and social policies of the CPS!) inter-
act and nerge.

And here also our party displays a creative approach to the solution of the
problem advanced by life and the practice of cos-mist building and is de-
veloping Leninisn with reference to the new living conditions. As is known.

it was Lenin. disclosing the essence of socialisn, its socioecononic content
and the practical tasks ensuing therefron, who directly posed the question of
the need for the strictest accountingcand control of the extent of labor and
consunption and the correct coatination of mterial and noral incentives to
labor. It was Lenin, having enphatically opposed petit bourgeois leveling,
who substantiated the genuinely Harriet understanding of equality under social-
isn and signposted the way to the victory of collaunist labor.

But our party, relying on Leninist nethodology, first charted the concrete
paths toward realization of the mist principle "fron each according to

his capabilities, to each according to his requirenenta" in the process of
socialist and comist building, having theoretically collated the new histor-
ical experience. It also conprehensively revealed the essence of socialist
distribution. which. while by no neans leveling the working people's require-
Ilents, creates real opportmities for their satisfaction according to the

principle "fro. each according to this capabilities, to each according to
his labor".

The party attentively takes account in its policy and practical activity of
the growing econondc force of the effect of this principle of socialism: the
working people's work according to their capabilities is beconing increasingly
fruitful, which is smrily expressed in the growth of labor productivity;
and the extent of renuneration according to labor is beconing increasingly
iapressive. And both these values continue to grow. In the llth Five-Year
Plan labor productivity in industry is to increase 23-25 percent and in agri-
culture 22-26 percent. In accordance with this, the average nonthly wage

of workers and ewloyees will increase 13-16 percent and kolkhor neabers'

pay 20-22 percent.

Inseparably linking the extent of distribtuion with the extent of labor, the
CPS!) underpins the program of a substantial increase in the naterial well-
being and cultural level of the assess with a real foundation, providing for
an increase in production and its efficiency, and at the sane tine takes ac-
count of the reverse inpact thereon of distribution. guided by Lenin‘s
proposition that "distribution is a nethod, inplenent and leans for increas-
ing production."*

Conrade L.I. Brezhnev said in the report at the 26th CPSU Congress: "Only
labor—its quantity,and qualitywcan be the min criterion of distribution
under socialism... Our systen of mterial and noral incentives mt always
and everywhere provide for a fair and objective evaluation of the labor con-
tribution of everyone."** And indeed: distribution according to labor

".1. Lenin. "Complete Works," vol 63, p 359.
*V'Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 59.

191

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

engenders the working people's interest in an increase in their qualifications
and cultural-technical level, contributing to the surnounting of the differ-
ences between people of intellectual and physical labor both in the city and
in the countryside. It helps strengthen labor discipline and nultiply sisterb
isl henefits. Finally. personal naterial interest, linking the extent of
labor and the extent of-‘consu-ption, inculcates in people carefulness and a"

solicit‘ous attitude toward public property and 'serves--given the correct-organ-
' ization of matters—to foster a cot-mist attitude toward labor".

The 26th crsu 'Congrese paid particular attention to the need to link wages

not sinply with a workers' qualifications but with the actual results of

his activity, bearing in nind that wages serve not only as a neans of satis-
fying requirements but also as an inportant stimulus to a growth of labor pro-
ductivity and work quality. "...We have to ensure," Conrade ILA. Tikhonov
said at the congress, "the increased dependence of the anount of the wage on
the final results of the work of the collective and each workingpperson."*

‘lhe CPSU also pays tremendous attention to an increase in the social consum-
tion funds, whose significance grows as we nove toward comisn and which
under the conditions of nature socialise are a source of satisfaction of a
meter of the aasses' vitally inportant requirements and contribute to the
equalization of Soviet people's socioeconomic living standard. But ”they
need to he spent," as the 08!! Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th party
congress said. "effectively and with the greatest benefit for people."**

Along the neasures sinsd at a rise in the working people's living standard in
the 11th five-Year Plan are an acceleration of the develop-ant of the group
"B" sectors, the fuller satisfaction of demand for various co-ndities and
services. the increased productiveness of agriculture, a strengthening of the
agrarian-industrial eagle: and others. In a word, the docuents of the
26th CPS!) Congress indicate both the tasks and actual paths of an upsurge in
the people‘s material well-being.

III

Exceptional significance in the solution of economic and social problem is
attached to science and,the use in the interests of the people of all the
possibilities revealed by the scientific-technical revolution.

It is come knowledge that under current conditions science is increasingly
becoming a direct production force. This applies not only to the technical
and natural but also the social sciences inasmuch as they also contribute

to the develop-ant of the production forces and an increase in labor produc-
tivity, forningnpspple with profound knowledge and a wealth of production
experience.

*"Phteriel of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 104.
M'l:l>id.. p 601

192

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the conditions of large-scale Inchine production science, via equipment
and technology, that is, "enhodied knowledge," exerts a tremendous influence
on production. ”Science was for hr: a historically motivating, revolution-
ary force." It. angels wrote and eaphesizcd that Her: held in particularly
hid: regard discoveries having a direct "revolutionary iwact on industry and
historical development in general.“

Under socialis- science is put for the first ties in Ian's history directly
and i-Iediately at the service of the working people and their social inter-
ests, facilitating the labor and increasing the neterial well-being of the
people and developing all nen's spiritual and creative capabilities. Here.
v.1. Lenin eaphasized, all the wonders of technology and all the gains of
culture become the property of all the people.

As practice testifies, at the stage of nature socialise socialist production
relations not only afford full scope for the development of science. equipment
and technology but are also capable of ensuring the interconnected. plan-

baeed development of all technical (technologicalf, scone-i“ political and
spiritual relations in their systenic character. integrity and unity. In other
words. under the conditions of the socialist society science influences

the production forces not only via equpnent but also via planning—economic
and social. And it is not fortuitous that the actual turnabout toward an
increase in social production efficiency begins here with planning. vhiich

was shown convincingly at the 25th and 26th CPS]! congresses.

Finally, being a direct production force, science is at the sane tine a nest
inortant elenent of spiritual culture. It exerts its influence on all
spheres of social life—economic. political. noral and so forth-and on social
nutual relations. v.1. Lenin even showed cowrehensively in his works that
scientific-technical achievements are realized via social relations; he also
revealed in an all-uracing sense: the organic connection of scientific-
technical and social progress.

The celebrated fornula: "Go-Imisn is Soviet power plus the electrification
of the entire cothbelongs to v.1. Lenin. By this formula he emphasized
that socialist. oomist progress presupposes reorganization of the entire
econon and social life on the basis of the use of the latest achievements of
science and technology in conbination with the power of the workers and peas-
ants. that is. with socialist production relations and socialist de-ocracy.
They organically link all spheres of people's life in a single, integral sys-
ten and provide via planning and the organizational-economic activity of the
state for the use of the latest achieve-ants of science and technology in the
people's interests.

This thought of Lenin's was developed and concretized in the docmente of
the 24th. 25th and 26th congresses of our party. As Conrsde L.I. Brezhnev

;l(. Nara, P. Engels, "works," vol 19, p 351.
“NJ. Lenin, "Cowlete Horks," vol 42, p 159.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

esphasised at the 26th CPSU Congress. the party of co-unists proceeds fron
the fact that the building of the nu society without science is siaply in-
conceivable.

The role of intellectual labor in the systea of naterial production increases
under the conditions of nature socialise. "Heavy" labor is being transferred
increasingly to nachinee. And this does not diminish but increases the signi-
ficance of the m araed with production experience and scientific knowledge.
The labor of the aodern worker, Conrade I..I. Brezhnev said. "is being suffused
increasingly with intellectual content." And this trend will grow and acquire
increasingly great social significance as scientific-technical progress and
production auto-tion develop.

In this event. in Marx's words, "science enters the labor process as an inde—
pendent force...."** However. science's iapact on production hereuvia equip-
ment and technology—acts. as before, as a most inportant factor of an in-
crease in social production efficiency—both economic and social. For this
reason "it is extrenely necessary." LJ. Brezhnev said. "that the country en-
sure that the efforts of 'big science,’ together with the de'velopnsnt of
theoretical probleas, be concentrated to a greater extent on the solution of
key national econonic questions and discoveries capable of asking truly re-
volutionary changes in production.”***

The CPSU is now tackling a task of historic inortance-othe organic oolhination
of the achievements of the scientific-technical revolution with the advantages
of the socialist systen of the econony and the note extensive development of
its own forms, inherent in socialiaa, of the coﬁinetion of science and pro-
duction. This proposition also expresses a singularity of the developed
socialist society constituting aminportent factor of its ongoing develop-
sent, new objective possibilities characteristic of this stage of the socialist
society's socioeconomic naturity in connection with the comtry's powerful
scientific-technical potential and the need for new, more accoaplished forns

of the socialist codination of science and labor.

The historic task of the organic coﬁination of the achievements of the sci-
entific-technical revolution and the advantages of the socialist systen of
the economy were further concretised and developed in Conrade I..l. Brezhnev's
report at the 26th CPSU Congress. There ha been a considerable increase in
the econony in recent years in the proportion of production and science-pro-
duction and also interkolkhoz associations, in which ferns of aan's relations
with the aeans of production via science inherent in nture socialism are
being developed.

The inplenentation of goal-oriented program sined at the solution of cardinal
socioeconoaic pmbleas—fuel-energy, transport, food and so forth—should
be a new form of the socialist combination of science and labor.

*"Material of thc 26th CPS]! Congress," p 52.
MIt. Marx, 7. Engels. "Works." vol 23. p 660.
“*"naterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," pp 42-43.

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-Scientific-technical progress, developing in breadth and in depth. is asking
' increased demands on nan and his attitude toward labor. “tones the 26th
CPSU Congress' attention to labor and plan discipline and everyone's strict
perforaance othis duties.

He still have my shortcoaings here. But the gain thing is that the couple:
units and automated system born of the scientific-technical revolution re- '
quire particularly careful treatuent and high discipline, organization and
professional culture. After all. overall success depends on the abilities

of each and presupposes enceptioaal precision in the work of each and coordi-
nated collective labor. And further: \nder socialis- it is in labor, under
the conditions of its correct organization on the basis of socialist produc-
tion relations, that people's capabilities and their natural qualities are
shaped and developed.

This is why in attaching para-cunt significance to the economy the CPS!) re-
gards social production efficiency and labor productivity growth as the foun-
dation and basis of a rise in the people's asterial well-being and spiritual
wealth, the all-around develop-eat of the personality and the sccosplishnent
of all socioeconomic tasks and as the basis of its social policy.

IV
Let us now era-inc the sociopolitical problem set by. the 26th CPSU Congress.

The interconnections} economic and social factors grows increasingly as our
society advances toward comisa. Take, for sample. the problsn of the
practice of economies. It is currently a question of the rational use both
of work tine (the economic thrust) and free ties (the social thrust). which
presupposes the simltmeous development of the econo-ic and social spheres
and. consequently, a further iaprovenent in the working people's everyday
conditions and the fuller satisfactionof their social-doaestic conditions

and develop-sot of‘ the services sphere. But this is just ‘one aspect. The
Iain thing is that the sociopolitical and ideological unity of Soviet society—
the eighty source of conunist progress—also natures an society's economic
basis, is determined by it and cannot be correctly understood and explained
in disconnection iron the active forces of asterial production and its found-
ation--socialist production relations.

The CPSU Central Co-ittee Report to the 26th party congress directs us toward
precisely such an approach to astters. Thus speaking of the ever increasing
rapprocheaent in both the social and professional sense of the labor of the
kolkhoz peasantry and that of the workers, Conrado l..I. Brezhnev eaphasized
that this rapprochement is deter-lined to a large extent by the rspprochenent
of the two form of socialist ownership and the develop-sot of interfarn
organizations, in which both the kolkhozes and state enterprises participate.

And the essence of social interests under socialise, which link the political
and moral-spiritual spheres of society and asterial production, can only be

correctly revealed on the basis of production relations. Bcononic, asterial
interests are of decisive significance here in the syste- of social interests

195
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in any society, including a socialist society. But their nature under so-
cialise, where there are no antagonistic classes, is fundamentally different
from capitalise and all other functions based on private ownership.

Relations of the conradely cooperation of people free fron exploitation and
the commity of fundasental interests of all social groups and all sewers
of society, in a word. collectivist social relations. are established mder
the conditions of socialists on the basis of prblic ownership of theueans of
production. "The reorganization of all social relations on' the oollectivist
principles inherently characteristic of the new systen is being coupleted
in the period of developed socialisn." the CPS!) Central Co-ittee Report to
the 26th party congress says.*

This proposition, which was first expressed by Conrade L.I. Brezhnev in the
report "Draft Constitution (Basic Lot) of the USSR and the Results of its
Nationwide Discussion." was further concretized and developed at the 26th
party congress. Both the natives and stinuli of huaan acts born of collec-
tivist social relations and how these relations are manifested in life,
eubracing its naterial and spiritual spheres, the existence of all social
groups and all nations and nationalities of our country and their entire tenor
of life. are shown here.

Comrade L.l. Brezhnev showed convincingly in the report at the 26th party
congress that the rapprochement of all classes and social groups continues
unswervingly in our comtry on the basis of the strengthening and develop-ant
of socialist social ownership. This is an objective and by no nean's spon-
taneous process. It is being realized mder the leadership of the CPSU,
thanks to its purposeful social policy.

The leading role of the working class in thelife of Soviet society has
strengthened in the course of mist building. which is connected with

the growth of its ideological-political naturity, education and professional
skills. Profound changes are also occurring in the‘life of the kolkhoz
peasantry, whose labor in the social and professional sense is growing grad-
ual 1y closer to that of the worker. A new stage of the practical realization
of the ideas of Lenin's cooperative plan has begun under the conditions of
nature socialisn, when interfarn cooperation is scanning the significance of
the basic, nost progressive forn of the specialization and concentration of
agricultural production.

An increasingly sipificant part of social life is played by the intelligent-
sia. At the sane tine intellectual and physical labor are beconing interwoven--
increasingly closely in the production activity of millions of workers and
kolkhoz neabers, which testifies to the dynamic process of the surnounting

of the essential differences between intellectual and physical labor. It is.
of course. a question-of the surnaunting of differences between people and

not the singularities of intellectual and physical ldwor. Incidentally, the
proportion of skilled physical labor in connection with the introduction of
new coaplex equipnent in nedicine, the scientific-experinental sphere and

_____________._
*"Haterial of the 26th C'PSU Congress," p 57.
196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

so forth is not diminishing currently but grating even. Differences in the
nature of intellectual and physical activity rennin even in the highest phase
of cos-mien. But there will he a greater conbinstion of physical and intel-
lectural labor. and esnual. heavy, unskilled and seeiskilled labor will be
done away with. This is, u I..l. Bred'mev said. not only an econoeic but
also serious social task, whose solution is directly connected with the
reeoval of the barriers in the way of converting labor into every person's
first vital requirenent.*

Having analyzed the processes of the sureounting of social-class differences
in our society at the stage of nature socialise, Ooerede l..I. Brezhnev said
in the report at the 26th CPS!) Congress: it nay be seeueed that ”the class-
less structure of society will cone into being by and large within the his-
torical franswork of nature socialise.”** This eeans that the developeent
of nature socialise is sieultsneously a process of the building of the con-
muniat society. In other words. there are no interesdiate levels and stages
between developed socialise sn‘ the highest phase of co.unisn.

Consequently, it is logical to sense that it is precisely within the histor-
ical framework of nature. developed socialise as a result of the rise in the
level of the socialization of the means of production both in industry and

in agriculture and the development of interfere cooperation and agrarian-
industrisl integration that the rspprocheeent of state and cooperativefkolkhoz
ownership with the leading role of the working class will lead to the creation _
of single, all-people ownership corresponding to the high level of develop-
ment of the production forces.

And the tse‘as which the current CPS!) Program currently links with the final
stage of our truly great cultural revolution will also be ecconplished with-
in the ssne historical frsnework of nature socialise.

These are, by and large. the objective conditions providing for the transi-
tion to a social classless structure. These are the realistic path toward
realization of the prograe goal which the (Jo-unis: Party has set itself--
the building of s classless society.

Thus our party's social policy. which is oriented toward solution of the
socioeconoeic problems of the current stage. dislecticslly incorporates a
direction toward the prospects of our society and its conunist future with-
out st the sane tiee being divorced froe realistic ground and actual possi-
bilities and without descending into social castle-building.

Movement toward a social classless structure is not a short-term act. v.1.
Lenin pointed out that sureounting social-class differences is a sore pro-
tracted teak than reeoval of the soil for esn's exploitation of een.“** And

________.____.__‘___
*See "Material of the 26th CPSU Congress,‘ p 57.
**Ibid., p 53.

M"'See v.1. Lenin, "Cowlete Works," vol 39. p 15.

197

POROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

life has fully corroborated this conclusion. The first phae of the col-mist
foraation—socialisn—is not free of class differences and the specific
interests of the classes and social groups. And where differences exist,

there is also the possibility of contradictions, even under conditions where
the funds-ental interests of the classes and all social groups coincide. whence
the need for constant concern for the correct codiination of the interests

of the social groups. directing then into a single co-on channel. This is
what our party is doing, ensuring with its policy and its entire activity

the firs alliance of the working class, kolkhos peasantry and people's

intelligentsia and the mnolithic sociopolitical and ideological unity of
the Soviet society.

The erasure of interclass differences. however. sets new tasks in the sphere
of social policy. As Conrade LJ. Brezhnev enphasired in the report at the
26th party congress, it is conmntrated increasingly on overseeing differences
which go beyond the franework of individual classes. an attentive consider-
ation of the singularities and interests of each group of our society and

the leveling of social differences territorially, so to. speak.‘

It should be home in nind that class relations do not exhaust all social
relations and that social-class differences do not exhaust all social differ-
ences. Porvexanple. there are professional differences connected with the
social division of labor. It is also natural that the singularities condi-
tioned by the social division of ld>or will not disappear with the achieve-
out of a classless social stmcture, that is, with the scent of all social
relations to a qualitatively new level. Differentiation in the production
process connected with people's sex and age, differences in their production
experience and so forth will also renain. National singularities will also
be preserved for a long tine mder cmisn.

Of course. in the process of the surnounting of social-class differences, in-
terclass and intraclass, there are also changes in the social division of
labor and its professional structure. The for-s of the division of labor.
the types of labor and nan hinelf even will undoubtedly change in the high-
est phase of co-Iunisn. Broadly educated and spiritually rich, he will
achieve a high degree of accoaplishnsnt in this sphere or the other and will
hinself have freely opted for the type of labor or several types of activity.
As far as the specialization of social labor is concerned, it is. v.1. Lenin
pointed out, "infinite in its very essence—just like the development of
technology."**

The entire practice of conunist building testifies incontrovertibly that a
high level of science and culture. technology and production organization re-
quire of people an ever increasing diversity and ooaprehensiveness of develop-
ment and at the ease tine note profound specialized knowledge in each sphere
of cocial activity and that eany years of persistent labor. the constant
replenishment and deepening of knowledge and refth of skills are needed
to acquire then. And this fact has to be taken into consideration not only

*See "Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 56.
“NJ. Lenin, "Conplete Works," vol 1, p 95.

190

FOROI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
in theory but also in the practice of the solution of problems of co-unist
building, from the tuition and training of the younger, rising generation

in the school throuul the scientific organisation of labor and problems of
the further development of socialist democracy and the use of the achievements
of the scientific-technical revolution in the people’s interests.

lbdern production, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress, lakes
rapidly growing demands not merely on machinery and equipment but primrily
on the workers thenslves and those who build this machinery and control this
equipment. “A person's specialized knowledge. high professional training and
general culture are beconing an obligatory condition of the successful labor
of increasingly broad strata of workers.”r

In science the integration of knowledge, increasing and strengthening also does
not exclude its differentiation but, on the contrary. is its basis and found-
ation. "...Hithout limitation of a sphere of activity," K. Marx wrote in
"Das Kapital," "nothing of significance cm be accowlished in any sphere."**
In the socialist society at the stage of its nourity the formation and de-
velopment of the working people as the main production force is the cosponent
of a nore wide-ranging task—the fostering of an enterprising, creative and
comprehensively developed personality actively participating in spheres of
social life. But this process by no means undermines the trend toward spe-
cialization. 0n the contraryy specialization intensifies on the basis of
people's all-around development and the high culture of society.

The socialist society at the stage of maturity is developing at a pace which
is historically unprecedented. And this applies not only to social-class
but all social relations, including national. Analyzing the dialectics of
life in its forward movement, our party drew the important conclusion that
the nationality question in the fore bequeathed us from the past has now been
solved in the Soviet Union in full and conclusively and irneversibily. But
this does not mean that there are no longer any problem in the sphere of
national relations. ‘lhe CPSU has made and continues to make an appreciable
contribution to the development of the naraist-Ieniniet theory of national
relations and is creatively solving in this sphere thenew problems arising
in the process of socialist and cos-mist building.

As is known, having comprehensively developed the permanent principles of

the equal union of the peoples based on complete trust and consent, V.I. Lenin
did not delineate the stages of the rapprochement and merger of the nations.
And understandably: in the first years of Soviet power and, even less, prior
to the victory of the socialist revolution this was not of essential signi-
ficance. Even under those conditions, incidentally, Lenin considered it
important to enphasize that state and national differences "will remain a very,
very long time...."***

*"llaterial of the 210th CPSU Congress," Moscow, 1971, p 1.1.

**K. Marx, F. Engels, "Works," vol 23, p 378.
“NJ. Lenin, "Complete works," vol 61, p 77.

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But with our society's ednarkation upon the period of nture socialism the
strict delineation of these processes became necessary both from the theo-
retical and practical-political viewpoints. "He are opposed to trends aised
at the artificial eruure of national singularities," Conrade L.I. Brezhnev
emphasised. "But we consider equally inperuissible their artificial exaggera-
tion. It is the party's sacred duty to raise the working people in a spirit
of Soviet patriotisn and socialist internationalisn and the proud feeling

of neiership of the single great Soviet I.)thhrlam'l."*I '

Questions of national relations were “aimed at the 26th party congress in
organic unity with Questions of the social-class structure of our society.
Otherwise it would have been inoesible to understand either the new social

and international commity which the single nultinational Soviet people
represents, the processes connected with our society's moment toward a class-
less social structure and the conplcte social hoaogenity of all its consti-
tuent peoples or the current stage in the development of national relations.

It was nentioned at the 26th CPSU Congress that there are no backward national
outlying regions here and that a process of the all-around rapprochement of
the republics, the flowering and enridment of the national cultures: and the
formation of the culture of the single Soviet people—a new historical con-
nunity which in essence corresponds to the stage of developed socialise and
lost fully reflects the trends of the ongoing novesent toward conunisn—is
proceeding unswervingly in the country. But this process by no leans erases
the "ethnic individuality” of the nations and nationalities and does-mot
exclude or diminish national cc-unities. ”...Building up the material and
spiritual potential of each republic and at the seas time its maxim- use for
the harmonious developnent of the whole comtry'mis our party's stra-
tegic course expressing the direction of the developnent of national relations
at the current stage.

The fornation of a new historical con-unity does not slow down but, on the
contrary. is providing for the even sore rapid rate of developnent of each
nation for, developing -as part of a single whole, each nation and nationality
makes use of the tresendous advantages of the USSR's strengthening single
national economic coupler. Our country represents a single socioeconolic organ-
isn, all of whose tasks, to whatever sphere of life and in whatever region they
apply, should be tackled by joint efforts and nost rationally and efficiently.
Thus the wide-ranging neasures for the upturn of the econoay of the noncherno-
zen are to he inplenented, as Conrada L.I. Brezhnev emphasised. "by the joint
efforts of all republics and as quickly as possible."*** This was how we built
the Turkeatan-Siberian Railroad and the Urals-Kuznetskiy Coal Basin, developed
the virgin land and restored Tashkent.

*"ﬁterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 57.
**Ibid., p 55.
***Ibid. . p 56.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conrade I..l. lreshnev'e report also raised the problems of the further de-
velopnent of socialist demcracy, particularly in connection with the fact
that the conposition of the population of all the Soviet republics is nulti-
nationel. Every Soviet person, to whatever nationality he belongs and in
whatever republic he lives. feels hisself to be a fully equal citizen with
all the duties and all the rights of a USSR citizen. This is a tremendous
achieve-ant of socialist democratism expressing the political progress of the
Soviet society. '

The 26th CPSU Congress showed that the political progress of our society con-
sists primarily of the growth and development of the social-political assert-
iveness of every USSR citizen and the refine-ant of society's political organ-
ization via the working people and in the interests of the working people

and that the general thrust of political progress under the conditions of
nature socialise acquired comprehensive and concentrated expression in the
1977 USSR Constitution. The interconnection of the sociopolitical assertive-
ness of the masses and political progress with the accoqlishment of the tasks
of columnist building is revealed nest fully under the conditions of the de-
veloped socialist society, where the newssary material-technical and economic
prerequisites have been created for the development of the totality of social
relations based on the principles of collectivisn.

All this is of tremendous international significance. Particularly when it is
considered that under current conditions the theory or the socialist state
and socialist denocracy is being actively developed by the collective efforts
of Harsist-Leninists on the basis of the actual experience of the Soviet
Union and the other socialist enmity countries. As a result of this col-
lective work and on the basis of an analysis of the aggregateexperience of
world socialise the theory of scientific cos-miss has been enriched: sci-
entific ideas concerning the dialectics of the general and the particular
and the unity of the content and the diversity of the forms of the socialist
comtries' state building have been expanded: and the role of the Marxist-
Leninist party as the nucleus of the socialist society's political systen
and its state and public organisations is being revealed in increasingly
great depth and the stages and prospects and ions of movement of the peoples
toward the hidzest phase of the cot-mist social-economic fomtion are in-
creasingly clear.

Relying on practice in its dialectical development and the collective exper-
ience of all the socialist enmity countries, we now have a chance to con-
ceive of the comist future sore clearly than ever before and, taking
knowledge of the laws of social development revealed by Marxisrleninism as
the basis, accelerate movement toward it. while at the seas not getting
artificiallyahead of ourselves.

As is known, v.1. Lenin wrote way back in "Gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya" [The
State and Revolution] that the refinementof socialist social relations

presupposes "the development of democracy to the end, a quest for the forms
of such development and their verification by practice...."* - These few words

*V.I. Lenin. "Complete works," vol 33, p 79.

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contain an entire program. Indeed, all the organisational form of the demo-
cratic control of the affairs of society and the state cannot be foreseen
ahead of tine; they are created in accordance with the concrete historical
and national conditions of the comtry and the international situation and
are verified and‘ tested by practice. But the aain directions and trends

of the developaent of socialist social relations. the state and socialist
democracy correspond here to the general laws of historical progress.

The dialectice of social develop-ant are such: our society will arrive at
the withering away of the state-legal superstructure via its strengthening.
on the basis of the all-around develop-ant and intensification of socialist
democracy md as a result of the transformation of the current political
connections and relations. this is a lengthy process. but it has deep roots
in socialist reality. Comrade L.l. Brezhnev said in the report at the Ninth
USSR Supreme Soviet Extraordinary Seventh Session on Io October 1977 that

"our statehood is gradually deyeloping into co-Iunist social self-administra-
tion with the develop-en: of socialist denocracy"* and that even now aillions
of citizens are participating increasingly actively in the work of the organs
of power and people's control, asnageaent of production and distribution,

the inlenentation of social and cultural policy and the administering

of justice as the all-people state is developed and perfected. The deno-
cretic basis of the state and public organizations is being further strength-
ened here under the leadership of the CPS“ and on the basis of its principles
and its policy. which expresses the fmdanental interests of the working
class and all working people.

V

The question of the growing role of the CPS!) in the life of Soviet society
under current conditions was also substantiated in greater depth at the

26th CPSU Congress. Conrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized particularly the funda-
mental inportanca of the conclusion put forward at the 25th party congress
that the role of the party in the life of society increases in the period

of developed socialisn. "The past 5-year period has shown this conclusion
to be undoubtedly correct. It is now, in the-light of the Soviet people's
impressive achieveilents, that Lenin's well-known formula that the party is
the aind, honor and conscience of our era is being percein in increasingly
great depth."**

The increased level of the CPSU's scientific leadership of s'ocioecononic pro-
cesses and its enhanced responsibility for their results are brought about
by the fact that:

_ first, the scale of conunist building has expanded and the socioecononic
resources of the country and the culture of the noses have grown:

—————ﬁr——T——-—ﬁ'———'—
*LJ. Brezhnev, Lenin s Hay.- Moscow, 1978, vol 6, p 534.

“maternal of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 68.

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
second, there has been an unmual acceleration of socioeconomic progress it-
self. demanding the exceptionally precise control of the course of events
and the balanced developnent of the economy;

third, the form of social life have become more cowlex, the union and inter-
action of all eleaents of our social systen have increased and there is a
heightened need for a conprehensive approach to phenomena and processes and
for then to be viewed in their unity and dynanics in order to ensure with

the help of science and through comprehensive planning the accelerated plan-
oriented forward novement of our society toward the highest phase of consunisn;
and

fourth, there has been an immeasurable increase in the creative activenese of
the nasses-o-the conscious builders of col-unisI—and their role in the ruining
of state and social affairs; and socialist denocretisn in our society edn'aces
ell aspects and all form of Soviet people's vital activity.

‘Ihus the CPSU's increased role in the period of developed socialism has deep
socioeconomic growth and roots. This is by nature an objective, but not
spontaneous process. Great theoretical and political significance is attached
to Conrade L.I. Brezhnev's conclusion that the role of the leading force of
society does not cone about of its own accord but is worked for and earned

in the course of constant, incessant struggle for the interests of the work-
ing people and is consolidated by the fact that the party is constantly ex-
tending its ties to the people's masses and living their needs and concerns.*

This means that the party, united and cohesive and armed with Maniat-leninist
theory, must invariably keep its finger on the 'pulse of life, constantly
analyze socioeconomic and political processes, find the ways to solve the
problens which arise and carry the usses with it, correctly expressing their
fundamental interests and raising their consciousness to the level of the
historic tasks confronting society.

This also scene that the party must display constant concern for the ideolo-
gical-political training of the communists and the hiuuest eractingness toward
all its nesbers, whatever position they hold. No leniency for anyone when it
is a questionefthe honor and authority of our party and the purity of its
ranks, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said and emphasized that "it is this high exact-
ingness which ensures the nonolithic unity of the CPSU and its capacity for
heading Soviet society and confidently leading the Soviet people along the
path toward commisn."**

The proposition that under the conditions of developed socialism, when the
Communist Party has become the party of the entire people, it by no leans
loses its class character was put forward at the 25th CPSU Congress. It was

 

*See "Material of the 26th CPSU Congress," pp 219-219.
"Ibid. , p 68.

203

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFl-‘IGAI. USE ONLY

esphasized at the 26th party congress in confirmation of this proposition
that the best representatives of the working class constituted 59 percent
of those who joined the party in the last 5 years.

In general, political progress under socialism is inseparable from the lead-
ing and constantly growing role of the working class in the life of society.
For this reason in the developed socialist society also the Gommist Party
remains by nature and class content the party of the working class—the lead-
ing force of communist building ebodying its world outlook, its policy and
its goals. At the same time the class character of our party, which has al-
ways expressed and continues to express most fully and profomdly the cher-
ished aspirations and fundamental interests of all the working people, should
be understood in its dynamics and in the process of continuOus development.

Insofar as in the nature socialist society the cooperation of the working
class, kolkhoz peasantry and intelligentsia has strengthened and grown and
been raised to a qualitatively new level and insofar as the revolutionary
ideology and morality of the working class, its collectivist mentality and
its interests and ideals are now becoming the property of all strata of

the Soviet society, to that extent the Communist Party—the party of the
working class—is here the colbat vanguard of the whole people, which is
building coanunism. In other words, the social base of the Communist Party
under the conditions of socialism is expanding, reflecting the new social-
class structure of society. But this is not happening at the expense of any
weakening of the revolutionary principles of the working class but on their
granite foundation, which reveals even more strikingly the great meaning of
class goals, ideals and principles of the working class and the increase in
its leading role in the life of society.

Thus it is legitimate to speak of the single social-class, internationalist
essence of the CPSU as the party of the working class also at the stage of
the socialist society's development when it is becoming increasingly homgen-
cous socially and when the deep-lying process of the rapprochement, flowering
and mutual enrichment of the nations on the basis of the new historical
community of people, whose backbone is the working class and its Marxist-
Leninist party, is under way. In other words, having become the vanguard

of the entire people, in the mature socialist society also, we emphasize this
once again, the CPSU remains the party of the working clue. The more so in
that in the world arena it represents an illustrious cowat detachment of

the international con-mist movement, which is in the van of the class strug-
gle of the revolutionary proletariat and the broadest working people's Inases
against imperialist reaction and for peace, democracy and socialism.

me Connunist Party is the political leader of the people and the guiding

and directing force of the socialist society. It would be naive to believe
that the tasks of political leadership of the socialist society become siner
at the stage of its maturity. 0n the contrary, as socialist social relations
develop, in V.I. Lenin words, increasingly great objective possibilities are
created for the organization of social production and distribution on the

basis of science and "in accordance with scientific consideration". But
realization of the possibilities of the conscious, scientific control of so-
cial production and all other social processes in accordance with theobjectivs

2010

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
laws of social life is, as Lenin pointed out, a task of gigantic complexity.
"...M understanding of such a truth," he wrote, "contains the entire diffi-
culty of Marxism and its entire strength.“

This is why in formulating its economic and social policy our party pays such
great attention to a refinement of the economic mechanism and the control of
socioeconomic processes under current conditions. The documents of the 26th
CPSU Congress, the CPS!) Central Conittee decree "A Further Improvement in
the Economic Mechanism and the Tasks of -.hhe Party and Stats Authorities" and
the CPSU Central Conittee and USSR Council of Hinisters dezres "An Improve-
ment in Planning and the Increased Impact of the Economic Hechanism on an
Increase in Production Efficiency and Work Quality" outline big tasks for

an improvement in economic control in order that it correspond in full to
the requirements of the stage of mature socialism.

The CPSU is endeavoring to ensure that the Soviet society fmction as a well--
tuned clock mechanism, that the entire mechanism of realization of economic
laws operate efficiently, smoothly and precisely and at all levels, in all
components and in all spheres of our social life, mreover, and that each
Soviet person know his tasks in his area of work and successfully accomplish
them, see current and long-term problems and be able to tackle knowledgeably
the tasks of economic, sociopolitical and cultural development confronting
him, the group to which he belongs and the entire country.

Our entire ideological and ideological-political work is called on to play
a tremendous part here. Our goal, which was signposted by the 26th party

congress, is to achieve in practice the unity of ideological-theoretical,

political-education, organizing and economic work.

Summing up what has been said, we emphasize once again that the documts of
the 26th party congress, primarily the CPSU Central Co-ittee Report delivered
by Comrade L.I. Brezhnev, afford us an opportmity to understand that our
movement toward comunism is being accowlished "via the stage of the de-
veloped socialist society" and that this is a "necessary, logical and his-
torically lengthy period in the coming‘into being of the commist formetion."**
This conclusion is of tremndous theoretical and practical significance

for whereas it is possible to arrive at socialism having bypassed capitalism,
it is impossible to arrive at co-unism having bypassed socialism.

A Haradst-Ieninist analysis of developed socialism presupposes its investi-
gation from the angle of Harrist-leninist teaching on formations and the
ascertainaent of the general regularities of socialist building and their
distinctive manifestation in different comtries. As the aggregate experience
of socialism shows, there are particularly many sharp differences here in

the transitional period from capitalism to socialism for the movement toward
socialism begins under the most varied socioeconomic and cultural conditions.

____.______._——r—————

*VJ. Lenin, "Complete Works, ' vol 36, p 38 .
**"Hateria1 of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 78.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Increasingly such that is cornea and sinilar, however, appears in all spheres
of social life as socialise develops. and at the stage of its maturity, when
socialise develops on its own basis, on the basis of socialist production
relations, the for-er sharp differences no longer exist. In our country the
problea of equalization. of the levels of the socioeconoaic and spiritual de-
velopment of the peoples has already been solved. in the nain; currently,
under the conditions of nature socialise. the accelerated cowletion of these
processes based on the general upsurge and high econoaic and sociopolitical
dynanics in under way.

In revealing the advantages of the new eyetea it is necessary, strictly speak-
ing, to compare not capitalism and socialise but capitalism and the co-sunist
formation with regard for its highest phase. Nonetheless, . aocialisa's in-
disputable ddvantages over capitalism are perfectly obvious even now. These
advantages are the source of our optimism and firm confidence in the triuwh
of columnist ideals.

Practical realization of the mpificentprogran put forward by our party at
its 26th congress will contribute to the further upsurge of our notherland,
the increased well-being and culture of the Soviet people, the strengthening
of the cause of peace worldwide and new successes of social progress in this
world. The CPSU has the truest cowass, tested by life, whose needle merr-
ingly signposts the arterial novel-eat toward colmunisn. This is the great
Marxist-Leninist science. the powerful instrument of knowledge and the re-
volutionary transformation of the world and the great science of winning. It
is the dependable foundation of the activity of the CPS!) and all the frater-

nal parties.

Loyally and unswervingly following this teaching and its creative developmt
with reference to present-day tasks is the basis and guarantee of the suc-
cesses of the Soviet people, all the socialist countries and the entire
international couunist novenent both in the present and in the future.

'M.A. Prokof'yev, minister of education of the USSR: "The 26th CPSU Congress
and the Tasks of an Inproveaent in the Ideological-Political, Occupational
and Moral Training of Schoolchildren"

The school is of great significance in the nolding of the younger generation.
The transition to coapulsory universal secondary education is under way in
our country; an increasingly large nuber of students (there will be llo-llo.5
million of them by 1985) attends extended-day groups in which the appropriate
educational and training progral is provided for then; the achooldhildren's
organized recreation coabined with work of which they are capable in the
sunset vacation period is being further developed (it extends to 24-25 mil-
lion persons annually).

The Commist Party sets the Soviet teaching body ever increasing tasks.

This was reflected in the CPSU Central Comittee decree "A Further Ilprovenent
in Ideological and Political Education" and was heard at the 26th CPS!) Congress.
The USSR Ministry of Education Board and the General Educational School Coun-
cil attentively discussed the tasks ensuing from the decisions of the 26th
party congress and drew up the corresponding plans. Parmunt sinificance
‘ in these is attached to a further strengthening of the ideological-political

206

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
education of the students. Every school student should be aware of. in a
torn that is intelligible for him, the neterial of the 26th CPSU Congress. A
special nethods letter was issued concerning the organization of such work by
way of conversations with students of different grades on subject nutter
connected with the naterial of the congress, the inclusion of this naterisl
in the nain courses and «travel neasures. The special aib "For the School
Student Concerning the 26th CPSU Congress" and the corresponding nethods hook
for the teacher are to be pnblidned in 1981.

Shortly after the promulgation of the 0280 Central Co-dttee decree "a Further
Improvement in Ideological and Political Bducation,” a specially organised
teachers' conference was held in Kasn' which on the basis of seem-slated
experience fornulsted reco-sndations for study in the school of the works

of v.1. Lenin and the nest inortant party and govern-ant docusnts. 'l'hese
recs-endations point. inter alia, toward the in-depth study of Lenin's works
which are intelligible to the students and caution against thoughtleesly
extending hhe list thereof.

It is extraordinarily inportant to increase the ideological-political aspect
in study‘of the hunanities and the natural sciences and to sake the fullest

use of the possibilities of each sdaject for the shaping of a Haraist-beninist
world outlook.

The successful realization of the scheduled plans naturally depends on the
teacher. Great attention is paid to liarsist-Leninist education in the pro-
cess of the training of yomg teachers in the WZ's. But th-x- knowledge ac—
quired during studies not be renewed and replenished in the process of work.
A course on topical problem of Marxist-Leninist theory and CPSIJ policy has
been introduced in the teacher-inprovelent institutes, where every teacher
undergoes the appropriate retraining once every 5 years, as a rule, for
everyone. irrespective of special abject. The lbscow teachers' initiative
"higher Political Education for Every Teacher" has also been taken up by other
teaching groups. With every passing year there is an increased nusber of
teachers who have coupleted universities of Haraisn-Leninisn or are being
trained in then.

A special council for the inprovsnect of the ideological-theoretical training
of teaching personnel has been set up under the USSR Ministry of Education.
The comcil heard reports on the organization of the teachers' ideological-
political training in different parts of the country (in Stavropol'skiy Kray,
the Lithuanian SSR, the Chuvashskaye A881! and elsewhere) and approved
Stavropol'skiy Kray's experience of the creation of schools of scientific
co-nunisn for the teachers. Discussion of the curricula and syllabi of these
schools has shown that. given the appropriate finishing touches and with
regard for the experience of other republics. trays :and oblasts, this form
could be recornended for extensive use in the political education systen.

The ministry's work plan provides for further study, collation and dissemina-
tion of the experience of the ideological-theoretical training of teaching

personnel and the organization in teaching journals and UCHITKL'SKAYA GAZB‘I‘A
of perment heads in assistance to teachers conducting theoretical seninars

207

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and those studying independently liardst—Leniuist theory and the nsterial of
the 26th party congress. In 1982 the USSR Ministry of Bducatiouplans to conduct
an all-mien scientific-practical conference on the ideological-theoretical

education of teaching personnel in the liat of the decisions of the “6th
CPS“ Congress.

At the sane tine there is such that renaina in need of gprovenentiinthe
organization of tuition and political education inthe e 001. Forulien in
learning is proving difficult to overcoIe, and a depend‘lebridge is far
fron always being laid between learning and practical conclusions refracted
in behavior and in the attitude toward studies and work. Converting knowl-
edge into conviction is a cowlax process requiring efforts and patience on
the part of the tutors. The reaction of the tutor-teachers to the nistéen
viewc of certain schoolchildren is not always correct, and "exposure" often
prevails over persuasion. Individual work with the juveniles is often not
performed. ﬁnch has to be done to do away with these ehortconings.

The traditional August teacher conferences should nobilixe the schools‘. teach-
er groups for fulfillment of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. It
would be advisable at these conferences' plenary sessions to hear a general
political report on the 26th CPS" Congress and the tasks ensuing fro. its
decisions and Conrado l..I. Breshnev's report thereat and also the report of .
the leader of the public education departnent with an analysis of the results
of the past year cud concrete nasures to fulfill the party's targets in the
sphere of public education.

The naterisl of the 26th CPSU Congress. the CPS!) Central Conuttee and USSR
Comcil of Ministers decree "A Further Tmrovennt in the Tuition and Train-
ing of General Bducational School Students and Their Preparation for "or "
(1977) and also the citizens' letters contain ctiticisn of the school curri-
cula and textbooks and note their increased conplexity. It is essential to
rectify the situation.

A great deal of work has been done in the last 2 years on a critical reexami-
nation and adjustsent of the school curricula. It has been decided to intro-
duce in then as an integral part certain didactic advice and pedagogical
requirenents. These include such inortant ones as "Principal Requirements
of Knowledge and Ability," which are designed to orient the teacher toward
precisely the questions on which it is necessary to concentrate special atten-
tion in order to consolidate knowledge in the pupil. We are eudeavoring to
nuke the curricula a pennant duct-ant for the teacher. It will be neces-
sary to ex-ine the published curricula attentively at the August teacher
conferences, and they will be taken into consideration in work in the 1981-
1982 academic year.

Old textbooks are being enended and new ones are being created. Textbooks
should be brought into line with the curricula. But this will take sone tine.
The nein line of the finishing touches snot-Its to increasing, on a level
intelligible for the schoolchildren, the ideological concentration of the
naterial and ‘its connection with the processes observed' in life and, con-
sequently. to increasing the polytechnicnl thrust of the textbooks. We trust
also try to prevent overburdening the textbooks with specific terninology for

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a given science. In sons of them an understanding of the essence of important

processes is clothed in such archcosplex scientific language that additional
efforts are required to simply Mar the ter' .

The most appreciable changes are occurring in the oath course. Although
there are serious approaches to the study of oath in the school, it has to be
adaitted that the textbooks are unduly for-sliced. Certain grades (the sixth
and the ninth, for enmle) in the ens sduool will evidently switch in the
1982-1983 acadenic year to tuition in accordance with the 11C textbooks.

It is well brown that the entire process of tuition and training in the school
cannot be reduced to presenting intonation and the pupils' acquiring and
assinilating knowledge. It is iwoasible to teach a person, even less, a
young person by information alone to act in accordance with thedelands of
society and the principles of cmist morality and to cultivate in him
stench, conscious convictions. It is inortant that the educational process
be conbined with lduorsnd socially useful activity, in accordance. of course.
with the student's age.

The school'.s role in occupational training grows under the conditions of uni-
versal compulsory secondary education. A great deal of work has been done
with the help of the party and state organizations on improving the students'
occupational training and vocational guidance. the creation of the necessary
physical plant of the school workshops and the lore than 2,000 industrial-
training centers and the enlistment of a large number of experienced personnel.

He often imply in our practice by occupational training suerely the acquisition
of certain occupational skills at work classes. But we must not be confined
to this. There is also a decent mater of occupational classes in the vocation-
al-technical schools. for example, and professional tuition is organized quite
well. But the problem of occupational training hm by no Ileana been done

away with. It is a nore complex matter than that. The entire process of
tuition and training should be geared to the mlding of a responsible atti-
tude toward work and industriounness. The system of neasures whose prin-
cipal ments are rationally organized educational work, well-arranged
self-education in the school, a cotination of work of which one is capable-
and recreation in the sunset vacation period and, finally, handwork classes
(properly speaking, occupational training) is designed to contribute to this.

The fostering of occupational qualities begins with each pupils' thorough per-
formance of his educational duties. It is to this that we need prinarily to
direct the attention of both the teachers and the pioneer and Koseonol organ-
izations and the-public.

An important element of occupational training is self-help and service of
one's group. The-observance of sanitary-hygiene practices in the school is
primarily a matter for the pupils thenselves. Self-help should not be re-
garded as a purely economic function. Every student should feel: "The
school is my home. I must keep order in it".

209

FOR OMCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The schoolchildren have a long our vacation, from 10 to 16 weeks in prac-
tice. .Nny young boys from the junior and niddle grades spend tine in out-

of town pioneer canps or cams organized mder the auspices of the school.

They allocate an unforgivably smell .ount of tine to occupational netters.
Together with the trade union and Ko'onol organisations the 0388 Ministry of
Education must sqhetically rectify matters. Work and recreation canps for .
the senior students have becone widespread. The successes lust be consolidated
and the quality of the occupational nattera inproved. Collective labor,
socially useful labor, is a great educator. This business is no less import-
ant than the handwork classes.

Rationaliy organized handvork classes are intended to and can influence prin-
arily the direction of vocational guidance in accordance with the requirements
of the national economy. Such influence is as yet imufficient. The fact that
the percentage (below 50) of graduates connecting their future path with

work or training in accordance with the school occupational guidance special-
ty is still snail testifies to this. An imrovenent in vocational guidance

is connected with the development of the industrial-training centers (UP!)—
the best form of the organisation of the schoolchildren's occupational train-
ing at this stage. It is proposed to increase the under of m by a further
1,000 in the 11th Five-Year Plan. It is necessary to bring the UPK's special-
ization nore into line with national econonic requiremts, inrove the

quality of their work and increase their educative inset on the schoolchildren.
Implementation of all these measures in a complex will be realization of the
targets of the 26th party congress with respect to an inrovenent in the '
younger generation‘s occupational training.

It is essential in work on vocational guidance to take into consideration the
picture of the distribution of the youth stress which is actually unfolding.
Let us trace the fate of the generation which started school in 1975. Some
5,009,000 children were accepted in the first grade at that tine. In 1983
they will complete the eidlth grade, and in 1985 the nsjority of then will
couplete the 10th grade. Calculation show that approximately 50 percent of
then will replenish various occupational schools, approximtely 20 percent
will enter secondary specialized educational institutions, approxinately 10
percent will enter “12's and the renainder (roughly 20 percent) should enter
the national economy directly.

The eipificsnce of the close connection between the school and the vocation-
al-technical collaege is growing. Practice has accmlsted many good exanples
of their joint work which th». USSR Ministry of Education and the USSR State
Cornittee for Vocational-Technical Education are endeavoring to encourage

and disseminate in every possible way. But the problen has not been solved
conpletely. Efforts should be of a two-sided nature. The school has an
important role in this two-sided process. It consists of the appropriate
organization of occupational instruction and work on vocational guidance. the
school collectives' constant contacts with the college collectives and the
joint discussion of ways and nethods of improving general educational prep-
aration and occupational training.

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Not all agree with the above-stated position concerning ways to inrove occu-
pational training. The congress' nil and press publications set forth dif-
ferent viewpoints also. ’

One such is directed against the UPI, which allegedly only here matters,
attenpt to provide inadequately prepared people with professional qualifica-
tions and inpede the staffing of the vocational-technical schools. But, first,
the UP! do not give out worker grades, this is done only by skilled co-is-
sions of the enterprise, and they are given 'only to the lost well-trained
schoolchildren. Second, it is hardly possible to solve questions of occupa-
tional training and vocational guidance in the abstract. Such s liquidation-

ist viewpoint appears to us mistaken and contrary to party decisions concern-
ing the school.

Another viewpoint anomts to the fact that it is neceOsary to convert the
occupational polytechnical school into a nonotechnical school. As an article
claim, the school could be financially autononom, earning fron the work of
the trainees up to R10 billion annually. To take certain progressive exper-
ience as the reference point, such a school could allegedly train workers far
lore quickly than the vocational-technical schools, and this would cost six-
seven tines less. So, not a polytechnical but nonotechnical school respons-
ible for the nanufscture of products and not the fornation of people. It is
not a new view. Such a viewpoint was in the past devastatingly assailed by
v.1. Lenin. Such pseudodiscoveries hardly need to be popularized in the press.
Such publications not only do not do any good but are essentially harnful.

Schoolteachers must now provide the pupil not only with a certain level of
knowledge stipulated by the curricular and shape hit as a personality but
also help hin realize his plans in life and deternine his place in social
production, where he nay be of the axiom benefit to society and nest fully
satisfy his personal interests and aptitudes.

In the 10th Five-Year Plan the school was reinforced with an almost 800,000-
strong detachment of young specialists trained in the teacher-training insti-
tutes and schools. Particular attention was paid here to providing the high
schools with qualified personnel. Work on raising the teachers' qualifications
has asst-led considerable proportions. he newly instituted high title of
“USSR People's Teacher" was conferred for the first tine on 25 teachers.

However, there are still my shortconings which need to be eradicated in

the training of teadners and raising their qualifications and, priaarily, in
aning then with the loans and -thods of educational work. It is planned

to step up the training of specialists, particularly with secondary pedagogical
education. Educational work mthods instructor-specialists will be trained
first by way of experinent and subsequently, we hope, more extensively. It
should be borne in nind that approxinately ”0,000 regular tutors currently
work in the country's schools. But their training is often below the standard
required today. '

Comrade L.l. Brezhnev rightly observed at the 26th party congress that the
demands on the teacher are growing continuously. lie pointed to the need for

an attentive attitude toward the teacher's work, his life and everyday exist-
ence and an inproveaent in his qualifications. Measures are being planned

21].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to inrove the work of the Teacher-Inprovensnt Institute. Schooltsacher-
isprovesent faculties have been opened in a nuder of teacher-training instio
tues and mivsrsities. Sons 15- subscription nethods libraries for different
categories of teachers will be prepared and pdalished in the 11th Five-Year
Plan. 'bhny ninistries and departunts have deternined seasures for assisting
schoolteachers in the echoolchildren's occupational instruction, including

:he ministries of lidnt industry, agriculture, railways, coal industry and food
ndustry.

The 0331! Ministry of Culture has enlined the question of how with the re-
sources of art to better propagandise the creative work of the teacher and
drawn up a nude: of rsconnndations. Many lparty connittees end soviets are
adopting the necessary neasures to assist die teachers (particularly the
yomgsr generation) in the nor-s1 organizat on of their life and everyday
existence. .

However, there are also quite a few negative facts in this respect also, tn-
fortunately. Here are a few examples fron!recent nail. Bryanskaya Guest's
"Vlast' sovstov" Kolkhos allocated teachers .an apartnent in a house that had
not been mleted. It had only just been cowpleted, and an order followed
for the apartment to be assigned the veterinary assistant caning to the kol-
khoz. The teachers have been trying for a year, but have been unable to
solve the problen. "A kolkhoz apart-eat," the board replies, "but you are
not connected with the Irollthoz." Preqmntly the teachers are used in the
nest varied work absolutely unrelated to their main duties. In Kirghisia's
Ksntskiy Rayon the Novopolt'rovshiy Rural Soviet obliged the teachers to asks
a list of citizens with previous convictions, drunkerds and also the owners
of notor transport facilities, endowing then with the functions of adnin-
istrative authorities: picking up illegally stored weapons, checking trans-
port papers and so forth. In Gonel'sltaya Oblast's city of Svetlogorsk the
teachers had to collect inforeetion on believers, people with previous con-
victions (who and for what) and other persons. He lust declare an emhstic
struggle against such "local initiatives". They underline the teacher's
authority and hats the cause of the young people's education.

The press and the working people's letters sonetinss raise quite sharply the
question .of the fornl approach to evaluating a school's activity by the pos-
rate percentage. Ihe authors of the letters frequently conclude that such an
evaluation leads to the flourishing of liberalisn and does not contribute to
the inculcation of a responsible attitude toward tuition. It is proposed

that the USSR Ministry of Education work on the determination of objective
criteria of an evaluation of the activity of the teacher and the teaching
collective. "hat is our position on this question?

Evaluating the work of the peachsr end the teaching collective solely by the
pass-rate percentage would be wrong. The school not only teaches but edu-
cates also. The ideological-political clisate in the collective and the
fostering of lofty civic qualities in the pupils are an inportent indicator
of the school's activity. It cannot be evaluated by an arithmetical grade.
It is senifested in the social activity of the teachers ad students, in
their understanding of their duty, in the attitude toward events in the coun-
try snd in the world and in much else. But nor should the pass-rate

212

MWLISEONLY
indicator be discarded entirely. Secondary education in our country is con-
pulsory for everyone; there was every reason to introduce it. Given the normal
process of tuition and education, all children (excluding, of course, handi-
capped children) can and should receive it. True, this requires intensive
work both iron the pupil and the teacher. At the sane tine it is necessary

to declare battle against those who take an euier path—undeservedly evalua-
ting with a positive grade those who have not acquired the necessary knowledge.

The education systen will he further developed in the llth Five-Year Plan. The
nutter of students will increase by 2 nillion, the nude: of children being
raised in preschool establuhnents by 3 million and the nde'r of children

of half-board status will increase by 3 nillion.

The workers of the education systen regard the decisions of the 26th CPSU Con-
gress a a fundanental progran of their activity. The Soviet teaching body
represents a big any of ideological workers and is the Lenin Party's depend-
able assistant in propaganda at its ideas and in the struggle for the shining
ideals of the co-nunist future of our great notherland and the ispl‘ssentation
of the historic decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

" V.P. Yelyutin, minister of higher and secondary specialized education of the
USSR: "The 26th CPS!) Congress and the tasks of an leprovsnent in the Student
Youth's Ideological-Political, Occupational and ﬂoral Training"

In the collectives of the higher and secondary specialized school, as in all
the country's collectives, the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress have

evoked a great patriotic and liner upsurge. The professors and lecturers,
students, trainees and all W2 and tekhnikun workers realize with all respons-
ibility that each task put forward by the CPSU congress is also a task of the
higher and secondary specialised school, which is called on to prepare per-
sonnel capable of the successful inplenentation of the namificent'plans of
the party and the people.

The party's policy of the intensification-of the econouy and the integration
of science and production is naking increased denands on the entire activity
of the VUZ's and tekhnikuns and, particularly, on the quality of the profes-
sional training and the level of the ideological-political, occupational

and noral education of specialists. In order for these increased denands to
be realized in full there is nuch in the systsn of higher and secondary special-
ized education, as Comrade I..I. Brezhnev emphasized in the CPSU Central Con-
nittee Report to the 26th party congress, which can and needs to be ilproved.
"I refer...," he said, "to the quality of teaching and the strengthening of
ties to production. It is necessary to make fuller use of the scientific
potential of thesVUZ's, which concentrate almost half of our doctors and
candidates of sciences. 1he denand for-personnel of this speciality of

the other is also changing together with the developnent of the econony. And,
consequently, the systen of planning the training of personnel in the “12's
nust react sensitively to these changes."*

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," 1) 60.

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

higher and secondary specialised school, mark a qualitatively new stage in
its development, when the system of education, together with other conponents
of the national scope», is to elbark firmly on the path of intensive develop-
ment. Citing jut the soot general singularities of this stage, it should be
emphasized priaarily that the 1980's will be characterized by a stable and,
as a whole, invariable scale of specialist training. Yet the national econ-
osy's need for personnel will continue to inevitably grow. Consequently,

the hiyuer and secondary specialised educational institutions must now .find
ways to satisfy the country's growing requireasnts through an increase in

the quality of the training and an improvement in the assignment and use of
specialists. ﬁguratively speaking, we are now obliged to train specialists
such that each of then may do the work of two and. sometimes. three people.

me Soviet higher and secondary specialized school has now become a strong
educational-scientific coth exerting a growing influence on all aspects of
the life of the country. Approximately 10 million students and trainees are
currently receiving tuition and 800,000 lecturers and research assistants
are engaged in lecturing and research in 883 higher and 4,383 secondary spe-
cialized educational institutions. Training personnel in 450 specialties and
1,000 specializations, the YUZ's and tekhniklm dispatch their graduates into
all cosponents and all sectors of the national economy. Every year the coun-
try's enterprises and organisations receive a 2 million-strong replenishment
of young specialists, over half of whoa heads for the material production
sphere. This ensures an mswerving ispuovenent in the professional-qualifi-
cations structure of the working people corresponding to society's interests
and requirements. It is sufficient to say that whereas in 1970 there were
196 specialists per 1,000 people in eqloymsnt in the USSR, there are currently
223, and one out of every 10 workers now has higher education. More than
half of all specialists are W2 and tekhniku graduates of the 1970's.

“the higher and secondary specialised educational institutions are progressive
centers of education, com-mist upbringing and the development of science and
culture. There are currently universities and institutes in 340 of the coun-
try's cities, and each large-scale center of population has tekhnikums and
colleges. Preparing a considerdale proportion of the Soviet youth for work
and social life, they also play a leading part in increasing the qualifications
of specialists already at work and in the organization of the continuous edu-
cation of personnel of all elements of the scenery and participate actively
in ideological and cultural-mass work among the population. The VUZ's con-
tribution is no less iupressive in the development of Soviet scientific
thought also.

The main factor of the success of the entire sultifaceted activity of the
higher and secondary specialised school is the co-unist noral fiber and the
high scientific qualifications and teaching skill of the lecturer collective.
The well-organized system of lecturer personnel iaprovement created in the
last decade provides for a continuous isprovement in their professional train-
ing. Thanks to this, in the 10th Five-Year Plan 51 percent of the W2 lectur-
er collectives was composed of lecturers with degrees and academic titles.

21!.

I'D! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The party organizations of the educational institutions, in whose ranks are
67.2 percent of VUZ lecturers, are the nucleus of the-lecturer collectives.
The conbination of party-ulndedness and scientific character in the activity
of the lecturer personnel has converted it into a progressive and authorita-
tive detacluaent of the comtry's scientific-pedagogical intelligentsia.

Nonetheless, it he to be acknowledged that the tasks of an increase in the
efficiency of higher and secondary specialized education are as yet being
tackled more slowly than required by the interests of the intensification of
social production. Legitiaate concern is caused by the fact that while pos-
sessing an approainately 30 million-strong aray of specialists our national
economy is not fully coping with the plan quotes with respect to the aseinila--
tion of new equip-eat and tedmology. The rate of labor productivity growth
also has begun to lag behind the rate of the working people's increased qual-
ifications in recent years. ‘me shortage of personnel in a number of base
sectors of the national econony and areas of the intensive developoent of

the production forces has not been overcome. There is still unevenness in
the level of development of higher education in different zones of the coun-
try. and the VUZ's of Siberia, the North and the Far East continue to exper-
ience an acute shortage of highly qualified lecturer personnel. Despite the
overfulfillnent of the plan quotas for the graduation of specialists, the
plan of their state assign-ant was underfulfilled. He hsve not succeeded in
reducing the mjustifiably long interval of ties separating the scientific
solution of this technical-economic problsn or the other and the introduction
of the data obtained by the scientists in econonic practice.

These and other bottlenecks holding back an increase in the contribution of
the higher and secondary specialised school to the country's progress are the
consequence of a certain inbalance in the functioning of the educational-
scientific and econoaic complexes. A considerable share of the responsibility
both for the eaergence and for the solution of this problea isbome by the
higher and secondary specialized school itself , whose graduates, constituting
the best-trained detadusent of Soviet workers, have a decisive role in the
organization of the activity of all production collectives and the develop-
ment of ways to improve the econodc nechanisa.

Personnel and more personnel, their preparation for work and their attitude—
such is the true key to the intensification of the econony on the basis of
the integration of science and production. It is this which determines the
exceptional urgency of the tasks of an iwrovenent in the ideological-
political, occupational and neural education of the student youth- for the level
of consciousness and life position of the specialists determine their pro-
fessional and civic character and, consequently, the actual labor contribution
of V02 and tekhnikun graduates. And it is for this reason that the success
of the entire struggle for the increased efficiency of education and its
increased role in socioeconodc and scientific-technical progress now largely
depend on successes in couuniet education.

The WZ's and tekhnikusa are struggling to build cos-amiss, tackling socio-
ecomnic problem with the resources of tuition and education and molding
commist-ninded, highly qualified personnel. It is natural, therefore, that

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE 0Nl.Y

the collectives of the higher and secondary specialized school have inter-
preted‘particularly responsibly the conclusion concerning the increased role
of education in comist building formulated in the CPS!) Central Co-Iittee
decree "A Further Iwrovement in Ideological and Political Education".

Guided by a comrehensive approach to educationslwork, the lecturers and public
organizations of the educational institutions have in recent years done much
to increase the efficiency and quality of all areas of the educational pro-
cess. The development of an integral system of the teaching of the social
sciences has been completed in the VUZ's, thanks to which future speicalists
at all stages of V02 training assimilate the theory of scientific co-nmism,
constantly broaden their sociopolitical outlook and study the works of K.
Marx. P. Engels and V. I. Ienin, CPS!) doctnsents and the works of L.I. Brezh-
nev and other party and state leaders in depth. The syllabi and textbooks

on the social sciences have become more conect and apposite, and their con-
tent is concentrated on the urgent tasks of co-mist building.

Ihe ideological-political conditioning of future specialists is organically
combined with-their occupational training. The students' main work is academ-
ic, and for this reason a place of paramount imrtmce is assigned occupa-
tional training in the educational process. This is promoted by an isprove-
ment in the teaching, the utmost stimulation of studies and the introduc-
tion of progressive technical facilities in the-educational process. There
has also been a considerable improvement in the use of the great educational
potential ofnthe enlistment of the student youth in scientific-technical
creativity. It is sufficient to say that approximately 2.5 million students
currently participate in scientific research.

An important school of occupational training is production practice, in the
course of which the students master a profession, working alongside workers
of the foremost enterprises and establishments of the national economy. A
leading place in the trainee youth's occupational training is occupied by
the student detachments. in whose activity over 800,000 yomg men and women
participate annually. 'lhe scale and importance of the economic tasks being
tackled by the detachments, the organic costination of productive labor with
mass-political work and the students' extensive independence in the organize-
tion oflsbor and social life in the detachments—all these have made them

an effective instrulnnt of the occupational and political conditioning of the
new specialist shift.

The W2 and tekhniku collectives are striving purposefully for the fusion of
ideological-political and ocupational training with moral training,
contributing in every possible way to ensuring that the students' and
trainees' knowledge in the sphere of the theory of Marxism-Leninism develop
into profound convictions and asserting the principles of a mist attitude
toward labor as an iuutable moral norm determining the entire way of life
of the student youth. The main element here is an increase in every possible
way in the authority of honest and conscientious academic work and the con-
solidation in the educational collectives of an atmosphere of a genuine
struggle for knowledge. A decisive factor of success is the inseparable
unity of word and deed in the practice of tuition and education. the reliance
of aural education on the plblic opinion of the collective, the extensive use

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in education of the force of crawls and the utmost development of the public-
political assertiveness of the student youth.

This is why the social profession faculties andyoung lecturer schools, public-
political practice and the Lenin Credit Test and the international friend-
ship clubs have becone an irreplaceable support in moral education. Con-
tributing to the cultivation of an active life position, these and other form
of com-mist education help the future specialists enter the couple: art

of the organizer and educator in the production collectives. inculcate in
then the skills of mess-political work and contribute to their mderetanding
of the meaning and significance of the struggle for columnist norality as an
important instrunent of the reorganization of social life on the principles

of commniem.

The developnent and enrichment of the content, for: and methods of education
in the higher and secondary specialised school required a strengthening of
scientific leadership of the educational process. For this purpose unifor-
oolprehensive long-tern plus of the co-unist education of the student

youth based on the entire peripd of the instruction of the future specialists
were developed on the basis of the experience of the country's foremost VUZ's
and tekhnikuls and introduced everywhere in the 1970's. Implementing a com-
preheneive approach to education, these plans provide for the close interb
connection of different areas of educational work and continuity in its content
and methods at each stage of the specialists' training and envisage the con-
centration of educational neaeures on the key tasks of the student youth's
ideological, occupational and civic development.

The integrity and efficacy of the system of columnist education in the higher
school are ensured by party leadership of the ideological life of the education-
al institutions. In the course of inlementation of the CPSU Central Com-
mittee decrees "Work in the lbscow Higher Technical School Imeni NJ. Batu-In
and the Saratov State University Ineni 8.6. Chernyshevskiy on Raising the
Ideological-theoretical Level of the Teaching of the Social Sciences" and

"A Further Improvement in Ideological and Political Education" and the CPSU
Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers decree "The Further Develop-
ment of the Higher School and the Increased Quality of the Training of
Specialists” the party comittees increased their attention to the work of

the social science departments. the for-nation of Ko-omol activists and the
implementation ofeducational measures in out-of-school hours. The ranks of
oo-unist-etudents are being strengthened. An increasingly important part is
also being played by such a coweratively new area of party leadership of
education as the selection and organization of the work of student academic
group lecturer-curators. were this task is being tackled at the proper level,
the orgmic unity of the teaching and educational processes is guaranteed in
practice, and the daily and multifaceted contacts of the lecturers and stud-
ente exert a salutory influence on the development of the future specialists'
ideological, practical and civic qualities.

Organisation-of the in-depth study and propaganda of the decisions of the 26th
CPSU Congress is currently the leading element and core of educational work
in the 702's and tekhnikune. Making the ideological riches fornulated by the

217

l-‘OlOFFIClALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

congress the property of each lecturer, each student and trainee and each
worker of the V112 and tekhnikul and conveying than to the minds and hearts of
each nasber of the nultinillion-etrong collective of the higher and secondary
specialized school-«his is the nucleus of the educational program of the
educational institutions, guided by which they will organize ideological

work in the llth five-year period. In order for this work to be directed
into a single channel and for its naxim. efficiency the appropriate nethods
instructions have been issued for the VUZ's and tekhnikuns determining the or-
ganization and ferns of the study of the material of the party congress and
syllabi and instructional literature on the social sciences are being revised.
These and other measures will make it possible to assinilate the congress'
documnts and decisions conprehensively and in depth and to be guided by then
in the ideological, teaching-educational and scientific research activity of
the educational institutions, their study, propaganda and fulfillment being
organically conbined.

The higher and secondary specialised school has accuaulated vast experience
of the columnist education of the student youth. This nukes it incuﬂent
upon it to approach in a greatly critical spirit the exposure and removal of
existing shortcomings and bottlenecks in educational work, pointing to which
Conrade I..I. Brezhnev observed that "among certain young people education and
knowledgeability sonetines coexist with political naivete and professional ‘
training with an insufficiently responsible attitude toward work."*

' Speaking of the reasons for the mfinishsd business in education, we should
put in first place an underestimation of the changes in the character of

the younger generation which have occurred in recent years. It is a question
of the fact that the process of the rise in the people's nterial and cultur-
al living standard. which is salutary as a whole (and the consequences of
this process in the youth environment are perceived both earlier and note
strikingly than in the consciousness and behavior of other strata of the
population), the high level of our youth‘s general development and the ever
increasing flow of diverse infomtion have made appreciably nore coaplicated
both the objective and subjective conditions of educational work in the higher
and secondary specialized educational institutions.

Today's young generation gets, figuratively speaking, its :knowledge of the
clashes with the class eneny of the 1920's and the burdens of the war and

the first postwar years from the bookshelf—it knows only from a distance:
those who with blood and deprivations defended and established socialisn.

This is why the higher and secondary specialised shcool, as the country's
other educational establishnents also, has in the next few years to inplenent
a well-considered systen of neasures on the reorganization of a whole nuiaer
of inportant areas and spheres of ideological work with the future specialists
ensuing fron the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

Our priority task is an increase in the effectiveness of ideological-political
education. For this it is necessary for the teaching of the social sciences

*"ﬁterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 67.

218

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and all educational work among the students and trainees to face the complex
political. econosic and noral prohl-s of present-day life and the acute ques-
tions of the ideological struggle sgsimt views alien to socialists. Aggres-
siveness. assertiveness and a realistic approach and a close connection .uich
the political. econeuic and social tasks of the dayusuch are the features
which should impart efficacy and persuasiveness to the teaching of the social
sciences.

A leading role in the increased ideological-political training of the student
youth rightly belongs to the social science lecturers. Responsible for the
ideological appearance of the new shift of the Soviet intelligentsia. they
should stand out anong lecturers of other disciplines in their pedagoch
skill, have high political culture and know the art of persuasion to perfection
Measures are currently being iqlsesnted in a package in the liﬂnt of these
tasks for an inprovenent in the selection of university applicants for the
philosophy. history of the CPSU. political scone-y and scientific counties
specialties. a refinement of graduate work in these specialties and also
for strengthening of the role of the social science lecturer isprovenent
institutes as active centers of the collation and disseeination and the pro-
gressive experience of co-unist education.

Much has been and is being done. A highly skilled collective of lecturers

of Harriso-Ieninisn. approximately 60 percent of whoa are doctors and candi-
dates of sciences, professors and assistant professors, has taken shape in the
higher school as a whole. But the rate of ilprorvensnt of the conposition of
she social science departeents is still lagging behind available potential.
Shortcomings in the selection of personnel. when, despite the-fact that a con-
siderable proportion of graduates of the leading universities and graduate
students even in the social sciences remain without an official usigumbn
these departments in any centers of higher schooling are frequently filled
by people lacking specialized training, serve as an inedieent. And there are
currently 10.000 such teachers out of the 32,000 in W2 social science depart-
ants.

High political culture is a general requireeent of all VIII and tekhnikue
lecturers. each of when is obliged to reveal the world-outlook problem of
his discipline free the standpoints of Marxisrbeninies and explain to the
student youth the CPSU's domestic and foreip policy. Nor can we forget the
determining role perforaed in the upbringing of future specialists by the
personal emlelof the lecturer. particularly the purveyor of the profession
which the young person is teetering.

Proceeding froa this, purposeful work is being perforeed in the hitter and
secondary specialized school on a rise in the ideological-theoretical level
of all lecturer personnel. The training of graduate students-ofuture W2
lecturers-4n the sphere of the theory of Ilerxise-beninisa and urgent problems
of the eethodclogy of science has been intensified in recent years. lecturers
of all disciplines are supplenenting their Marxist-Denim“ education in in-
proveesnt faculties. The training of W2 and tekhniku lecturers in univers-

ities of Marxian-Lenin“ is being stepped up in every possible way. In
any educational institutions. like the Moscow State University. the Moscow

".19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I-‘K‘IAI. USl-Z Oh LY

Higher Technical School ineni ILE. Beulsn end others, where the perty co-it-
tees heve set the tesk of politicel education for every lecturer, the absolute
enjority (more then 90 percent) of pedagogicel workers hes elreedy completed
s full course of instruction in the universities of Herxisn-heninisn. In
eccordence with the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress, it is plenned to
continue to perfect the ideologicel training of the lecturer personnel.
linking it lore closely with the current tests of the education of the student
youth.

The perty's policy of en increase in the efficiency and quality of work re-
quires en inprovenent in the vocetionel trsining of the future specieliste
end the strengthening of educetion's ties to production. In the lidnt of
this it is plenned to psy perticuler ettention to en inproveeent in vocetionsl
end precticel instruction es s Iein fern of the occupetionel conditioning of
the students end treineee. The revision of the stenderd sylldbi ad pro-
grens of studies which is currently under wey end which is being conducted on
the hesis of the quelificetion cherecteristics of epecielists rsvseling the
densnds ends by production on their knowledge. skills end shilitiee is sub-
ordinated to the professionsliretion of educetion. The precticel propels
being newly forenleted envisege end: future specielist of the engineer-
technicel end other fields ecquiring e worker's occupetion in the educetionel
institution. It is elso neosesery to increese discipline in the orgenizetion
of precticel instruction end put an end to the use of students end treinees
in ell kincb of euxiliery operetion, which ere frequently currently substi-
tuted for serious work in the field of the specielty being studied. To en
increesingly lerge extent the VIJZ'e will shift the finel stege of the per-
sonnel's training to production. This will he served by the work on the
creetion et the enterprises of hreuches of the core depertnsnts which hes
been initieted st the present tine. The future specielists' tiuly usign-nt
to e job, which we heve begun to effect 1-3 yeers prior to the students'
greduetion free the "12. will eleo contribute to their in-depth "ecclinsti-
retion" 5:0 production.

The strengthening of educetion's ties to econoeic prectice is e leeding eeens
of the integretion of science end production. which Colrede l..l. hreshnsv
teresd en urgent den-end of the ere. The seid tesk will he teckled in the
19w‘e hy proceeding free the nein directions of the developmt of scientific
resssrch in the hijter school et the current stegs. which is cherscterised
by the extensive use of the -thod of goel-orlsnted progre. in the plenning
end orgenieetionntscisntific work. the increued coepreheneivensse of scien-
tific abject letter end the concentretion of ettention on the speediest

end extensive introduction in prectice of the results ohteined by scientists.
Even todey e whole ndsr of couprehensive reeeerch progrens in the sphere

of the develop-mt of themil end gee resources of West Siberie. the

crsetion of robots end robot-engineering systeo. energy sevings end with
respect to other inortsnt n‘etionsl econonic prohle. is being developed by
the forces of lerge-ecele scintific collective uniting hundreds of lecturers
end students free dozens of VUZ's. '

A further iqortent tesk of the mist sducetion of the student youth
which should occupy e lore sinificent plsce in the eyllehu of the educetionel
institutions is the further development of the generel culturel functions of

220

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI'OFFICIAL USE ONLY

education and the fornation of the spiritual qualities of the specialists as
representatives of the progressive Soviet intelligentsia. It would be

no exaggeration to say that the education of the specialist as a true intel-
lectual: of the society of mature socialisa is the quintessence of the entire
cause of co-miet education in the higher school. It is a question-of the
unity of the sociopolitical, professional and spiritual nakeup of the m
graduates. and for this reason problem of a world-outlook, ideological
nature are closely interwoven with the tasks of the professional training of
the personnel and its occupational, moral and aesthetic education. The nain
goal is to continue to cultivate our intelligentsia a part of the very flesh
of the working class and kolkhoz peasantry and, inbibing the best traditions
and traits of the Soviet people. ensure that our intelligentsia participate
actively in communist building and tirelessly serve to aultiply the spiritual
wealth of all the people.

In the light of this it is necessary to perforn a great deal of work on an
ilprovement in the content and methods of teaching in the higher and secondary
specialized education systea and a strengthening of its fundaaental and
humanitarian basis. Tha'inculcation in the student youth of a hid: culture

of labor for the purpose of molding in the specialists an ability to organize
their future professional activity in accordance with the lure of aorslity and
beauty should be a stbject of particular concern. And, of course, constant
attention should be paid to the patriotic and international education of the
specialists, the inculcation in than of strong imity to bourgeois ideology
and reformist and revisionist vim and outlooks and the molding of the ability
and aspiration to struggle aggressively against ideas alien to socialise.

In a word, all-encompassing accelerated advance in all areas of the comaunist
education of the student youth is essential.

The effectiveness of com-mist education in the “12's and tekhnikuan is gaged
by the occupational affairs of their graduates. A paramount condition of
successful and creative labor is the rational use of personnel trained by the
higher and secondary specialised school and the precision and justification
of the plan-based leadership of their training and assignaent fully in ac-
cordance with the requirements of the national econony. An improvement in
planning in the training of specialists is also required by the demgraphic
situation which has taken shape and the decline in the growth of labor resour-
ces. In the light of this it is planned to appreciably inrove the nethod-
ology and practice of the plan-oriented control of the training of personnel
and increase the flexibility of plan decisions ulth regard for the long-term
prospects of the develop-ant of production, science, technology and culture.
Particular attention will have to be paid to a: isprovensnt in the use of
personnel directly in production, where. despite the shortage of workers with
hidaer and secondary specialised education. the appoint-ant of specialists

to positions not requiring the qualifications they have obtained is permitted.
This is a big economic, social and ideological problea since the incorrect use
of specialists not only exerts a negative influence on the quality and end
results of their labor but is also reflected in the moral-psychological
clinate in the young intelligentsia environnent. Ihis is why, together with
the development of organizational and plan neasures, party work and a party-
ninded exacting and critical analysis of the work with specialist personnel
in production are essential here.

221

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Student years are anong the lost vivid and valuable periods in a person's
life, when his spiritual and physical forces flourish, his professional calling
is for-ed, his philosophy of life takes shape, his cultural outlook broadens -
and his convictions and noral principles acquire firness. Leadership of

the ideological, labor and soral develop-cut of the student youth is the min
and most responsible business of the teaching collectives of the higher and
secondary specialised school. which are called'on to train specialists worthy
of our ranarkahle era and true educators and organizers of the assess con-
hining profound professional training with an active life position and con-
mist consciousness and conviction with an enterprising, creative approach
,to setters.

The hidter and secondary specialised school will graduate approximately 10
million specialists in the 11th Five-Year Plan. Today's students are to en-
bark on labor in an exceptionally isportant period, when, as pointed out at '
the congress, the national econonic structure will be created with which our
country will enter the no: Iillenniun. This is why this lust he the most
progressive, best-trained and mat convinced generationof specialists in the
country's history. It is fron such standpoints that the columnist education
of the student youth is approached by the W2 and tekhnilun teaching collec-
tives. which organise the entire educational process in the general channel
of the CPSU's activity on ensuring the close unity of ideological-theoretical,
political-educational, organizing and acoustic work.

The professors and lecturers, students, trainees and all workers of the high-
er and secondary specialized school, rallied aromd the Co-mist Party and
its Leninist Central Co-ittee. will exert every effort for the consistent
and unswerving inplensntation of the decisions of the 26th (1’80 Congress and
in order to raise to the level of the party‘s increased require-ants the
quality of the training and co-unist education of specialists.

" 5.x. Tsvigm, first deputy chair-an of the 088! Km: "The Subversive Activity
of the Special Services and Ideological Centers of the Inerialist States
Against the USSR"

I

Under the leadership of the Leninist Co-sunist Party the Soviet people are
working selflessly on inlenentation of the decisions of the historic 26th
CPSIJ Congress.

The congress and the report thereat of Conrade I..I. Brezhnev, general sec-
retary of the CPSU Central Codttee. chair-m of the USSR Suprene Soviet
Presidius and outstanding party and state figure of the present day, revealed
yet another striking page in the heroic annals of mist building and the
struggle for peace and people's happiness and was an inportmt lsndnark in
the history of the party and the Soviet society and an event of treaendous

world-historical signi ficance.

The 26th CPSU Congress convincingly showed once again the people's cohesion
around the Con-mist Party and the mshakability of the unity of the party

222
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ranks. 'nze congress saphasited with treesndoue force the titanic. excep-
tionally fruitful activity to strengthen the economic and defense night of
our ntherland and increase the Soviet people's well-being of that loyal con-

tinuer of Lenin's cause and ardent fighter for co-lnise and peace—Coerade
L.I. Brezhnev.

Soviet Gaekists and border guards, together with the entire party and the
Soviet people, warely approve the results of the 26th CPSU Congress. Conrado
L.I. Breshnev's report and the congress' doctnsnts are engendsring a new
surge of forces and creative energy end an ardent upi'ration to selfless labor
in the naae of the triuph of comics.

The Gxekists are grateful to the CPSU Central “tree. the Central Co-ittee
Politburo and Conrade l..l. Brezhnev personally for the constant attntion to
questions of an iqmvencnt in the attivity of the state security authorities
in accordance with the requirensnts of the class struggle in the international
arena and the present stage of the develop-at of the Soviet society.

The 26th CPSU Congress was also of trensndous significance in the plans of
cowrehension of the couple: problem of the current international situation
and the ideological struggle between states of the two opposite social systses.
As Conrade L.l. Brezhnev pointed out in the report, the current period is
sorted prinsrily by the intensive struggle of the two directions in world
politics. 0n the one hand a policy of curbing the ar- rsca, strengthening
peace and the relaxation of international tension and defense of the sover-
eign rights and freedom of thsgpeoples, on the other, a policy of under-
nining detente, adding a twist to the ar- race spiral, threats and inter-
ference in others' affairs and suppression of the liberation struggle.

The 0883's foreign policy hes invariably been and continues to be of a funda-
mentally class nature. It is ained at strengthning the positions of social-
ise. supporting the forces of the national liberation novenent and social

progress. ensuring peace and the security of the peoples and at preserving
detente.

As is known, there was a sharp exacerbation of the international situation
by the start of the l9m'a throudl the fault of inperialisn, primarily the
United States. The aggressiveness of the inerialist states increased. The
CPSU Central (Io-ittes Report to the 26th party congrsu revealed the deep-
lying causes of this extremely dangerous phenoesnon connected with the pro-
cess of the further intensification of the general crisis of capitalise and
the growth of its profound intrinsic contradictions.

The calculations of the ruling circles of the inperialist countries that
under detente conditions they would succeed in broadening on a greater scale
the opportunities for mdsreining socialise fro- within via the ideological
imact and by way of the implantation of "dissidence" bring ﬂout the
ideological loosening of Soviet society and shake its sociopolitical and
ideological unity were unfounded.

223

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use outv -

Under these conditions the most reactionary inerialist circles headed by
the United States resolved to return to the "free a position of strength"
policy. They truly set themselves the goal of achieving the unattainable--
erecting a barrier in the way of the progressive changes in the world and
restoring to the-selves the role of arbiter of the peoples' fate.

Inerialiat propaganda is attemting to explain the causes of the exacerba-
tion of the international situation by various farbfetchsd protests: the so-
called nilitsry threat on the part of the Soviet Union. its "interference"
in Afdlaniatan, violation of the Helsinki accords and now—support for inter-
national terrorism. But the whole world knows that this is far from being
the case. In the United States the tilt toward an-- vsascerbation of relations
with the Soviet Union began long before the events in Afghanistan. It is
interesting to note in this connection that in the first days of April 1981
the Iloover Institute of Her, Revolution and Peace attached to Stanfordi.
University published a lengthy "study," of almost 900 pages, titled "The
United States in the moon": The purpose of thid publication, which was
prepared by one of the leading centers of anticomsunisn and-lanti-Sovietism in
the United States, was, according to its authors, "to treat and analyze the

min domestic and international problem which will confront the United States
in the current decade."

The anti-Sovietism of the Beijing leaders is joining up increasingly with
inerialist policy. The imperialists are contributing to the provision of
China‘s any with nodern arm and encouraging its hegmsonist designs in re-
spect of adjacent states. The (hinese leaders openly set the-elves the goal
of, as mu RIBAD wrote, "preventing, mdereining and frustrating every-
thing that the Soviet Union is attemting to do in any part of the world.”

R. Reagan's first months as President are reason to believe that he and those
closest to hit: in thee-person of Secretary of State A. haig, Defense Secretary
c. Heinberger, CIA Director U. Casey and other representatives of the U.S.
Administration, which are an instrusent in the hands of the U.S. nilitary-
industrial complex, view the world through the sights of a tank.

we are witnessing the birth of a new Anerican doctrine of the building of
Best-West mutual relations the essence of which is to closely link all aspects
of nutual relations with the Soviet Union in the political, econonic, nilitary
and other spheres with the so-called "line of behavior of the USSR in the
world"? Ignoring the facts of the 0888's huge role in world development, the
Hhite House bosses intend to "warn” lbscow in advance, threatening pmishment
for any actions which do not suit the Heat. In the development of this ad-
venturist doctrine the Pentagon is persistently engaged in the development of
the problem of the influence of military factors on the further development of
relations with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries.

The Reagan Administration links the inlementation of this progra- with a
course ained at underlining detente policy. a rest-ption of the cold war, a
continued arms buildup, confrontation with the Soviet Union, an intensifica-
tion of all for-s of subversive activity and attempts to split theunity of

the socialist countriu and bring about the degeneration of socialist relations
into capitalist relations froe within. '

2210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II

he Reagan Adninistratioh's policy of the encerbation of the international
situation is being acconpanied by a sharp stinulation of all for. of the
secret subversive activity of ieperialisn against the USSR and other socialist
countries. The huge propaganda achinery ad the bitter attacks of interna-
tional reaction are being used in the interests of the realization of the poli-
tical goals and tasks of the reactionary forces of inerialisn. In the con-
frontation with the world of socialise and co-unisn the ruling circles of the
inerialist countries assign an inortsnt role to their intelligence and
other special services. Ihder the conditions of the absence of open eilitary
confrontation these services represent iqsrialisn's nain strike force in
subversive activity against the USSR and other socialist countries.

The current role of the special services in the nechanisn of Ansrican foreign
policy is graphically illustrated by a 0.8. National Security Council direc-
tive, according to which "the government's open foreign policy activity should
be supplenented with secret operations.... Such secret operations will in-
clude, inter alia, propaganda nsasures; political actions; econonic warfare;
preventive subversive operations; sabotage; blowing up important facilities;
the organization of escapes; assistance to underground resistance mvenentsn
partisans and i-igrant resistance groups; support for anticomist elenents
in countries of the free world threatened by coming disinformation and
other seasures contributing to the achimnt of our goals."

This concentrated action program of Alerica's special services is being-sctive-
ly carried out in practice. As described by the American press, secret oper-
ations are divided into two Iain categories. The absolute majority of then
are mall-scale operations regularly carried out by CIA find-post spies in
whatever country. minly through a network of agents. The second category is
a progran of big secret operations directed against the holding or denocra-

tic elections, at the outer of popular regimes, nercenary invasions and ares
and a-Iunition supplies. Incidentally. this direction was snployed most
extensively in the organization hack in 1978 by Aeerican intelligence of the
undeclared war agath the people of Afﬁniatan, which continues to this day.

The leadership of Aeericsn intelligence attaches great significance to the
concealment of secret operations and the murders of political opponents. The
journalist 1.. Gonzales's interview published in the Aeerican PLAYBOY ngsaine
entitled "Hr Death" with a specialist in explosives. poisons and firearm
who had worked with the CIA for approrinately 20 years. developing. on its
orders. methods andueans for sabotage-terrorist activity, is interesting in
this respect. This person declared: "The CIA asked ne to develop sons
nethods and means of physical extermination. Practically everything on which
I worked wu intended for murder. I was involved in the three main esthods
of killing people: special firearm, explosives and poisons. The CIA wishes
to have special neans causing certain death, but without indications that
they were of Anerican production.”

A wave of anger on the part of the world pdalic wn caused by the prolifera-
tion of such secret CIA operations as work in the sphere of thought control.

225

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which includes the use of drugn, hypnosis, electric shock and the deprivation
of sensitivity by various methods to control un's behavior. Many American
convicts and people taken fro- the streets who did not suspect that sinister
experimta would be conducted on than were the victim of these barbaric
acts. Certain Antican panic organization which for:- a coalition which ad-
vocates s new 0.8. foreign policy reported that in the last 25 years the CIA

has put into effect 169 plans for thought control, having sailed hundreds of
people here.

Thus the whole mlu of large-scale neesnres for an isprove-nt in the work
of America's special services being inplenented by the 0.5. Administration is
increasing their role as the nsin strike force of iuperialisn still further.

Occupying a special place in the nechanisa of the inerialist countries. the
special services are under the leadership and control of the heads of state
and government. back at the tins of the election ensign Reagan, for ex-
anple, declared repeatedly that in the event of his election as president.

he would first of all take the lost effective steps to strengthen the United
States' intelligence nechanisn. And whereas nany other of Reagan's densgogic
election promises. nsinly in the social sphere, rennin on paper. in the sphere

of an increase in subversive activity against the Soviet Union he is keeping
his word.

Having asst-ed presidential office, Reagan began to inpleaent a package of
organizational-structural neasures aimed at a considerable increase in the
CIA's role and an extension of its powers and possibilities. Thus there has
been an appreciable increase in the CIA's role in the sphere of the female-
tion and inlenentation of forein policy decisions in the recently estab-
liehed new ayetea o! interdepartssntsl coordination;

It is interesting to note that a well-known reactionary—Sen b. Goldwater—
has becone the new chair-en of the Senate Intelligence Codttee and that
Reagan has appointed CIA director and usiaer of the presidential cabinet one
of his closest collaborators—U. Casey.

In MI Casey was chief of secret intelligence of the theater of military
operations under General Bisenhower. Pros 1969 through 1977 he was a odor
of a whole meter of presidential co-issiom, including a consultative coun-
cil on intelligence. the organisation of foreign policy and others. In his
speech to the special Senate co-ittee Casey declared that he intended to step
up CIA activity in furnishing the United States with intelligence inforntion.
He called for the avoidance of ”new upheavals in the CIA” and for ”linitations
on the activity of the intelligence depertcnt to be reduced to a minim."

Addressing the Senate Intelligence Col-ittoe. Cassy declared that the "Reagan
Mainistration intends to use the intelligence authorities as an effective
instnunent for carrying out its foreign policy acts." lie thssieed that so-
called secret operations abroad would be given priority in the activity of

American intelligence and spoke of his intention to grant the agents sore
rights and powers in carrying out such acts. without having coordinated then
in advance with the central mchinery.

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Following Casey, the leaders of the other special services in the United
States spoke in public at the sign fron the conductor's baton. They all ex-
pressed their thoughts concerning the noet important tasks of the Anericsn
intelligence service for the toning decade. Thus Lt Gen 3. Tigha, director
of the Defense Intelligence Agency, declared that nilitary intelligence had
to streanline its work, react prowtly to the new req‘drenents which are energ-
ing and increase efforts in the evaluation of the USSR's nilitary potential
and ascertainment of its orders of battle and new types of weapons. 3. Innan.
director of the National Security Agency, which deals, nainly, with techni-
cal intelligence, observed that to ensure the best intelligence support for
the highest echelons of both executive and legislative authority it is essen-
tial, es before, to keep in the focus of intelligence activity all questions
of long-tern planning of strategic isportance to the United States. The

array, navy and air force intelligence chiefs expressed theuelvea in the same
spirit.

Following these statenents cane the routine increase in appropriations for
the activity of all subdivisions of Anerican intelligence. The regular per—
sonnel was strengthened by way of the enlistmt of a large nuﬁer of special-
ists in the spheres of international relations, econonics and warfare, and
experienced intelligence agents who had earlier been dismissed were rehired.

The leadership of Anerican intelligence is asking efforts to isprove inter-
action with the intelligence services of other inerialist states. Thus CIA
Director H. Casey visited Japan in harch 1931. During talks with the prine
sinister he discussed, inter alia, the possibility of a stepping up of Japan's
intelligence activity in the Far East and the Southeast Asian countries and
also ways to coordinate the intelligence efforts .of the United States and
Japan in this regim. Oo-enting on the results of the visit, Anerican ob-
servers note that "the first official overseas trip of the new CIA director
even testifies to the Reagan Adninistration's intention to appreciably in-
crease the role of Anericsn intelligence and Casey personally in the for-uls-
tial and inlensntation of 0.8. foreign policy."

Britain is ieproving its intelligence services. financial appropriations for
intelligence needs are increasing fron year to year. The whereas in 1979
they mounted to 36.5 nillion pounds and 53 nillion in 19!). sons 61 nillion
pounds are being allocated in 1981.

West Ger-an intelligence has stepped up its activity considerably. This
espionage departeent'a 25th anniversary was recently solsnnly celebrated “in
Bonn. In a speech on this occasion Chancellor ll. Schaidt aentioned the ser-
vices of Heat Gernan intelligence and declared that the I'llc'e well-being
depends on its activity.

The increased interaction of the work of :the Western countries' special ser-

vices is being accoapanied by an increase in the organizing role of 0.8.
intelligence, particularly in the coordinating centers of NATO intelligence

in London destanbul.

227

“OFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

III

In connection with the military preparations the United States is attempting
to develop its intelligence activity along a broad front, taking advantage of
all legal and illegal opportunities and operating both on the territory of
the socialist countries and in the United States itself and also in third
countries.

A principal fora: of this subversive activity is espionage. Ens-y intelligence
is eating big efforts to collect intonation on the econoaic. political and
noral readiness of the USSR peoples to withstand the possible trials of a
thernonuclear war and a sharply increased ar- race and also intonation of
a political nature on the USS‘R's plans and positions concerning urgent inter-
national probless, relations with-thesocialist and developing countries. the
situation inside our country, relations among the USSR peoples, the popula-
tion's living standard. the work of the party and soviet authorities and pd:-
lic organisations and their executives and the consequences of the neasnmss
adopted by the 0.5. Adainistration to freeze trade-econonic and scientific-
tethnical relations with the Soviet Union.

The eneny attaches particular sipificance to scouting military and industrial
facilities which it regards . priority targets of a nuclear strike. The

intelligence services' interest in a study of the systen of the USSR's inter-
nal security is noted. Anerican intelligence has given its agents the assim-

unt of collecting all infornation on the role and activity of the judicial,
prosecutor's office. state security and internal affairs authorities.

Increased interest is being displayed in the achieveunts of Soviet science
and technology. Ihtelligence is confronted directly with the task of ”not
missing the Soviet Union's possible surprise nave daead in the sphere of
science and technology." Rivalry in the sphere of science and technology,
as an Anerican intelligence officerput it, "is turning ldaoratories and
proving gromds into a nest iqmrtant theater of the intelligence agncies'
operations."

As is Imown, the stations operating under the cover of awassies and other
official representations in the USSR are nests of espionage in our country.
Their intelligence activity increases with every passing year.

The ailitary intelligeme agents. who are endeavoring to obtain data on the
concentration and deploy-ant of ailitary unite, special shipments and other
measures of the USSR Defense Ministry brought about, they believe, by the
events in Iran, Afghanistan and Poland, are particularly active. In seeking
intelligence infomtion visually the United States' nilitery intelligence
officers frequently operate in open violation of the nor- of nave-eat around
the country and photography deternined for foreigners, attemting to pene-
trate closed zones and to facilities of interest to then.

Thus in January 1981 the Anerican ailitary intelligence officers Bolbrooke
and Spencer set off for a tour of the Ukraine. They were dram met to the

republic's western regions. having with then the latest electronic intelli-
gence apparatus, they atteqted with the help of variom swterfuges to

228

POIOFFICIALISEONLY
penetrate areas directly bordering on Poland and to collect information on the
deploynent of our ailitary units and their operations. The intelligence of-
ficers were interested in the state of the rash and their traffic capacity.
But their contenpleted plans were not to be since local residents nede the
foreigners' isperussible actions known to the organs of power.

Giddens and Ira-er, assistant 0.8. air and naval attaches. were recently ar-
rested attemting to carry out visual reconnaissance of s Tashkent plant.
sdasaquently, on a trip to this sea city [Dshetri] and [mkkolin], eqloyeas
of the air sttache's office. ude a flagrant atteqt to carry out a recon-
naissance act: they crossed the city‘s centery, approached the plant well
and clieted over it into the enterprise grounds, whence they were thrown

out by the workers.

Military intelligence agents sake active use of the latest special portable
apparatus in the region of facilities connected with the production and oper-
ation of radio enission system. Despite the failure of an operation using
Electron-type equipment (this was reported in our press), the Anerican sili-
tary intelligence agents have not abandoned the use of the latest technical
intelligence planting resources in places of interest to then. ‘l‘o remind
you: the Electron systen is a neans of radio engineering intelligence which
under a variety of' canouflsges (in the for- of pine tree stun. say) can be
installed at a distance of several kilo-stars fro. the slitting facility

and is capable of intercepting its edssions and than on cos-nd "firing"
this infornation to a satellite or other receiving device.

The special services attach great significnce to a increase in secret

agent intelligence on our territory. Following the exposure of enst spies
in recent years, the artery has been carefully studying the causes of his fai-
lures and taking steps for sore reliable encoding and securing the actions

of his secret agents.

[were that there is no social base for the recruit-ant of agents in the 0881!,
the intelligence officers are gaining on individual anti-Soviet, nationalist
elenents and politically unstable persons or noral degenerates with a bent
for masrned incons and s parasitical way of life.

the sajority of the enesy's recruitnent attenpts ends in failure. But sons-
tises. unfortunately. the eneny succeeds in recruiting sons person or another.
An end was put recently to the espionage activity of Badzhabov, an engineer-
at a Baku institute. This norally corrupt stbject was a heavy drinker. had
- fallen into debt, had never been interested in the political life of the
country, was distinguished by his love of gain and hated everything Soviet.
As part of a tourist group in a European country, he called on the 0.5. Els-
bassy there and asked for help in getting to the United States. During his
talk with an A-srican diplosat Radshabov passed on infer-ation lawn to his
of a political and nilitary nature. But the diploast declared that "travel
to the United States has to be earned" and suggested that Radshsbov cooperate
with Anerican intelligence. he agreed and was recruited. Having stipulated
a nthod of communication, the American. instructed Radahsbov to collect in-
fornation on the situation in the areas bordering Iran and the possible trans-
fer of nilitary units there. Upon his return hone Redshabov set about

229

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fulfilling the espionage assimnents. but was soon exposed and sentenced to -
13 years' imprisoment. Nilov, Pilatov and other agents of Alerican intelli-
gence were also exposed and sentenced.

For sending agents into our country the-enemy sakes active use, as before, of
tourist, scientific-technical and cultural channels. Several foreigners who
had availed themselves of these channels for intelligence penetration were
arrested in 19”, and approx-lately 50 were expelled from the USSR.

The tendency of the eneny to make more extensive use in subversive work agath
our country of foreign specialists engaged in contract supervision at Soviet
enterprises is observed. The mjority of foreign specialists performs its
duties conscientiomly. Busineaslike cooperation, actual mderstanding and
sutual assistance are being established between them and Soviet workers, and
this is contributing to the expansion of the 0388's trade-economic relations
with other countries. But instances have been deterained of agents sent in
among these specialists engaging not only in espionage but also danage to
equipment, the incorrect eesedly of transfer lines and cowents, delaying
the startup of equipnent and so forth.

Thus the Japanese citizen Smuau. who was working in our country as an admin-
istretor of a group of specialists of the Japanese [Toyo] Engineering Corporb
scion, was expelled from the Soviet Union last year for engaging in hostile
activity. lie was involved in collecting intelligence intonation, enlisting
other Japanese specialists in this. Susum had a special questionnaire per-
taining to the collection of econoaic and sociopolitical intonation and

kept a record of the political situation in the USSR and the state of public
_ security, industrial enterprises and various state and public orgmisations.

Major damage to fastening bolts of the frne of a unit aade especially at
the manufacturer-plant which could have led to its breakdown at the-tine of
commissioning were discovered in equip-nt supplied by an American fire.

It should be said that soaetines certain esployees of our sstsblishnents and
enterprises nintain nonbusiness relations with foreigners and notify then of
the Soviet side's interest in acquiring equipaent and raw aaterisls, the
proposals of competing fine and iwending deals. Instances have been re-
vealed of certain Soviet specialists faailiarising foreigners with docmaents
of a secret nature.

Recently the United States, Japan, the m and other NATO countries have been
iapleeenting wide-ranging aeasures to step up technical intelligence. Since
the spring of 1979 the American special services have been using three dif-
ferent visual reconnaissance satellites siaulteneonely—the [Seaos, beep]

and lOlO-which mine it possible to obtain sore accurate photographic data

on area and defense equipnant, the capacity of the enterprises-mufacturing
then, the sites of eilitary facilities and special transportation. There are
data on the start of the U.S.special services' intensive develop-eat of a new
systen of radioelectronic surveillance with the use of artificial Barth
satellites in geostationary orbit. This system is to replace the lost oppor-
tunities for conducting reconnaissance from Iranian territory.

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 0588's state security authorities are also working on putting a stop to
smuggling and currency speculation, which are frequently inspired fron abroad
and connected with the mezslement of state property and the definite econolic
damage inflicted thereby on our comtry.

Attenpts at contraband isports: of concdities from abroad are not abating.
Attents to export from the Soviet Union large sum of Soviet money, precious
metals, works of art and antiquities also continue.

At the end of last year, for exanple, an end was put to the snuggling activity
of two groups headed by Bl'gart, chief of the USSR Ministry of Nonferrous
Metallurgy Worker Supply Athinistration Repository and photographic artist
Presnyakov. Through their accoqlices chosen from a amber of persons with
previous convictions the said persons bought up ancient icons and antiquities
in the USSR and dispatched them with the help of certain diplonats to West
Berlin and the m to antique store owners. The criminals received fron
abroad in the same way Soviet money and industrial couscdities in short sup-
ply for speculation and new purchases of item of contraband. Variom valua-
bles which were ready to be dispatched to the West worth Rl.S million were
confiscated from the smugglers. In addition, 20 home-nade null-caliber pist-
ols fitted with silencers were confiscated.

The investigation into the case of a group of currency smugglers and brilliant
and diamond thieves, who, taking advantage of the inadequate supervision of the
safekeeping of precious stones in thsaproduction process, dazzled 312 mil-
lion worth thereof, concluded in Decoder 19!). In ”the course of the investiga-
tive neasures currency and other valuables worth R7 million, including the
confiscation of 84.5 million worth of brilliants fron Kazakov, the organizer
of these thefts, alone, were rettnrned to the state.

IV

Provocations against Soviet establishment and citizens abroad remain active
for-s of the subversive activity of the imperialist: states' special services.

Soviet citizens are worthy representatives of their motherland in the capit-
alist world. For the purpose of creating difficulties for Soviet establish-
nents and citizens abroad the special services of the imperialist states and
certain developing countries of a pro-Rest orientation continue to inspire
charges against them of their engaging in imperniuible activity. Thus in
March-start of April 1981 such actions were carried out against workers of
Soviet establishments-‘11} Norway, the Netherlands, Spain, Austria, Iran,
Nigeria and Liberia.

A for. of hostile work against Soviet citizens abroad performed by the special
.services of the enemy, primarily the United States and Britain, is atteqts to
recruit them and persuade then into not returning to the motherland. lime

in March 1981 in London the British special services nade an attempt to
recruit a technician of the USSR Messy in Britain. In February the Ameri-
can special services attempted to persuade V.V. Belyayev, an employee of the
UN Secretariat in New York, not to return to the mtherland.

231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The galvanization of activity against Soviet establishments and citizens
abroad by various hostile organization. and elements is continuing in an
atmosphere of the kindling of anti-Sovietism. Provocative denonstrations
are being regularly organized in a number of capitalist countries at Soviet
establish-eats to put psychological pressure in Soviet people. Over 130 such

anti-Soviet mb gatherings in variom countries were recorded in the first
3 months of 1981 alone.

Hostile elements are continuing to practice such particularly dangerous a'cts'
as the organization of arson, explosions and firing at Soviet offices. There
are numerom instances of hooligan escapades in respect of Soviet establishmts

and their employees, anononus letters and telephone calls with various threats
and demands.

Particular concern is caused by the situation in the United States, where acts
against Soviet representatives and neﬁers of their fsailies have assumed the

nature of an extensively organised extremist caqaign flouting not only the
standards of international law but also elenentary principles of hunsnity.

At the end of lurch 1981 in Athens certain persons blew up the autonobile be-
longing to the USSR Com-arcisl Representation, which was parked outside the
office building. Upon a police inspection of other cars of the Soviet estab-
lishment, three other explosives were detected and rendered harmless.

The absolute aajority of Soviet citizens abroad is fittingly rebuffing the
provocateurs and frustrating all the enemy's atteqts to danage our country.

V

The iaperialist countries long since also adopted such a fern of subversive
activity against the USSR as ideological sabotage. But new trends in the
tactics of its implementation have been nanifested in recent years and an

. endeavor to extend its scale and to inpart a greater intensity of anti-Soviet-
isn and extremism to the hostile acts is observed. Conrade l..I. Brezhnev
drew attention to this particularly in the report at the 26th CPSU Congress,
observing that under current conditions "there has been an increase in the
assertiveness of the propaganda India of the class enemy and a strengthening
of its attemts to exert a corrupting influence on Soviet people's minds.“’

The purpose of ideological sabotage is to weaken and loosen the socialist
systea. It is undertaken by special nedis and specially organised services,
constructed wholly and fully on lies and the most flagrant distortion of the
facts and often represents direct interference in the socialist countries'
internal affairs.

As a fan: of subversive activity. ideological sabotage has two asin directions.

*"Haterisl of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 75.

232

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The first is subversive propaganda with the use of radio, the press and verbal
propaganda.

The second is intelligence-organizational stbversive activity aimed at the
creation in our comtry of every conceivable legal and underground hostile

group for struggle against the existing system, leadership of them and their
political. noral and naterisl support.

The plans of ideological sabotage are extensive and have a far-readling

aim: loosening the internal social-political foundations of the socialist
countries; weakening the leading role of the co-unist parties and their in-
fluence in the mass; "eroding" columnist ideology and implanting a bourgeois
world outlook; and, finally, disorganizing the socialist comtries' political
and econoaic life for the purpose of reviving capitalist practices.

Ideological sabotage is'aiaed against the ideological-political unity of the
working people of the socialist countries, a weakening of the alliance of
the working class, kolkhoz penantry and the intelligentsia, compromising so-
cialist nationality policy, counterposing nonparty people to the communists
and young people to the elder generations and blunting the patriotism. class
consciousness and political vigilance of the working people. Our class ens-y
is aware here that under the conditions of the Soviet people's moral-political
unity and their close cohesion around the Col-mist Party there is no social
basis in our country on which the special services and ideological centers

of imperialism night rely. Nonetheless, despite this. a considerable place
in the subversive endeavors of the ideological sabotenrs is occupied by a
quest within the country for individual political renegadss, anti-Soviet.
nationalist-ninded persons and apolitical people and attenpts to involve then
in the struggle against the Soviet state and Soviet society.

111s nain organizer and performer of ideological sabotage is the United States,
where this activity has become an organic part of foreign policy, and the

special services consider their participation therein just as inortant as
espionage.

The main diversionary-propaganda organ of the United States is the ICA, which
Has created on 1 April 1978 (in place of the abolished USIA). Its activity
is mdsr the personal control of the President. With the creation of this
agency the 0.3. Administration concentrated in single hands all the channels
of 0.8. foreign policy propaganda—radio broadcasting, the press, the shoot-
ing and presentation abroad of motion pictures and television film. the
publication of periodicals. brochures and books. the organisation of. exhibi-
tions abroad. leadership of the so-called cultural centers and libraries,

the organization of English language courses and so forth.

The new agency is organizing its activity with regard for ohradninistration's
directive that "the min audience for American propaganda lives in the Soviet
Union and the East European countries."

The eneay special services and the West's reactionary circles continue to
gamble in acts of ideological sabotage against the Soviet Union and the social-
ist co-nity 'countriss. in addition to the use of the state authorities.

233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on various enigre nationalist formations end Zionist organisations (Amnesty
International, the ITS, the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists, renegades
froa the Soviet Baltic, Central Asian, Trans-Caucasian republics and so forth).
Over 1.00 anti-Soviet centers, organisation, co-ittess and groups operate
against our comtry altogether.

The nain content of the ideological sabotage is large-scale political acts to
coapronise the USSR’s foreign and donestic policy. Attempts are asde, inter
slis, under the direct leadership of the American special services to conduct
anti-Soviet measures on an international scale. Atteqts by the special ser-
vices to directly urge overseas nationalist organizations and Zionist centers
into joint actions on an anti-Soviet platfora are noted.

The gathering of the so—celled World Congress of Free Ukrainian, which has

set itself the goal of outlining a general progran of subversive operations
not only of Ukrainian but also Belorussian, Lithuanian, bettish and Estonian
Zionist and other anti-Soviet e-igre organisations and also attracting the
attention of the vorld public to the alleged violations of the Helsinki accords
in the Soviet Union, nay serve as a typical erasple.

The scale and tactics of ideological sabotage dzange depending on the inter-
national atnosphere and situations taking shape in the world. The eneqy's
subversive activity at the tins of the preparation and holding of the Moscow
Olympics was a striking illustration of this. 0.8. reactionary circles un-
leased a furious caQaign ained at diacrediting and boycotting the Olynpios.
At the sale tine they mde active preparations for extensive sdwersive activ-
ity on USSR territory.

The eneay special services and foreign sxbversion centers enlisted are than
50 anticomunist fornationa, including large-scale eaigre, nationalist,
Zionist, clerical and extrenist organizations, in mti—Olynpic activity.

Together with this the new eeployed the possibilities of its propaganda na-
chinery on an unprecedented scale in hostile activity against the USSR. lbre
than 300 extrenist terrorist organizations were trained to carry out hostile
acts in connection with the OlyIpic gases. A gable was also node on the
stimulation of antisocial ale-ants in the USSR at the tine of the Olyepics.
And, indeed. under the influence of the essay special services certain anti-
Soviet persons planned to carry out hostile acts during the Olmics.

The danger of the concentrated strike conceived of by the eneay was that the
hostile acts at the Olynpioe were to have been carried out on a linited
territory in a short interval of tine, but in view of the whole world. But
the enemy's plans were frustrated. In accordance with the require-ants of
the CPS!) Central Cousittee. a systen of neasures wu counterposed to his
aspirations which nsde it possible to totally‘ paralyze the hostile activity.
No subversive acts of any significance were pernitted at the tine of the
Olyspics on USSR territory.

But the ideological saboteurs have not benefited fron this lesson either.

2310
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
As soon as the macaw Olmics were over, U.S. Zionist organizations marked
on the dsvelopnsnt of plans to use the forthconing 01mic Genes in Los Angeles
to instigate an anti-Soviet caqaign in the country around the so-called
"question of the position of Jews in the USSR". Thus a decision was adopted
at e neeting of the Los Angelas Council of Jewish Organizations to conduct
denonstrations at the ties of the 198‘ Olynpics at the places of residence

of the USSR sports delegation. hand Soviet sports-en anti-Soviet literature
and letters of provocative content and send groups of Zionists to the cone-
titions with the nission of "creating a nervom atnosphere when Soviet sports-
nen are perforning".

A concentrated anti-Soviet canaign was unleashed at the tine of the prepara-
tion and during the 26th party congress. m, the no, radios Liberty and
Free Europe and others presented a special series of broadcasts for this

purpose prepared by Western Sovietologists and renegadas who have left the
USSR. '

The increased activeness of foreign hostile centers was noticed at the tine
of the 26th CPSU Congress in the dispatch to the USSR under the guise of
tourists of their own enissaries with assign-ants to inspire antisocial acts
and also collect and bring out tendentious and slanderous information for its
snbsequent use in inciting an anti-Soviet canpaign in the Best. Particular
sctiveness was displayed by Zionist organizations of the United States, Bri-
tain, France. Holland and Sweden. Thus it was revealed that [Lyulen] and
layer, who were anong tourists free a Best European country visiting Moscow
in February 1981. were attenting to collect and take out of the USSR sland-
erous naterial diecrediting the activity of various Soviet official estab-
lishsasts. [Snukler], a functionary of the National Conference in Defense
of Soviet Jews," had been sent to the USSR on a similar assignment free the
United States the sane nonth. As a result of the steps that were taken the
said asterial was discovered on the foreigners upon their departure fron the
USSR and confiscated.

Recently all the bourgeois press organs and ideological sabotage centers have
begun to actively spread the U.S. Administration's mnstrous fabrication con-
cerning the Soviet Union's involvenent in international terrorian and concern-
ing the USSR's leadership of terrorist organizations in the "set even. This
lie is intended not only to justify the United States' international plunder;
it pursues the goal of evoking unhealthy sentinents in sons Soviet citizens,
sowing doubts in then as to the husnsness of our policy and attenpting to
push individual anti-Soviet elenents into the use of nethoda of extrenisn

and terror.

Evidence that the [1.8. Administration has raised the accusation against the
Soviet Union of international terrorists to the level of official policy is

en ICA guideline sent to its overseas offices in February 1981. It observes.
inter alia. that the USSR is rendering financial assistance and supplying
weapons to the PLO; assisting in every possible way can and Libya, which
allegedly support various organizations which have declared terrorism the Iain
method of their activity; helping so-called national liberation novemnts

235

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which ewloy terrorist nathods: conducting foreign propaganda encouraging the
activity of international terrorists; and is persistently palicising arsed
struggle as an effective lustre-ant of the solution of regional problem.

The new slogan concerning terrorisa does not replace but aerely supple-exits
other areas of subversive acts against the USSR. nostile new organizations
are being created, congresses and conferences of an anti-Soviet thrust are
being convened and the work of the subversive radio stations is being adjusted
in the West. Thus the congress of the "Coalition for a Free mssia," whose
participants appealed to the Reagan Ad-inistration for an even tougher policy
in respect of the .0883, was held at the end of. l'ebruary 1981 in New York.

In “arch. again in ﬂew York. the "Busian higrs Hrlters' Association” was
created with the support of 0.8. special services whose purpose was formlly
proclaimed to be the mification of Russian writers' efforts for the preserva-
tion of national traditions and the extensive dissemination of their works in
the United States. In fact, however, the organisation is ained at the cre-
ation and dissemination of literature of an antisocialist nature.

An organization which openly calls itself the "Center for Leadership of the

Denocrstic Hovenent in the Socialist Countries" has been created at Oxford
University in Britain.

The BBC Board of Governors decided as of the end of March 1981 to step up

by 30 ainutes the daily broadcasting tine in Russian for listeners in the USSR.
The leaders of radios liberty and Free Europe are increasing broadcasting

tine to the Soviet Central Asia and Trans-Caucasian republics for the purpose
of stirring up pan-lslanic and anti-Soviet sentilents.

The enemy endeavors to avail hinelf of channels of cultural. scientific and
tourist exchange for sending special service aunts and eaisssries. function-
aries and commications specialists of foreign subversion centers and organ-
izations to our country with assimts to establish illegal contacts with
hostile elements, incite then to acts of provocation and inspire politically
harlful unitestations. Among the foreigners mo visited the USSR in 1980

as tasters of tourist groups and scientific and cultural delegations were
detected several hundred eaissaries of foreign subversion centers. nsny of
who:- were esposed and expelled fro. the country, as reported in the press.

Until recently the enesy gadled nainly in the organisation of subversive work
within our country on individual persons fro. the nutter of hostile Soviet
citizens demonstrating under the flag of a revision of our political and
ideological institutions who called the-elves different-cinded or "dissidents"
and who advertised the-selves as "defenders of the law" and "fighters for
democracy”. Bis nsin calculations here were built on the quest for and
discovery along then of a leader or several leaders who would be capable of
marking on the path of active confrontation with the Soviet power and rally-
ing antisocial and other hostile eleaents for organized struggle against the

socialist systel.
As a result of the neasures adopted by the KGB, which were iuplenented strict-

ly in accordance with the law and under the leadership of the party authori-
ties. the antisocial elelents were not successful, despite the considerable

236

FOR omwu. USE ONLY
Isterial and aoral support of the Heat. in achieving organized cohesion

on a platfora of anti-Sovietiss. 'l'heir appeal for a revision of Soviet poli-
tical and ideological institutions not only did not receive any support from
the Soviet public but encountened angry condo-nation. A stop was put to

the unlawful activity of the antisocial eleaents. end crininal proceedings
vere instituted against the lost active of then. This inroved the cliaate
to a considerable extent, brought about the bevilderunt of the hostile ele-
Ients and exerted a restraining influence on their fellov thinkers.

Explanatory and educational work has been and continues to be perfomd with
persons who have gone astray. The state security authorities rely constantly

here on the assistance of the Soviet public and are extending and strengthen-
ing ties to the eases.

Lacking social support in the Soviet society and having been exposed. the
antisocial eleesnts ultiaately degenerated into a easll closed group without
any single ideological platfors and action progras.

Having understood that their ﬁle on antisocial elements had lost.- the
iqerialist special services and foreign anti-Soviet centers «lurked on a
feverish search for new tactical methods and tricks. Hithout conclusively
rejecting the ”defenders of the luv" and "chqioas of democracy," they are
attenting to have an infla-atory inset in different social groups of the
USSR population. There has been an increase, for ample. in the sneay'a spe-
culation on the teqorary difficulties being encotmtered in places in supplies
to the population of certain foodstuffs and also on shortcomings in the
organization of aedicsl and consumer services for the working people. There
has recently been an extension of acts to kindle eaigration sentiaents not
only among the Jewish. Ger-an and Arsenisn population but also anong believers
and stteapts to persuade the latter to leave the 0383 on religious grounds.

'me leaders of Ikrsinisn nationalist organizations abroad are beginning to

talk increasingly persistently about Uhrainians' "right to emigrate" free the
USSR.

Against the background of the generally increased assertiveness of clerical-
isn the eneay's gamble on the use of the clergy and the nost fanatical be-
lieveuhas increased. Vatican activity in support of illegal Uniate groupings
and encouragenent of the extranisn of the hostile part of the Catholic clergy
have seemed a sore aanifest anti-Soviet thrust. Resctionary foreign lslaaic
organization and centers of ideological sabotage have stimulated the use of
Islas as a cans of destabilizing the situation in the Central Asian and
Trans-Caucasian republics and increased propaganda of pan-Turkiss and pan-
Islanisn, taking advantage of the events in Iran and Afghanistan for this.

An inortant place in the sphere of the enely'e subversive endeavors is oc-
cupied by the youth. An American ideologist declared: He aust influence
Soviet youth in such a way as to ensure that there be no new Hatrosov's.
Koshev's and Kosnoden'yenskiy's in the 0883 in the event of the outbreak of
var. Typical in this respect is a document called "Guidance for the Organiza-
tion of Political Radio broadcasts of the Radio Liberty Oouittee". It sets

237
FOR OFFICIAL ISBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the goal, inter alia, of "evoking in Soviet youth irritation with surround-
ing reality and putting it in a state of anger and despair. People will
inevitély come to light in this atmosphere,” the doctnent says, "who will
be ready for acts of self-sacrifice and who will realize the need for plan-
based, painstaking work on the preparation of cardinal changes."

Subtle methods of influencing different categories of the youth are sought;
entice-mist and antisocialist fdyrications are dressed up in fashionable
theoretical clothing. The so-called theories of the youth's "exclusive"
role in the modern world, the "autonomous individual,” the need for "an in-
provement and desecratieation of the Soviet model of socialise," ~"democracy
without shores" and so forth are propagandized.

In a nuﬁer of instances the eneny succeeds in exerting a negative influence
on certain unstable young people. In a nutter of cities of the country in-
dividual juveniles and young people are attmting to fora groups based on a
fascination with "pop music” and the "Western way of life" and are perpetra-
ting hooligan and other antisocial acts. Some enter into crininal relations
with foreigners.

A new nethod is the enemy's endeavor to inlant in our country the religious-
lystical groups which abound in the Heat (Church of the Prophet, Hhite
Fraternity, Krishna Consciousness Society and so forth). Propaganda of the
proposition of so-called parallel structures, which is aised at the creation,
together with official public associations and organizations of the working
people and as a counterweight to then, of anateur "unions," ”societies,"
"Elan," "theaters" and "seminars" of antisocial elssents, is being stepped

up.

Armed with the decisions of the 26th party congress, the state security author-
ities are adopting decisive measures to frustrate the enesy's acts of ideo-
logical ‘ séotage .

VI

Despite inerialism's tremendous expenditure of nsterial and hm resources,
the organizeraof subversive activity will never succeed in achieving-:the set
goals. All the enemy's vain attenpts are being smashed on the Soviet people's
indestructible unity and their cohesion aromd their Connmist Party, the
friendship of the peoples, Soviet patriotism and Soviet people's readiness

to defend their sotherland everywhere.

But it should be said that the huge wheel of the bourgeois propaganda aachine
does not always the eqty spins. Individuals are still encountered who for
various reasons cone under the influence of bourgeois propaganda, fell
victis to ideological sabotage and sometimes take the path of crime.

And it is not fortuitous that in the Soviet people's education the (Io-mist
Party attaches paramount sipificance to increased political vigilance, which
is the Iain impediment in the way of the iaperialist intelligence services.
Political vigilance presupposes high Soviet patriotism, a hatred of eneeies
and an ability to recognize their insidious actions.

238

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A big part in the working people's education in a spirit of political vigilance
is being played by the decision of the 26th CPSU Congress, the report of
Conrado L. I. Brezhnev and also CPS!) Central Co-ittee decrees aimed at a
further improvement in ideological and political education and a strengthening

of labor discipline. These doclnsnts chart the concrete paths of an inrove-
nent in the entire cleex of educational work.

In the atmosphere of inperislisu's increased subversive activity there is an
increase in the state security authorities' responsibility for our society's
reliable protection against the-intrigues of the special services of the iner-
ialist states. A nost iaportant condition of the successful acconplishnent of
the tasks of ensuring state security is party leadership of the KGB authori-
ties. It is this which inperts to Cheka activity the correct political thrust
and ensures the use of specific nsans of struggle within the strict franarork

of the law and exclusively in the interests of our great cause—the t’riuph of
- do-unisn. -

In the report at the 26th CPSU Congress Conrado L. I. Brezhnev ends a high eval-
uation of the activity of the KGB authorities. It in fact expressed the view
of our party's Central Couittee of the Iain aspects of the state security
suthorities' activity under current conditions. The general conclusion fron
this evaluation is that the exacerbation of the international situation de-

ssnds increased vigilance. decisiveness and aggressiveness in all areas of
Cheka work.

The decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the instructions of Conrade L910
Brezhnev have inspired all Chekists to n iqrovenent in work quality, raised
their personal responsibility for the entrusted task and will contribute to
an intensification of the struggle against the intrigues of inerielisn. Our
nsin task is to reliably ensure the state security of our great notherland '
under the leadership of the party and with the support of the entire Soviet
people. Chekists assure the party and the Soviet people that they see ser-
vice thereof as their high duty and sacred obligation.

*S.A. Losev, general director of TASS: "For the Topicality ad Intelligibility
of Inforlstion” .

The TASS collective considers it its min task to usist the party organiza-
tions convey to each Soviet individual and the foreign «unity the profound
leaning andhistoric significance of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.
The agency's activity is currently concentrated on an all-around portrayal of
the Soviet people's struggle for realization of the congress' decisions, the
fulfillnent of plans and socialist pledges, the intensification of social pro-
duction and its increased efficiency. TASS ha conpiled long-tern plans of

propaganda of the congress' decisions and the proposition and conclusions set
forth in Conrade L.I. breahnev's report.

At the center of attention of our entire body is an inrovenent in the qual-
ity of the transmitted infornation and its increued prowtitude, topicality
and intelligibility. In accordance with the require-onto of the CPS" Central
Co-ittee decree "A Further Inprovenent in Ideological and Political Education,"

239

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe omcm. use can

the subject setter and geography of the inforaetion have been extended and
its voluee has increased approxiastely 15-20 percent in the last 2 years.
Naturally. this is only the start of the ispending reorganisation of all in-
formation-propaganda work. Our group is guided here by (Jo-reds I..I. Brezh-
nev's instruction that "every article in a newspaper or journal and every
broadcast on television or radio needs to be vimd as a serious conversation

with people. who upset not only a truthful and proqt exposition of the facts
but also their in-depth analysis and serious generalizations?“

We have recently begun to trans-it nore extensively differentiated infer-e-
tion with regard for the specific features of newspapers and certain region
of the country. Special layouts are used- to trans-it uterial for central
and Moscow newspapers. for the raptblic, tray, oblast and other local publi-
cations. for the Baltic, Trans-Cancun, Central Asian, Ural. Siberian and Far
East zones and for Koeeonol. evening and sports papers. This work is being

perfected constantly with regard for the requirensnts of the recipients of the
inforlation.

In intra-union intonation an increasingly large place is assigned social
subject setter and naterial convincingly showing the party's trenendous con-
cern for Soviet people's well-being and revealing the measures for the inten-
sive econoeic develop-set of each fraternal union republic. A neat mortant
task of TASS journalists is the propaganda and disselination of the progressive
experience of the labor collectives which are all-union socialist conpetition
winners. Over 50 articles were translitted to the newspapers in 1980 on col-
lectives represented on the USSR Eadxibition of National Scone-1c Achieve-ants
All-Union Roll of Honor under the rubric ”Attention: Interesting Experience!"
The newspaper: receive TASS photographic intonation on these subjects twice
weekly. The preparation of analytical nobles-solving material on acute, as
yet unresolved questions of our life for the purpose of ascertaining the
specific causes of shortcoeings and the reaovel of negative phenonena will
continue.

TASS transnits to the country's newspapers daily a large quality of the lost
diverse intra-mion information sufficient to fill one page of a naspaper.
as a whole. The papers are afforded a wide choice both with respect to the
subject setter and the geography of the reports. How the netsrial that is
received is used is another natter. We have considerable oonplaints in this
respect about the local press.

Thus coupared with the fourth quarter of last year in the first quarter of
1981 Ukrainian repdalic newspapers had cut back the publication of TASS union
informtion by 30-400 reports, devoting the Iain attention nsrely to uterial
of an official nature. In the first quarter the Uzbek republic newspapers
PRAVDA VOS‘I'OKA and som UZBEKIS‘I‘MY carried 308 and 309 union reports re-

spectively, of which mterial of an official nature constituted nore than so

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 76.

2‘0

MWWWLY
percent. The situation is rouduly the sane in Lithuania also. The Georgian
republic newspaperaZARYA VOS‘NKA and WISH publish insufficient TASS
union information. In January 1981 the newspaper SOVBTSKAYA KIRGIZIYA was
transmitted 972 TASS ite. on the life of the country, but published 70, that
is, 7 percent. Only 9-10 percent of TASS union information was carried in
February 1981 by SOVBTSKAYA BEDRIJSSITA. It should be noted that it ie not
everywhere that we observe such an attitude toward TASS material. In the first
quarter of 1981 the reputlic newspaper SOVBTSIATA LATVIYA, for couple, car-

ried 790 reports on the life of the USSR. Official material accounted for less
than half of these.

It is wrong, we believe, whuu a republic newspaper is irregular in carrying
naterial on events in the fraternal republics and the country's biggest in-
dustrial centers. It is well known, for example, that representatives of the
whole country are participating in the construction of the Baykal-Anur Main
Railroad. TASS describes the labor affairs and the life of the Baykal-Anur
workers in a special news roundup. It is not that easy sometinea for the
agency's correspondents to obtain this information. And it is incowrehensible
why space is sometimes not found for it in the papers. Furthermore. many news-
papers could not obtain information under such rubrics as "Attention: Inter-
esting Experience!" and "The Nonchernosen: Vista of Development" without
TASS' assistance. but yet publish it irregularly. It is paradoxical, but a
fact that the central papers, which have correspondents throughout the country,
regularly carry TASS uunion infornation also, whereas certain republic, luray

and oblast papers, which do not have their own sources of analogouu information,
do not always make use of the TASS material. As a result it is difficult for
the readers, particularly those who subscribe to a local paper only. to get

an objective idea of the life of the country. A lack of the necessary in-
formation is also reflected. obviously, in the results of the newspapers!

work on the working people's education in a spirit of Soviet patriotisn and
socialist internationalisn.

Insufficient attention is also paid to TASS photographic intonation. The
agency offers the republic papers fiveosix current photos daily, not counting
official photos, on domestic and international subjects. But they are ordered
by a limited nuuiuer of publications. Inadequate use is also being rude of

the photographic neterial aentby nil.

The broadening of infomtion on the life of the country in the republic,
luray and oblest papers is a very inortant issue. The party Central Co-Iittee
decree "An Iqrovensnt in the Quality and an Increase in the Size of Repub-
lic. Kray mud Oblaat Papers," which was adopted in 1965, pointed out that it
is necessary "to take advantage of the increase in the notepapers' size for
a significant expansion of information on the life of the Soviet union and
uunion republics, krays and oblaete."

The volume of TASS information on questions of international life is consider-
able. In press roundups and con-entaries let the Soviet and foreign press
TASS extensively propagandizes the peaceful foreign policy initiatives and
serious proposals to extend detente and curb the arms race put forward by
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev. At the sane tine it exposes the aggressive, adventur-
ist policy of the new 0.8. Administration and rebuffs various provocative
cal-pains directed against the USSR and the other socialist countries.

241

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He are taking all necessary steps to ensure the proept daily receipt of this
topical propaganda material. It is a matter of our press asking active use
of the agency's wealth of correspondent resources abroad and inside the com-
try for the fuller satisfaction of the readers' requirements.

At the same time TASS journalists have much to do in the light of the require-
ments of the 26th CPSU Congress concerning a reorganization of many areas

and spheres of ideological work to ensure that the content of the agency's
information he even more topical and that the form of presentation be clearer
and more intelligible. There is every opportmity for this. Thanks to the
assistance of the party Central Co-ittee. modern technical facilities have
recently been created in TASS which are on a par with the best world models.
New offices and correspondent centers of the agency have been opened abroad.
ﬂwever, it should he acknowledgedin self-criticism that these rich opportuni-
ties are not yet being used to the full extent. Understanding the importance
of the tasks set by the party. TASS workers are doing everything to raise the
ideological level and improve the content and quality of their material.

*R.I. Kosolapov, chief editor of the journal KWIST: "The 26th CPSII Con-
gress and the Development of Marxist-Lenin“ Theory"

The political-economic biweekly M'SIIBVIK. which was subsequently renamd
ROWIST at the 19th party congressuthe theoretical and political journal
of the CPS!) Central Costitteenwas fomded on 19 Novelber 1923 by a decision

of the Russian Co-rnist Party (Bol'sheviks) Central Co-itte'e Organizational
Bureau.

According to conteqoraries, the initiative for the establishment of the
BOL'SEEVIK came from v.1. Lenin. Lenin, it is said, was shown a facsimile

of the cover of the new journal, but its first issue case out after Vladimir
Il'ich's death, in April 1924. As pointed out in the BOL'SBEVIK's first,
program. editorial, and this retains its relevance today also, "our main task
is the defense and substantiation of historic Bol'shevism and struggle against
all atteapts to distort and corrupt its principles." "We wish,” it was said
further, "always to be an organ of inquiring. critical, Bol'shevist party
thought.... We wish to be an organ of the animation, intensifidauilon and
strengthening of party thought and an organ of the manifestation of the party's
ideological initiative.“

Sm-ing up the first results of the journal's work, a resolution on party
building a year after the lloth Russian Cos-Iunist Party (hol'sheviks) Confer-
ence records: "To recognize that the idea of the creation as a supplement
to PRAVDA of a combat directive party organ (the journal BOL'SIIBVIK) has
been entirely justified end that the party should assist in every possible
way the further strengthening of BOL'SIIBVIK as the consistently directive
organ of Leninisn."** The editorial office has for six decades now adhered

*BOL'SREVIK No 1. 192‘, pp 3, 4. 6.
**"The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and
Central Co-ittee Plenums," Hoscow. 1970, vol 3, p 181.

242

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV
to this directive mswervingly, endeavoring to smtain hOL’sle-KOWNIST
in a consistently Leninist, party spirit entirely in the traditions of
classical harxisn-Leninisn.

It is necessary to speak of this here by no leans to take on the past as an
end in itself or to admire it but for the sake of recalling the vital need for
the consistent and tireless conhination of scientific co-unisn with the work-
ers' love-tut and the seas aoVensnt of worung people and constant purposeful
work in this field. It is well known that carelessness in respect of revolu-
tionary theory and negligence in respect of the correct political orientation
with its help of the people's uses hes repeatedly avenged itself in a
weakening of relations with these assessed with the younger generation,
which has been negatively reflected in the state of on entire worker cause.

Coarade L.l. Brezhnev eaphasissd at the 26th CPSU Congress that "a Marxist-
Leninist party cannot perfora its role if it fails to pay due attention to a
conprehension of everything that is occurring. a collation of the new pheno-
Iena of life and the creative denlopasnt of Hardst-beninist theory."* The
place of theoretical work in the large-scale and aultifeceted activity of
the party organiztaons is thereby deterlined.

After the CPS!) Central Committee June (1980) Plenua had adopted the decision
on the convening of the congress, manner inaugurated the attic "Toward
the 26th Party Congress—Experience of the 10th Five-Year Plan" and ran it
from issue to issue. In Decanter 19w this rubric was replaced by another“
"Toward the 26th Party Congress—6380 Central Codttee Draft Is Discussed"-
and the editorial office ran this until the congress itself.

Subsequently, in issues 10, S and 6 for 1981. [MIST accomdated e outer
of articles under the heads "To the Delegates to the 26th CPS!) Congress" and
"To the Guests of the 26th (1’80 Congress." but the nain rubric, which is
inaugurated in issue 6 and which it is intended to run for no less then 2
years,"hss been "The 26th CPS!) Congrus—Developnent of mrxist-Ieninist
meory .

Interpretation of the theoretical ideas and conclusions of the 26th CPS" Con-
gress is pacing through its initial phase as yet, but even now it is pos-
sible to cite a nunber of innovative features to whose revelation KWIST
will pay the closest attention. We will cite five of then.

First, the congress' orientation entirely toward Ian both in the theoretical
and, particularly, in the practical respects. The Lenin Party's traditional
line was therebycorroborated and extended. Setting the fasion of the entire
preparation for the congress, Conrade L.l. Breehnev deterained at the CPSU

Central Conittee October (1980) Plenum es the most party-linded approach

that "Hhen concern for the good of the people is node the cornerstone. And
from a strictly economical viewpoint." he added, "it is more correct to pro-
ceed from the final goal toward that which is to ensure its achievement."**

*"Eterial of the 26th CPSU Congress," p 77.
“LI. Brezhnev, "Lenin's Rey." vol 8. p 668.

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unfortunately, certain philosophers discerned in the material of the 26th
congress only a reproach leveled at then in connectim with the fact that
"quite often they prefer to prove what is already proven instead of inter-
preting the new phenouna of life ."* but failed to properly appreciate the
fact that nan—this sost i-portant category of historical materialist—proved
to be at the center of the examination of practically all the problens which
confronted the party form.

“nether it was a question at the congress of the main task of the 11th Five-
Year Plan or of output quality. of the food prograa or of the expansion of
consumer goods' production and the develop-ant of the services' sphere .and the
liquidation of annual unskilled and heavy manual labor or of the need. to-
gemer with the introduction of new national economic projects, to ensure

the fulfill-ant of plan quotes in term of homing and'cultural-everyday
construction-mus thing was confined on each occasion: "Concrete concern

for the concrete individual and his needs and require-ants is," as Conrade

L.I. Brezhnev declared, "the start and finish of the party's econonic policy."**

This proposition is applicable to our ideological work to a by no means les-
ser, if not greater, extent than to the socialist economy. After all, those
who are involved in it are entrusted with a net complex and'subtle sphere of
life—Ian's mind and his spiritual world—where an attitude toward his a the
slain, priceless resource of the Soviet society is particularly aesningful.

A particular feature of our ideological-political work today is the fact that
Soviet man as its "target" and as the "consI-er" of its results is different.
Mention was made at the congress of the extent to which "his knowledge has
been enriched and his erudition increased and his spiritual requirements
have grown considerably."***

Over the last 20-25 years the agitator,.propagsndist and lecturer have
gradually ceased to be a kind of "mnopoly owner" of information and have
largely lost their advantages over the audience in education and political
experience, and we can-only rejoice at this: we have before us the result of
the my years of efforts of those sane agitators, propsgmdistsand lecturers.
More often than not, critical observations concerning our propaganda are con-
nected precisely with the fact that this said fact is insufficiently fully
recognised by the ideological activists and still not taken into account by
then sufficiently in their work. The propagsndist now is capable of winning
people's enthueiun not so such as a source of the latest news and as: a
trans-utter of party instructions but rather as an intelligent interlocutor
and adviser who skillfully analyzes what is. in the Iain, already known to

his interlocutors, illustrates what is known by a ray of sober-minded Hsrxist-
Leninist logic and who has learned, as V.V. Hayalwvskiy put it, "to be able
to awaken in each speak of dust the copper of Bol'shevist fervor."

——————_—W—
*"Hateriel of the 26th CPSII Congress, p 78.

“man p «9.
“*Ibid” p 75/-

2“

FOR OFFICIAL WE ONLY
A capacity for analytical thinking is vitally necessary for our propaganda
personnel and it should be developed constantly. The propagandist's
respectful attitude toward his audience and conradaly col-mication with it
as an equal, without which it is hardly possible to count on an increase in
the effectiveness and quality of ideological education. is also somected
with this, incidentally.

The second of the congress‘ ideas is the further creative developalantr. of
what is lost iaportant in Herzisn-heninisn—the teaching of the working class'
world-historical mission'with reference to the stage of developed socialise
and the conditions of col-mist building. Raving becone s aajority of the
people of labor, it is rare powerfully palpéle than ever in the role of the
"social intelligence and social heart” of the world revolutionary process and
the developing new society. And there has been an unprecedented increase in
the activeness of the bourgeoisie. the eneIiea of socialise and the tmtbedors
of inerialist obscurantisn ainsd at confusing the class consciousness of

the proletariat, poisoning it with the poison gas of "eonstmerisn" and spirit-
ually "Ltnpenizing" and ideologically disaraing it. Because of this the
strengthening of class-based worker self-awareness priaarily on the basis of
scientific revolutionary theory is for us imeparable from a display of
ideological vigilance.

The third idea of the congress which should be developed and concretized both
in the scientific-theoretical and agitation-propaganda respects is that "a
classless structure of society will develop by and large within the historical
framework of nature socialise."“ And this neans that the Soviet people. as
a new historical, social and international co-mity of people, are proving
to be the cradle of the first classless society on earth. The guarantee of
its creation is the sociopolitical doaination of the worldng class, and,
furthermore, as the congress observed. its revolutionary ideology and total-
ity, collectivist mentality and its interests and ideals are becoeing the
property of all strata of the working people. We have never before been

so close to the program goal of the building of a society without classes
about which nany generations of revolutionaries have dressed. and no one has
hitherto been confronted with such a responsible and couples: task, with its
uses of hitherto unforeseen aspects. -

'The fourth is the congress' enrich-ant of the hrxist-Leninist conception of
socialist social relations and the ways of their ultinate reorganization in
accordance with the well-known fornula: "on the collectivist principles
inherent in the new systen."*** A broad spectrun of problem was in view on
this occasion-{iron the leveling of social differences territorially through
a tightening of control over the extent of labor and the extent of consumption,
from the fornation of reasonable require-ants and the ability to take advant-
age of the benefits of developed socialise through a refinenent of inter-
nation relations and fro. the developnant of an effective denographic policy
through an eradication of all relapses into a petit bourgeois approach. Big

*See K. Han: and P. Engels, "Works," vol 1, p 1925.
“"Material of the 26th CPS" Congress," p 53.
***Ibid., p 57.

265

roe OFFIGAL us: on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tasks also confront us here in the sphere of ideological-moral education. Thus
it is necessary to show tirelessly, but variously and not isportunately with
the all media of infatuation. propaganda and mass-politicalwork that our
socialist society is primarily a society of labor in which the satisfaction
of personal material and spiritual requirements is tightly and constantly
dependent on one's own contribution to the overall labor; that our society is
strong through its collectivist principles and that the true flowering of

’ the creative individuality of each is only possible on the basis of develop-
ing co-uniat collectivism; and that the rights and freedoms granted Soviet
citizens by the USSR Constitution, which are without precedent in any coun-
try, are practicable in full only if they are enoowassed by the single
hoop of cousunist morality and socialist discipline with the unswerving
performance of civic duties.

And, fifth and finally—and here we return to the point at which we began—
prior to the CPSU no political party in the world had proclaimed human rights
in full, starting with a guarantee of the primary right-v-to life-«which de-
ternines the Iain content of our peace-loving foreign policy.

I would like in conclusion to nake one further observation concerning the con-
fusion of the "information" and "propaganda" concepts which is sometines ob-
served. l‘he first even supersedes the second on occasion. Of course, our
information services have many shortcomings: delays :in transmitting news and
its interpretxion, the incosplete nature of information and improptitude.

and their work needs to he inproved. But even if we one day accoqlish this
task, our ideological goals cannot be achieved by intonation and the organ-
ization of the stream of topical reports alone. For this reason we say of
propaganda that, while also being a kind of information. it has its own

class bias, which among progressive forces is not at variance with objective-
ness, and active purposefulnsss and imparts to information the quality of

the fighting political orientation and mobilization of the masses. There is
much room for creative search. tests and discoveries here, and. furthermore,
the motto in this responsible and noble work could be Comrade L.I. Breshnev's
words spoken at the 26th CPSU Congress: "Hho if not ideological workers should
be characterized to the highest degree by a sense of the new."*

*Ye. I. Chazov, deputy minister of health of the USSR and general director of
the All-Union Cardiological Research Center: "Struggle for People's Life and
Healthuhumnistic Mission of Soviet hdicine"

Comrade I..I. Brezhnev emphasized in the report at the 26th CPSU Congress that
concern for Soviet people's health is a most important social task. The

CPSU Central Comittee and USSR Council of Ministers adopted the comprehensive
decree "Measures To Further Improve Ptblic Health Care" in 1977. This decree
points to the need for the development and strengthening of primary medical
assistance-wutpatient clinics, the neiynborhood service, first aid and the
medical units. The decree put forward as a principal task of Soviet health
care the creation of a cardiological service in the country and increased
struggle against cardio-vascular illnesses.

*"Haterial of the 26th CPSU Congress,” p 76.

246

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Cardio-vascular illnesses are the main cause of death in our country and one
of the most prevalent causes of occupational losses in connection with ten-
porary disability. Here than 1.3 million persons have been dying annually

in the USSR fvon cardiodvescular disease in recent years, which constitutes

52 percent of nortality. M trends which have surged in recent years are
asking us particularly watchful. First. the increase in norbidity and mortal-
ity fron cardiac and vascular disease in areas where even recently these
illnesses were not that frequent, nanly. lbldavia and the Central Asian
republics. In connection with this trend the tine has cone, I believe, for
the creation of reptblic cardiological centers (cardiology scientific re-
search institutes) in Moldavia and Tajikistan, where they are currently lack-
ing. Second, the considerable increase in norbidity and uortality frou cardio-
vascular disease in rural localities, where it was always considerably lower
than in the cities.

Conrade L.I. Brezhnev pointed out at the 26th CPS!) Congress that the cardio-
logicsl service had been developed apprecidaly in recent years. Sone llo
cardiology scientific research institutes are functioning currently whose
tasks include both scientific research and scientific-nethods leadership of
assistance to patients with cardio-vascular disease and highly qualified con-
sultative assistance.

A cardiology administration has been created in the USSR Ministry of Health
which is designed to provide for the creation of an extensive system of
cardiological assistance in the comtry and the introduction in health care
practice of the latest achieve-ante of science and medical equipnent. Some
827 cardiological departments in hospitals and 2,261 cardiological wards in
clinics have been developed and are functioning in the country currently and
368 "adaulance medical care" cardiology team have been ravaged. This is
Just the start of a great deal of organizing work ained at actively colbating
mankind's enely No l and at ensuring that those suffering from cardiac and
vascular disease say always and everywhere obtain tinely, qualified and sensi-
tive medical assistance.

The health care authorities are allocated annually up to 50,000 senatoria
passes, where patients who have suffered a myocardial infarction are sent in
accordance with the hospital list to finish their treatnent free of charge.
The measures that have been ilpleeented are beginning to produce results to-
day even. Thus a decline, albeit negligible, in nortality from hypertension
is being observed in the country as a whole. Good results in the treatment
of patients with a myocardial infarction have been achieved in the Ukraine.
Latvia and Lithuania.

Party and soviet workers and Soviet health care and science figures are
called on to acconplish in full the tasks raised in the decree ”Measures
To Further Inprove Public health Care".

The solution of najor problem in any sphere, including the health service,
is impossible without the accelerated developmt of scientific research.
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Congress: "...science eust be a
constant 'tranquillity agitator.’ showing in which areas stagnation and
legs have been discerned and where the current level of knowledge affords

267
FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an opportunity for speedier and more successful advance.“ It was precisely
this principle which guided the USSR State Co-ittee for Science and Technology.
the USSR Gosplan and the USSR Academy of Sciences in the creation of the

State Progran of Scientific Research. into Cardio-Vucular Disene. Sons

82 USSR Acadely of Scisnoss' and USSR Academy of hdical Sciences' establish-
nents and various ainistriss and depart-ants are participating. In incorporates
fmdaasntal and applied scientific research, particularly the creation of new
nedical apparatus and new drugs.

Pundanental research in the sphere of cardiology. which lagged behind the
world level in the past, is being developed. In the last 5-6 years Soviet
cardiological science has succeeded not only in taking w this lag‘ but.

as a whole, firaly occupying foremost positions in a nuber of spheres and
determining the direction of scientific research. The fact that the 10th
International Society for Study of the BesttCongress was held in bacon in
Septelber 19m was recognition of Soviet cardiology's successes in the sphere
of fundamental research.

Here are just son of the new directions being developed by Soviet cardio-
logists.

Researchers working in the USSR Acadeny of Medical Sciences' All-Union Car-
diological Center have discovered new ways and aechanisns of transeitting
energy to the ayocsrdiun. It has been deterained that alnost the entire
energy needed for the systole (and at any load) my be transferred by crea-
tine phosphate. This discovery creates the possibility of the search for neans
iaproving the heart's energy supply and increasing its functional possibili-
ties.

It has been known for a conpsrstively long :tiae that electric processes in
the heart are regulated by leans of changes in the flow of sodium and pota-
siun ions. And it is only in recent years that researchers' attention has
been drum to a study of the role of calciun and miudono’inthe regula-
tion of cardiac activity. It has been estblished that the heart's diastolic
(relaxed) phase. which was long considered a passive process conditioned by
the filling of the ohadnrs of the heart with blood, is an active process in
which an inportant part is played by the speed of the passage of calcium
ions from one part of the Iyoblast to another regulated by a special enayns.
Assistants of the All-Union Cardiological Research Center have succeeded in
separating and revving this enzyle—the basic cowonent of the systen of
the calcium: pun) of the nyocardiun. This creates the conditions for obtain-
ing new means of struggle against cardiac insufficiency.

Certain achievements of the theoreticians and experimters have already taken
their first steps in practical nedicine. Comratively recently biologists -
found nethods of i-obiliaing enaynes on biologically conpatible carriers.

work was begun in the All-Union Cardiologicsl Research Center on the creation
on the basis of iI-obilized easy-es of preparations applicable for sedicsl
purposes. The advantage of such preparations is that they can be channeled
with the help of a catheter into the affected organ, into the throﬁosed

*"Haterial of the 26th CPS]! Congress," p ‘3.

2108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vessel,- avoiding, on the one hand, the dilution of the preparation in the
entire volume of circulating blood. which leads to a considerable loss of

the activeneas of the preparation which has been inserted, and, on the other.
aultiple injections traunatising the patient. A preparation of [streptodekas]
representing an r-obiliaed streptokinsss snayms has been successfully ap--
plied with myocardial‘ infarction and acute throdiosis.

New directions in the treatment of a whole number of not only cardio-vascular
diseases but also nsntal illnesses and illnesses of the genre-intestinal
tract are connected with the synthesis and study of ao-called neuropeptidss
regulating the function of the central nervous systan. As our eaperinsatal
data show, these preparations will possibly be a means of preventing changes
in the function of the organism in a state of stress.

A whole number of fundamental studies is suiting it possible even today to
talk. about the practical singificance of the data that has been obtained.
Thus with reference to atherosclerosis we should point to the work connected
with a study of particular blood comonents, cholesterol carriers and so-
called lipoproteins. It appears that the blood contain two types of lipo-
proteins: some—of low density—contribute to cholesterol penetrating the
vascular wall, others--of high density—keep it in the blood. New possibili-
ties are being revealed on the basis of this of detecting persons with a
predisposition toward atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease and for
prophylaxis among them.

New diagnostic methods, particularly sutdy of the cardio-vascular system by
ultrasonic methods, are being applied increasingly extensively. Such a
traditional method of investigation and diapostics as electrocardiography is
also being perfected. Caddiac cavity ECG recordings and intra-esophagsal
electrocardiography are perfomd and 300 are transmitted by telephone and
radio in the Soviet Union. lbre than 20 new types of apparatus for monitor-
ing the function of the cardio-vascular system were introduced in series pro-
duction in the last 4 years alone.

A formidable heart disease is myocardial infarction, from which many patients
die before they can be rendered medical assistance. Taking this fact into'
account, a systen of treating myocardial infarction was developed in the
Soviet Union more than 24 years ago. It incorporates organized measures to
speed up the myocardial infarction pstients' delivery to a hospital and their
assistance in the process of transportation. for which specialised anti-
infarction "first aid" team were set up for the first time in the world.
Antishock wards and intensive-care mite have been organized in the major
and specialised hospitals and supplied with modern equipment. he final
stage of treatment-~recuperative therapyuincludes time spent in specialized
sanetoria. All this. together with an imprawennt in the methods of rendering
the patients assistance. is enabling us to lower myocardial infarction mor-
bidity.

Soviet cardiologists are paying serious attention to a study of the mechanisms
of the emergence of various forms of arterial hypertension and their treat-
ment. An analysis of many variants of the hypertension pattern has confirmed
the cowlexity of the mechanisms of the emergence of the disease, in whose

2109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development changes in the central nervous system, the neural regulation of
the vessels and the content of a nuﬁer of pressor and depressor hormones
play a part. The principles of differentiated treaueent of hypertension
taking-account of the state of the disease, its clinical variants. the
patients' age and the influence of different groups of preparations on the
pathogenic elesents of the disease have been streenlined. This has nade

it possible to achieve a lowering (and normalization even) of arterial pres-
sure in the majority of patients and has sharply reduced the frequency of the
development of serious ferns of arterial hypertension and such couplications
thereof as cardiac and renal insufficiency. Regular out-patient treatunt
of hypertensives is making it possible to reduce labor losses from Mary
disability to 13-35 percent.

A leading principle of the activity of the Soviet Union health care systee.
which was proclaimd back in the first postrevolutionary years. is recogni-

tion of the decisive role of disease prevention in the struggle for people's
health.

Thanks to free medical service. the existing methods of prevention may be
enloyed extensively not only under the conditions of the general health
clinic network but also within the renified systen of medical units and pre-
ventive clinics attached to large-scale industrial enterprises, and the free
issue of medicines is already practiced in some of then. Great significance
is attached to senatorial-health resort treat-sat and also the dispensary
method of the detection and treat-nt of patients with cardio-veacular di-
sease. which provides for the regular monitoring of the state of the health
of those under observation.

The effect of the preventive treatment of hypertension my be judged free the
following facts. It was established in a sass survey of male aged 40-59

that anong 20 percent of the persons with higher-then-usual arterial pressure
hypertension had been detected for the first tine. A year after the hyper-
tensives had been put on the dispensary register. the rude: of those mder-
going treatment increased from 31.2 to 81.5 percent and the amber of patients
whose treatment was successful from 10.7 to 56.7 percent.

The dispensary method which has been adopted in the Soviet Union is not con-
fined to active treatment of registered patients but also provides for doc-
tor's supervision of the patients' work and recreation conditions and their
diet. The introduction of the dispensary systen of the supervision of pa-
tients with cardio-vescular disease is contributing to a considerable im-
provement in the prognosis of these patients and their continued fitness for
work and is affording then an opportunity to follow a serial way of life.

The preventive clinics are a distinctive component of the systen of dispensary
supervision of patients. There are sure than 3,000 of then in our country.
Workers and employees, including those suffering fron cardio-vascular disme,
spend in nonwork tine (after work, on off days) epproxintely 1 month per
year here altogether. The :preventive clinics conduct dietary and physical
therapy. therapeutic physical culture and. where indicated, medicansntel
treatsent and nonitor the influence of work loads on the patients' circula-

tory system.

250

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In discussing the problem of the struggle for the people's life and health
Soviet radical nan do not forget either that life on earth itself has never
before been in such jeopardy as in our day. This threat esanates fros the
arms race, which in its power of destruction is in no way coaparable with
types of weapons which have existed previously.

It has been calculated that in all of Hill, which took 50 million lives and
left thousands of devastated cities and destroyed villages, approximately 5
negatons of variom explosive devices were detonated. It is not difficult to
imagine what could happen as the result of the deliberate or accidental out-
break of nuclear war if it is considered that the explosive yield of just one
thermonuclear warhead is dosens of tines greater than the total yield of

all the explosions detonated in the course of all the wars waged by unkind.
We say recall the tragedy of Biroshiaa and llaguaki, which shook all aankind
by its horrors. The consequences of the nuclear explosions in Hiroshiu and
Nagasaki were catastropic. But even they can provide no idea of the scale of
huasn losses and devastation which a mdern nuclear war would entail. After
all, the total yield of present-day nuclear arsenals is the equivalent of

1 million bod» of the kind which destroyed the Japanese city of Hiroshima.

Amid the concerns of daily life and the problem of the present day the poo-
ples have begun to forget the tragedy oilfieoshila and llagasski and do not
think of the potential consequences which nuclear war could entail for each
inhabitant of the planet. ﬂoreover, attempts are ude in the assertions of
certain political and ailitary figures and scientists even to belittle the
possible consequences of a nuclear war. A report prepared by a special con-
nittee of the 0.8. Academy of Sciences and lads public in 1977, which claim
that even a global nuclear war would not be reflected in the biosphere and
life on earth, night serve as an staple. Following publication of the report,
the 0.8. Acadesy of Sciences was forced under the pressure of incontrovertible
facts presented by other proninsnt scientists of the world and udder public
pressure to publish a letter in which it atteepted to prove that it had been
aisunderatood and that it was opposed to nuclear war in principle, it is

true. But a fact remains a fact. State-ants are appearing to the effect that
nuclear war is winnable or that it night be possible to conduct a limited
nuclear war. R. Pipes, a responsible official of the 0.8. National Security
Council, declared blmtly that it is necessary to prepare for 'nuclear war
since it is inevitdﬂe, and 0.8. Secretary of State A. ﬂaig has proclained
that there are principles sore inportant than the preservation of peace.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev said in the report at the 26th CPSU Congress: "They
wish to inpress upon people that nuclear war could be linited and recon-
cile then to the idea of the pernissibility of such a war. But this is out-

right deception of the peoplesl... Attenpting to defeat one another in an
arm race and counting on victory in a nuclear war are dangerous aadness.“

“7H:- terial of the 26th CPSU Congress," pp 21, 23.

251

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sober-linded people are increasingly beginning to ponder the question of
whither: the unrestrained nuclear ar- race is leading the world and what
will becose of nankind if nuclear war breaks out? At the end of 1979 a large
group of ms. scientists and doctors held a special conference in Boston,
which discussed the possible consequences of nuclear war for the life and
~health of people on earth. The scientific data presented at this conference
were so horrifying that its participants proposed founding the new interna-
tional rave-ant "Doctors of the World for the Prevention of Nuclear War".

Understanding that explanation to the peoples of the possible consequences of
nuclear war and the struggle to lilit and subsequently ban nuclear weapons

are iQossible without the participation of Soviet scientists and doctors.

B. [Lam]. professor of cardiology and leader of the Anericsn group of doctors,
proposed that we nest and discus questions of the creation and the principles
of the said international novenent. Such a seating was held in Decesber 19“)
in Geneva. Agree-ant was reached on the holding 21-26 liarch of a conference

of scientists and doctors of the United States and the 0883 in the Hashington
suburb of Airlie with an invitation to representatives of Japanese cities of
liiroshina and Nagasaki who had suffered free the atonic bolting.

It nay be asserted with a feeling of profound satisfaction and-professional
pride in the lofty noral, hues qualities of doctors of various countries
of the world that the idea of the novennt was extensively approved and
supported. The representatives of 11 contries stated their wish to parti-
cipate in the doctora' nesting. The planned bilateral neeting bacane the
first "Doctors of the Horld for the Prevention of lluclear Her" international
conference.

In its representativeness, significance of the documents which were adopted
and the attention to the conference on the part of the world pdalic and the
press, radio and television it surpassed all expectations. The Soviet dele-
gations, which included two esters of the USSR Academy of Sciences, 5 neiers
and 3 corresponding sewers of the USSR Acadeay of ludical Sciences, profes-
sors and eninent figures of Soviet nedicine, was anong the nost active and
representative delegations at the conference.

The basic principles of the novenent were formated at the conference. It
was enphasized that doctors. as the professional group nost responsible for
the life and health of the inhabitants of the planet and the nost faniliar
with the tragic consequences of nuclear war, could sake an appreciable con-
tribution to the cause of-‘its prevention. Abiding by their professional honor
and the Hyppocrstic oath. doctors do not have the right to conceal from
their patients the threat to their life which exists in the world today.

For each of our planet's 3 aillion doctors the struggle against the danger of
nuclear war should he not only a nanifestation of huen honesty and hunane-
ness but also a professional duty. This, incidentally, should also be under-
stood by the mters of the HBO. It is not a question-of political problels
but the preservation of the health and lives of all peoples of our planet.

‘.

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A basic principle of the meant is the endeavor to explain to the peoples
of the world and the govertnents of the nuclear powers on the basis of our
knowledge and precise scientific data the danger to life on earth contained
in the nuclear stockpiles and the outbreak of nuclear war.

Comrade lull. Brezhnev said at the 26th CPSU Cmgress: "The peoples must

know the truth about the dire consequences for nankind to which nuclear war
could lead. Ila propose the creation of an authoritative international coa-
mittee whtdh would show the vital necessity for the prevention of a nuclear

catastrophe.... The whole world should be notified of the conclusions which
it reaches.“

In the event of a nuclear strike mder mdern conditions the fate of the
inhabitants of the Japanese cities of ﬂiroshima and Nagasaki would be shared
by tens and hundreds of millions of people. Even a single explosion of a
nuclear bod» with a yield of l negaton (80 times more powerful than the bod:
dropped on Hiroshima) over urban areas would cause devastation and loss of
hunn life on an unprecedented scale. This would also create insoluble
problem for the conpetent medical services which remained. It is sufficient
to say that with a nuclear explosion of a yield of l ugaton in just 1 hour
the amount of radioactivity as a result of the explosion would be equal to
that of 500 nillion kilograms of radium. The risk of a fatal outcona for
the survivors of a nuclear explosion would exist for the rest of their lives.
hany of those affected would live the rest of their lives under the conditions
of the increased risk of leukemia and various malignant tumors.

In the event of a nuclear explosion there would also be disruptions of the
ecological balance (in living organises. agricultural crops and in the acne-
sphere) of a nature ad --scale which can only be guessed at. For sample.
the discharge into the atmsphere of large quantities of the oddes which fora
at the time of the concentrated me of nuclear weapons could destroy the
atnosphere'a ozone layer, which protects the Earth's surface fron penetrating
ultraviolet radiation. which would evidently lead’to the destruction of
plants and aniaals and also injuries to people. There is no analogy to
nuclear war in man's experience in the scale. duration and variety of dangers
for biological and social life. The preservation of civilization itself

1. CC 3:“.

Huge resources, both huan and material, are being diverted into the nuclear
arms race when millions-not people in this world are starving and suffering '
fron various discuss and when there are still nillions of illiterates. Sons
600 million persons are systematically malnourished, 300 million suffer froa
anenia, 100 nillion children face the threat of death from an inadequate '
diet and vita-in shortage and 30 percent of children have no chance of attend-

ing school in the developing countries currently. The arms race is conlicat-
ing the solution of numerous world problem—ecological and energy problem.
problem of health care and education and so forth.

T’Haterisl of the 26th CPSU Congress." p 30.

253

l-‘OIOI-‘FICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Certain cowarative data nay be adduced. In the last 10 years the "30 has
spent approxinately $82 nillion on eradicating snallpot: in the world, which
is less than the cost of a single mdern strategic bonber. According to
certain um calculations, it would take $450 nillion to wipe out nlaria.
fron which over 1 billion people suffer in 66 countries. This is less than
half of the resources spent in the world daily on arnanents and one-third
of thecost of a sdmarine fitted with the Trident nissile systen.

Returning to the work of the ”Doctors of the Horld for the Prevention of
Nuclear Bar" conference. it should he eqhasised that it was held under the
conditions of strong political pressure on the nenhers of the Anerican dele-
gation. The Soviet delegation had to do a great deal of work for the suc-
cessful cowletion of the conference and display initiative in the adoption
of a whole outer of decisions which are_very inportant for the doctors'
covenant and the future of peoples of the whole world. Great assertiveness
was also displayed by the delegations of the Best European countries. who
supported the Soviet delegation's proposal on the adoption of an appeal to
heads of state and the United Nations. The next conference is to be held in
April 1982 in Austria.

The adopted resolution described in detail the tragic consequences for civi-
lization and life on earth in the event of the outbreak of nuclear war and
also pointed to the actions in which doctors should engage in the struggle
to preserve peace. These are extensive infatuation about the nadical prob-
lems connected with nuclear war and the danger of nuclear weapons. discussion
of questions connected with the develop-cut of rules of international law
banning nuclear weapons and so forth. Appeals were adopted at the conference
to I..I. Brezhnev, chair-n of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidiu, and 0.8.
President R. Reagan, heads of states, the United Nations and all the world's
doctors which enphasized the need for talks on reducing and hauling nuclear
am.

In the appeal to the heads of all governnsnts and the United Nations the con-
ferees wrote: ”As doctors. we act in the interests of people, whose health
we are sworn to protect. Scientific data on the ndical consequences of the
use of nuclear weapons convinces us that providing casualties with effective
nedical assistance would be iapossible. we therefore insistently appeal

for remval of the threat of nuclear war to be given the higuat priority.
There is no note isportmt goal than ensuring the conditions for the preserva-
tion of huan civilization."

The nain idea by which the participants in the nova-ant are guided was ex-
pressed in a doth thus: "liar begins in people's minds. hut hunn wisdon
is capable of preventing war."

AJI. Rogenov, secretary of the Moscow Gorkon: "The Party Organisation's Fin
Ties to the Hence—Guarantee of Successful Ideological Work”

There is currently no sphere of the life of our party. our people and our
society which. thanks to the 36th CPS!) Congress. has not received a great
creative boost to its develop-ant.

25‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's striking report at the congress. which contained
profound theoretical generalizations and relevant practical conclusions, has
enriched the party's ideological arsenal. Realizing this wealth in the inter-
ests of «main building and Soviet people's education in a spirit of high
haraist-leniniat comciousness is the paramount, eatraordinarlly responsible
and at the same time inspiring task of each party organization.

Setting the party organisations and all co-anista an eaanple of a truly
creative attitude toward the accosplishment of the economic and sociopolitical
tasks confronting the party and the state, the CPS!) Central Co-ittee and

its Politburo headed by Comrade I..I. Brezhnev are also paying unrelitting
attention to a constant refinement of ideological work, regard it as a most
important part of the process of win building and are displaying the
utmost concern for its increased efficiency and efficacy.

In ilplementing the decisions of the- congress the Noscow Carlton has concen-
trated the efforts of the primary party organisations on an in-depth study of
Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report and other asterial of the 26th CPS!) Congress.
Study and assinilstion of the congress' material by every co-nnist and every
working person is, as the CPSU Central Co-ittee and Conrado L.l. Brezhnev
point out, an essential condition of the realization of the congress' deci-
sions.

The gorkom and the raykons have developed and are inlet-eating measures pro-
viding for the accomplishment of this.

We speak with satisfaction of the fact that a good political and moral atmo-
sphere has evolved in Moscow's collectives; the basis of which is the party
organizations' firm ties to the masses. This, in turn, secures favorable
conditions for ideological education.

The course of the study of the nsterial of the 26th CPSU Congress shows that
the columnists and working people of Hoscow are prepared both politically
and practically to perceive the new tasks and new requirements put forward
by the party for the llth Five-Year Plan. And this is a natural result of
the process of the sociopolitical and economic development of our country and
the party's entire ideological work.

It nay be said with satisfaction that in Moscow, as throughout the country,

the ideas and instructions of the congress are alive and are taking effect.

The results of the elections to the USSR Supran Soviet Council of National-
ities on 12 April. inter alia, testify to this. All of Moscow—6.3 nillion

voters-~participated. Sone 99.97 percent of the electorate voted for candi-
dates of the communist and nonparty bloc.

This is also attested by the results of the work of the capital's working
people in the first quarter of the first year of the new 5—year plan; the
quarterly plan for industrial output mdoutput sales was overfulfilled.

The patriotic undertaking of forenost workers-delegates to the 26th party
congress—fulfilling personal annual quotas by 7 November—is becoming in-
creasingly widespread in the labor collectives. lbre than 200,000 Huscovites
have now asstned this pledge.

255

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Work on the explanation and propaganda of the CPS" Central Col-ittee Report

to the 26th party congress and other aaterial of the congress is an unusually
rewarding latter affording the agitation-propaganda personnel enornous satia-
faction for the working people apprehend the material of the congress with
interest and literally reach out for it-to the extent that the hurning and
stirring issues which it raises are presented in lively and cowrehensible
fern. But this is also connected with high responsibility for explanation and
study need to be conducted such as to preserve the wealth of ideas of the
congress and prevent their smaculation.

This is why we are also paying particular attention to ensuring that the prop-
aganda cadres thenselves assimilate them in depth and that the proper level
of agitation an'dproptsmda be sustained. we are striving to ensure that all
full-tine raykom and party co-ittee workers and meters of methods councils
thesselvee attend classes on the congress' naterisl and gain a: idea of the
quality of these classes and that raykon and party co-ittee bureau and
methods council section meetings priserily analyse the shortcomings in this
matter and deter-inc ways to overcone them.

The Moscw Corkom and the majority of raykom and party co-ittees with ray-
kom status have now exanined the course of study of the congress' materials '
and also the work on implementation of its decisions. Hush has already been
done. But at the same time sons people have the illusion that special efforts
for the organization of the further study of the congress' materials are not
now required.

There is currently nothing more harnful than this "short-camaign" viewpoint.
It has to be overcome everywhere, even if such instances are not that frequent.
Re are striving to ensure that particular attention be paid to categories

of the working people with whida it is organisationally sore difficult to
conduct agitation and propagandr-construction and transport workers and
consumer service and trade workers.

Sometimes much time is given in propaganda work to a recounting of the bene-
fits which are to increase in the new 5-year plan, but silence is maintained
about the fact that these benefits still have to he created and that they are
directly dependent on the results of the labor of everyone. We are emphati-
cally codaating such ehortconings. .

Work on propaganda of the congress' aaterial still frequently lacks e con-
nection with the labor collectives' concrete tasks. It is not everywhere that
an explanation of the need for an increase in the efficiency of production
and its intensification and labor productivity growth is backed up by concrete
assistance on the part of the psopagmdists, agitators and political inferna-
tion workers in the development and substantiation of the working people's
personal taut socialist pledges and comterplans for the current year and the
5-year plan as a whole.

The Hoscow Gorkon Bureau examined the question of the work of the Pervonsyskiy
Raykom on the propaganda and organisation of the inlementstion of the deci-

sions of the 26th CPSU Congress and the reco-endations contained in Comrade
L.I. Brezhnev's report from this viewpoint.

256
FOR 051-10“. USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main purpose of the work that is being done is not only to study the
congress' documents but also inhalant than at every place of work. This
goal is being lost sidlt of in certain party organizations.

‘me extensive dissemination of the experience of the party organization of

the Hoscow Harehaling Yard and a under of others, where the party conittees
are currently holding talks with every mist, is aimed at overcoming

this discrepancy between word and deed. The purpose of the talks is, first,

to ascertain how successfully the content of the congress' doctneents is being
assimilated and eaplsin the questions which arise here and, second, to assist
each co-unist link the congress' material with his personal production assign-
nent in the llth Five-Year Plan.

At its last plenm the gorkom drew the party activists' attention to the fact
that it was too early to rest content in work on propaganda and explanation
of the naterial of the 26th CPSU Congress. A very great deal still has to
be done to ensure that the ideological wealth cultivated by the congress be-
come the personal property of each thiscovite, sad it is only such an approach
which can lead to an ilprovement in the organization of natters in every
area of communist building.

There is no more important task in ideological work currently than reaching
the level of the require-exits put forward by the 26th CPS“ Congress. This
is a responsibbe, creative task, and its acconplishnent has been prepared by
the trenendous experience of educational work which has been accmmnlated in
the party in recent years.

The idea of a conprehensive approach to the entire business of coal-mist
education fort-slated at the 25th party congress has been very fruitful. The
CPSU Central Col-ittee devoted an all-union scientific-practical conference
at the end of 1977 and other meuures and documents to the collation and
dissenination of the party organizations' experience of its practical inle- _
mentstion. Na: high frontiers of ideological work are deter-iced in the CPS"
Central Co-ittee decree "A Further Iaprovement'inldeological and Political
Education" of 26 April 1979, which is geared, u Comrade L.I. Brezhnev ob-
served at the 26th congress, to the distant long term. The all-union seminar-
conference will also undo‘btedly play a sipificant part in the realization
of these goals.

This constant attention of the CPS" Central Co-ittee to questions of ideology
and education strikingly manifests a Leninist style in party work.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized in the report at the 26th party congress the
need for the reorganization of any areas and spheres of ideological work to
ensure that in content it become more relevant and in fora correspond to a
greater extent to Soviet people's level of culture and knowledge. Much is
being done in this field in Moscow.

Party, Konsoml and economic training has been stepped up and brought closer
to practice. Mass-political work, including that along the population at the

257

me OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY

place of residence, has becone lore fruitful. lbscow newspapers, television.
radio and oral agitation are showing lore strikingly the labor achieve-ants
and progressive experience of the participants in socialist coapetition and
that which is new which is born in the activity of the priaary party organi-
sations and labor collectives. All ideological education is an inalienable
want of the accosplishnent of the task of making Moscow a nodal co-un-
ist city. A coaprehensive approach to the organization of cousunist educa-
tion is being catered for considerably nore fully by the practice of current
and forward planning. Ideological cos-issions under the auspices of the
Moscowcorkoe and naykoas and in the Iajority of party co-ittees and party
bureau have been created and are operating successfully.

These and other positive phenomena in educational work have exerted their
influence on the fact that Hoscow as a whole and all its enterprises coped
successfully with the 10th Five-Year Plan quotas.

At the same time we understand that these are yesterday's successes and that
new, sore cosplex tasks lie ahead of us. Ideological work and its refine-ant
and reorganisation, the purpose of which, we believe. is to ensure that the
for-s, name and level of the party organizations' ideological work be brought
into line in all things with the party's Iain orientation—attention to m
and his life, work, social existence and leisure and concern for his material
and spiritual well-being-should he stbordineted to their sccoqlishesnt.

The capital's party organization has Inch work to do to ensure the transition
' of the city's econon to the tracks of intensive development. As is known,
Moscow has tremendous industrial and scientific-technical potential, which

to a considerable extent influences the develop-ant of my sectors of the
country's economy. his production progren is being fulfilled currently under
the conditions of the nodcrnisation of the enterprises and their retooling
of unprecedented scale. There will be no increase in the ntﬂer of jobs
here. A verycoaplex demographic situation is taking shape: the nui>er of
persons retiring on pension here is greater than the number of those begin-
ning their work life.

Under these conditions there is particular increase in the daunds nude on
society‘s nain production force—earned, consequently, the question of the
quality of ideological work and an increase in individual ideological education
beconas increasingly acute. mat ensures its success?

The role of the brigade-this important cell of the labor collective—has
increased recently and will continue to grow throughout production life. This
phenoeenon is a col-send of the tines. It is a neans of increasing efficiency
and work quality. The accent on the brigade was reflected in the well-known
CPSU Central Committee and 11583 Council of Ministers decree question of an
isprovelent in the economic mechanism

Yet ideological work is not yet putting or not putting fully this obvious
accent on the brigade as the center of educational work with nan . But it
is the collective of the brigade, department. study group, laboratory and

258

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

division which has a tremendous ideological-educational impact on man. The
principle of a cowrehensive approach to the business of education may be
realised most fully here.

Conditions even more conducive to educational work are being created with
the transition of the brigades to a single job-order, and we already have
approximately 20,000 of these. At the imeni Valdinir Il'ich, Automtive
Electrical Equipment No l, “Kmreesor” and 211. plants, in the Metrostroy and
in house-building works and other collectives the brigades' transition to a
single job-order with payment as per the end result has contributed not only
to a growth of labor productivity. the increaad quality of the manufactured
product and a reduction in losses and shoddy work but also to a strengthen-
ing of discipline, heightened organisation and an increased thirst for knowl-
edge and higher qualifications.

The time has evidently come to switch to the practice whereby in bringing

the political training systea up to strength the principle of the brigade—

a unified couective--be taken into consideration together with the educa-
tional princple. Oral political agitation should be conducted in the brigades.
It is necessary to pay the closest attention to the ideological-political
training of foremen and brigade leadersuthese educators by production
activity type.

incidentally, not only the enterprise party organizations but also the higher
school, since its graduates are increasingly reinforcing the foremn and
brigade leader personnel, should be involved in this question.

It has to be said that whereas in recent years much has been done in the
scientific development of the problems of the labor collective, the problem
of the brigade as the primary production cell have as yet been less well
developed, unfortunately.

A nest important goal of the reorganization of ideological work is a further
increase in the educational role of math practice. To achieve this we
are introducing increasingly extensively managers' reports at raykom and
party conlittee bureau nestings. But this is not enough. It is necessary,
finally, that the ministries and departments be fully involved in the solution
of this problem. At foreman schools at the enterprises and at various
courses under ministry auspices Iiddleetier managers are studying questions
of the production process, but, as a rule, questions of the ideological-moral
developnent of the labor collective are not being dealt with. Ministry
leaders should considerably revise the-pram of the training and retraining
of managers of the middle tier of production, linking in one the management
and educational aspects. This also, we believe. is part of the neorganiza-
tion concept.

A lost inortant area of ideological work is the col-mist education of the
younger generation. In Moscow, as everywhere, favorable conditions have been
created for its all-around spiritual and physical development. An active
position in life and the skills of independent creative work are being shaped
more purposefully in the future workers and specialists and their enlistment
in labor and public activity is being practiced more extensively in the schools
and vocational-technical colleges and VIIZ's and tekhnikums.

259
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the sans time the systen of the youth's occupational, noral and aesthetic
training requires even lore appreciable iaprovenent. We see potential for
an inproveaent in the work with the youth in a further increme in the role
and authority of the teacher and lecturer., a broadening of their outlook,
their increased ideological conditioning and the creation for then of the
best conditions (including social conditions) for full concentration on
educational work.

The housing office teachers' institute and juvenile group and section leaders.
that is, all who in their professional and public activity are connecting
with the youth's education require the closest attention. Unfortunately,
still far froa every party organization is sending the best propagandist,
lecturer and political information worker for work with the,youth at the
place of residence.

Heart-to-heart and confidential talks with the young people without notes

and in '. ich acute questions are not avoided are rare. We believe that an
increase in the responsibility of everyone who at the behest of the party

and the state works with the younger generation contains an iaportsnt re-
source of an increase in the effectiveness of education. And we are directing
the party organizations' attention toward this. On the other hand. it is
ilportant that in the work and study group the young people sense trust in
then and have their own illportant work, that is, that the atlosphere itself
create the conditions conducive to their education.

Conrade HA. Suslov emphasized in his introductory renrks at the seainar-
conference that it is necessary to take fuller account of the exacerbation
of the class struggle in the international arenad" "...It would be wrong,"
he said, "to ignore the iapact of alien ideology on the minds of sons people."*

The USSR capital is given particularly close attention by our class monies
and their propaganda and intelligence services. The capital's party organ-
izations have begun to react more prowtly to the subversive work of the
enemy and to expose its malicious. inpudent slander sure aggressively. At
the same tine we still have much to do in this field. It is primarily a
question of teaching every propagandist, lecturer, agitator and political'
information worker to analyze the most ilportant events of international and
domestic life from precise class-political positions.

I would like to mention a further iaportant reserve of a refinement of ideolog-
ical-political and educational work with people--sn inproveunt in the train-
ing of ideological personnel. In speaking of the effectiveness of Marxist-
Leninist education we all emphasize the ilportance of debate, the lively
discussion of questions in classes and eaployunt of the so-called active
methods and forms of propaganda. And at the sane ties the Iain form of
training at propaganda seminars rrequently remains the monologue—lecture,
paper or report. Very little tine is devoted at the seminars to an investi-
gati on and discussion of typical nistakes. "practical gases," open classes

*1'his publication. p 7.

260

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
and so forth. Insufficient attention is being paid to the style, form and

tone of propaganda. And this applies not only to the propagandists but also
other categories of ideological personnel.

For this reason we are endeavoring increasingly actively to create support
schools for disseninating the best propaganda experience and to introduce
such fonas of work with propagandists and other ideological personnel as
practical assign-ants and the discussion of books, theatrical performances
and motion pictures. We are conducting more classes in psychology, logic.
pedagogics, sociological analysis methods and the art of oratory.

we express profound gratitude to the party Central Couaittee for the organi-
zation and realization of the all-union seiner-conference and note with
satisfaction its tineliness, high theoretical level and great practical value.
Its naterial will undoubtedly serve to perfect ideological work in the Mos-
cow city party organization and further inprove mscovites' education in a
spirit of the great ideals of mien.

A.s. Kapto. secretary of the Ukrainian Comist Party Central Conittee:
"Communist Bducation—Conprehensimeas and Purposefulness"

It is not that long since the start of the historic 26th CPSU Congress and
the day when the fundamental analysis of the main processes of world develop-
ment contained in the CPSU Central Comittee Report delivered by Conrade

L.I. Brezhnev, an analysis inbued with revolutionary spirit and an innovative
approach to urgent econonic and social problens, becne the-property of all
progressive unkind. But even this brief interval of tine ha been suf-
ficient for us to see what a tremendous imct the congress' docunents are
having and will continue to have on the sociopolitical life of society.

The Ukraine's party co-ittees have initiated work extensively on propaganda
of the documents and Interial of the 26th CPW Congress. It is being organ-
ized on a practical basis. without undue haste and is being performed con-
sistently and purposefully in all labor collectives and among all categories
of the population. It is being perforned by over 1.5 Iillion of the lost
skilled cadres and activists. The labor collectives are at the center of
their attention. Imnediately following cowletion of the congress, the
Ukrainian Col-mist Party Central Connittee and the obko- sent propaganda
groups into the labor collectives. They assisted the prinary party organi-
zat ions in the develop-ant of propaganda of its decisions.

A uniform political day was held in the republic on 25 March on the thene
"Lenin's Way of Creation and Peace". There have been lectures, papers and
talks in 337,000 labor collectives. These have been attended by more than

21 million people—practically the entire adult population of the republic.
Some 2,786 delegates to the 26th CPSU and Ukrainian Commist Party congresses,
S90 USSR and republic suprene soviet deputies, ninistry and department leaders
and party-soviet activists—over 600,000 people altogether—took part in
meetings and conversations with the working people on this day.

261

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thousands of new political schools and seminars have been created in the
labor collectives in the system of party, Romsomol and economic training

in addition to the existing network. More than 13 million persons altogether
are studying the congress' material in the political and economic education
Ont”. '

In developing propaganda of the congress' docusents the republic's party
co-ittees are paying considerable attention to ensuring that it enmspass as
fully as possible the student youth: senior graders, tekhnikm and vocation-
al-technical school trainees end students.

The speeches to such a dynamic social group as the students are prepared pur-
posefully, for exasple. It is now that a precise system of the students'
regular notification of urgent questions-of CPS!) policy is taking shape in
the Ukraine's WZ's. Uniform political days are held quarterly in all the
WZ's. Permanent lecture series for student activists have been organised
in the major W2 centers. Ukrainian Co-uniu Party Central Couittee sec-
retaries, party and soviet workers, ministry and department and VUZ leaders
and personalities of science and culture speak here regularly. Thus the
activists are obtaining -a reference point for lectures and talks before use
student audiences. And every next speech is planned and organized, further-
more, with regard for continuity and on the basis of an analysis of students'
questions put at previous neetings.

For an explanation of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Cmgress at the place
of residence special goal-oriented visits of agitation—propaganda groups
and agitation teams to remote villages and fsrutesda are practiced every-
where, new agitatlsneites ere beingopened and political information evenings
are being held. Active use is also being made of such tested form as
sociopolitical readings, lecture series, motion picture lecture ceases,

the people's universities and so forth.

The necessary attention is being paid in the work at the place of residence
to such a category of the population as the pensioners. Rayon pensioner
meetings have bees-e a part of practice in Kiev, thereon and other Ukrainian
cities at which rayon-level leaders speak. lectures and talks on socio-
political subjects are combined here with answers to questions of concern
to war and labor veterans and with trips to enterprises, new construction
projects and sociocultural facilities.

Such a category of working people as long-distance sailors is singled out

in Odesskaya, Nikolayevskaya, Krymskaya, Donestskaya and certain other
ohlasts. Tape recordings of lectures, talks and the speeches of delegates
to the 26th CPSU Congress, sets of slides, notion pictures, film strips,
transparencies and minilibraries to help lecturers, propegandists, political
information workers and agitators are sent to ships far from the motherland.

In organizing the study of the 26th CPSU Congrese' material we are displaying
concern for the qualitative aspect and for ensuring a high theoretical and
methods level of propaganda work. (blast, city and rayon seminars for ideo-
logical activists were conducted everywhere here in the first half of March
to this end, meetings with delegates to the 26th CPSU Congress were organised

262

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK'IAI. “SI-10M}

and the appropriate nethods develop-ants were prepared. We are endeavoring
to ensure that the material of the congress be studied in close connection
with the entire wealth of the ideological heritage of Marxism-Lenin",

the documents and decisions of the 23d, 25th and 25th CPSU congresses and
Central Couittee plenu- and the works and speeches of Conrado L.I. Brezh-
nev. It was the qualitative aspect which was given priority in the examina-
tion in the Ukrainian Col-mist Party Central Co-ittee of the question of
the work of the party organizations of Glernigovs'kaya Oblast on propaganda
and explanation of the decisions and neterial of the 26th CPS!) Congress.

me propagandists, lecturers and rapporteurs are closely linking the content
of their speeches with the socioeconoaic tasks confronting the collectives
and endeavoring to determine the place of each industrial enterprise,
kolkhoz, sovkhoz, establishment and individual in their accowlishment.

We apire to the harmonious coﬁination of approved, traditional forum of
propaganda and the study of party decisions with new forms. Among these we
any mention the preparation of large-scale television and radio broadcasts.
the formation of young people's scientific-technical program, journalists'
joint briefings of coqeting oblasts and distinctive social orders to the
republic's scientists providing for fmdanental research'- into the problem
raised in the decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress.

The "Tribune of the Ukrainian SSR Acadeuy of Sciences" pernanent lecture
series, for exane, has gained extensive popularity along the Kiev working
people. Its purpose is to explain the latest discoveries and achievements
of science and technology and coqleted scientific develop-eats and actively
assist the coﬁination of science and production. In the time that the lac-
ture series has been conducted there have been 26 acting; at which sci-tists
have delivered reports to the city's ptblic. Similar meetings are also
conducted on the basis of regional scientific centers of the UkSSR Acadel'y

of Sciences in the cities of Dnepropetrovsk, Kar'kov, Donetsk, L'vov and
Odessa.

A new form may emerge as the result of the development of for” of ideological
work which have existed hitherto. Let us take, for exaaple, the miforn poli-
tical day. It was born here at the rayon level and subsequently can to be
conducted within an oblast framework. Reptblic political days, on which
ideological influence extends simultaneously to 15-20 aillion working people.
have now become a part of practice.

Whereas previously the naterial collected in the course of a uniform poli-
tical day was systenatized and collated on a rayon scale and sometimes that
of an individual oblest, this is now done on the scale of the republic, on
whose territory over 50 nillion people live. For exanple. 270,000 questions
and proposals were received from the working people at neetings and in con-
versation with then on 25 March alone. Party workers and scientists have
received a wealth of material for the study of public opinion and its pur-
poseful for-scion. The Ukrainian Oomist Party Central Co-ittee regularly
analyzes the questions bhat 'are received and enlists the appropriate Central
Collittee depart-eats, the reptblic Comcil of Hinisters and ninistries and
departments in their solution. Sinilar work is being performed locally.

263

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we will continue to refine the for-e of the traditional reptblic Propagandist's
Day in order to contribute to the increased authority and, if you will.
attractiveness of propaganda work. matings in the Ikrainian Co-uniet Party
Central Committee Politburo with representatives of various categories of
working people and party activists have become an effective fora of work.
lbetinge with instructors. propagandiets. war veterans, production pace-
setters and Romeo-In workers have been held jut recently.

Propaganda and study of the docunenta of the 26th CPSU Congress are combined
in the republic with the tinely support for and'extensive dissenination of
labor initiatives. The uses information and propaganda organs are giving a
pretty good account of thuelvee here. Very inportant questions of a
solicitous attitude toward plblic property, particularly toward netal and
land, were raised in articles by 6.1a. Corban'. celebrated steel worker, twice
hero of socialist labor and delegate to the 26th CPSU Congress, in RABOCBAYA
GAZETA and also in a letter-appeal to all grain growers fron Hero of Social-
ist Labor YeJl. Parubok, thewell-hwwn machine operator. in the newspaper
SIL'SKI VIS‘II. The collective of the Arc Welding Institute imeni Ye.0. Paton
has appealed for the development of socialist cowetition under the notto

"The Union of Creative Thought and Creative Labor for the Accelerated Creation
and Introduction of New Equipment and Technology”. “mess initiatives have
been approved by the Ukrainian (Jo-mist Party Central Conittee. They

have already been supported by hundreds of labor collectives and tens of
thousands of working people.

Work on the disseeination of the labor collectivea' patriotic initiatives ained
at an increase in labor productivity, an acceleration of scientific-techni-
cal progress end an iaprovement in product quality has asemd a Dre specific
and purposeful nature in the course of propaganda of the decisions of the

26th CPSU Congress. Among these we any mention any valuable undertakings:
“Progressive Experience for Every Labor Collective, Progressive Hork Methods
at Every Place of Work," "The Highest Results Ptom Every Working Hour," ”From
Top-Quality Steel to Rolled Metal with the Sydol of Quality," ”Projects hear-
ing Completion To Be Introduced Ahead of Schedule, "1.000 Kilometers a Day

for 5-Year Plan Freight" and others. Particular attention is being paid

to the further dissenination of initiatives and undertakings approved by the
CPSU Central Comittee.

An object of the Ukrainian party organizations' constant concern is a further
improvement in ideological education at enterprises of heavy industry and,
particularly, its base sectors—fuel-energy, metallurgical and chemical
industry-and at shock construction sites. The republic'e party couittees
are endeavoring to concentrate this work as much as possible and clearly
deternine the role and place both of oral and printed propaganda in the
accolpliehment of the key taeke of the 11th Five-Year Plan.

In the work on explanation of the congress' documents we are endeavoring
to nake use of the wealth of experience and new forms which have appeared
in the party organizations of Moscow, Leningrad and the fraternal republics.

We regard what has been done in the republic on propaganda of the decisions
of the 26th CPSU Congress merely as a start and as a period of ease faaili-
arization with the nain economic and sociopolitical evaluations and proposi-
tions contained in the congress' aaterial. A great deal of work still has

26!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to be done on the systematic study and extended theoretical interpretation
and practical fulfillment of the decisions of the highest party form.

All these questions have been reflected in organizational-political measures
of the Ukrainian Communist Party Central Co-ittee. They were extensively
discussed at a meeting of the republic‘e party activists and examined at a
Ukrainian Communist Party Central Comaittee plenum. It is essential that
their solution presuppose a further refinement of ideological-educational
activity on the basis of a coqrehensive approach thereto and the development
of the long-term problems connected with fulfillment of Comrade L.I. Brezh-
nev's instructions concerning the need for the reorganization of my areas
and spheres of ideological work.

Reorganization as we understand it is by no means a fundamental break with
the evolved system and organizational components of ideological work. The
Ukrainian Communist Party Central Co-ittee orients the party courittees
toward a thoughtful approach to this problem and demands that there not be
undue haste or a departure from reality. In reorganizing ideological-
educational activity we are relying primarily on the available experience
of the competent and effective organization of the educational process. And
this is everywhere. For example, the Donetskaya Oblast party organization
is performing fruitful work on the working people's occupational and moral
training. Special services of regulation of the moral-psychological climate
have given a good account of the-elves at many enterprises of Dneptopetrov-
skaya Oblast. In L'vovskaya (blast work has been skillfully organized on
overcoming the influence of bourgeois-nationalist propaganda and in
(hernigovskaya Oblast on patriotic and international education.

Scientific-practical conferences , particularly those organized by the CPSU
Central Col-ittee, are a good form of the analysis and collation of positive
experience in the organisation of co-mnnist education. It is essential that
the positive experience be extended, developed and disseminated. It is
impossible to tackle the new tasks effectively without this. It is no less
important to study in depth and analyse everything new that is born of prac-
tice and formulate recomaendations for the party organizations on this basis.
We see the collation. dissemination and effective introduction 0f the progres-
sive experience of cat-mist education as a principal element of the reorgan-
ization of the ideological process.

Another component thereof we consider the selection and training of ideologi-
cal personnel capable of grasping in detail what is not working and where

and answering the question why. After all, it is no secret that we still
have people who are not averse to concealing their own inactiveness behind
verbiage about allegedly outmoded form of ideological influence on the
masses. But upon a more careful examination it transpires that there is
absolutely no problem and that it is merely necessary to work and work with
maximum input. Selecting people who like their work and teaching them and
training them-this is the cm of the matter.

In recent years we have encountered increasingly the need to imove the
retraining of this category of agitation-propaganda personnel or the other.

265

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sectorial for. of the training of economic school and seninar leaders

has been expanded and the certificationto'flecturere of the party co-ittees
and the "Znaniye" Society has been undertaken for this purpose. Five reptblic
and 11 oblut correspondence lecturer-training departnents have been set up
under the auspices of the leading "12's. Work is being done on the creation
under "Znaniye" Society ampices of a lecturer personnel retraining imtitute.

Due attention is being paid to an increase in the qualifications of personnel
engaged in criticism of bourgeois nationalisn, international Zionism and
religious extremism. Three republic permanent seminars have been set up on
these issues. Two-year lecturer courses are functioning on the basis of

the Ukrainian Commist Party Central Col-ittee's Higher Party School.

A system of the training and retraining of atheiatic personnel has been
developed. Various formsoo'f training extend to over 100 .000 lecturer-
atheists. Some 25 oblast and 2 city centers for the training of organizers
of new Soviet holidays and rituals have been created.

In a word, the training of ideological personnel has improved in many respects.
It is now tine, we believe, to unify these scattered efforts and create a
uniform system of the training of ideological personnel of all categories.

Such a systea is now being developed by the llrainian Commist Party Central
Cot-litres, which will make it possible to exercise centralized leadership of
the training and retraining-of ideological personnel.

One further important ale-ant of the reorganization of the ideological pro-
cess is the shift of the center of ideological-educational activity directly
to the labor collectives. The Mainian Commist Party Central Co—ittee
has approved concrete measures for stepping up political education in the
primary production cells. The main accent here is put on the efficient use
of the educational resources at the disposal of the party organizations and
practical assistance to then on the part of the-rayon, oblast and republic
organizations.

He shall not be successful here without in-depth sociological research, the
systenatic performnce of which is also a most inportant element of the
reorganization of the ideological process. We have planned the perfornance
of such research into a whole umber of urgent problens concerning the
fostering of reasonable requiremts and an increase in the educational func-
tions of the labor collective and sources of intonation and their effective-
ness and influence on the shaping of public opinion.

We are placing big hopes in this respect in the recently opened sociology de-
partnents at the Kiev and Khar'kov universities and the research into the
nost important questions of the CPSU's ideological activity under the con-
ditions of developed socialism being perforated by the Ukrainian Con-unist
Party Central Co-ittee Institute of Party History and institutes of the
republic Academy of Sciences.

266

FOIOFFICIALIJSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ukrainian Cos-mist Party Central Conittee is currently studying a
proposal for the creation of a single republic scientific research center for
the theory and methods of ideological work capable of coordinating the activ-
ity of individual depart-eats and groups engaged in this set of problem.
Proposals are being prepared on the creation of a reptblic Political Educa-
tion Center from the staff of the oblast political education centers.

And, finally. concerning a further inportant aspect of a refine-en: of im-
logical work. I refer to a further inprovenent in the activity of the. use
information and propaganda nedia. The republic Co-unist Party Central Con-
nittee has developed concrete neuures to this end. The Iain areas and sub-
ject latter of press articles and television and radio broadcasts in the
light of the decisions of the 26th party congress have been deternined. The
briefing of journalists has inroved. In particular, press conferences in
which readers of the Politburo and secretaries of the Central Co-ittee of
the Ukrainian Coil-mist Party and obkon secretaries participate are held
monthly. Press relations groups are being created under ministry and depart-
nent auspices. The trans-iesion of WA!) reports to the press organs is
differentiated in order to avoid duplication as far on possible.

The work practice of the editorial offices includes open-letter days at the
working people's place of work, training and residence. Measures have been
outlined for an inprovenent in the selection, aseiyusnt and training of
journalist personnel, the planning of journalist training in the universities
and a reinforcement of the press' physical plant. All these and other ques-
tions will becone an integral part of the "Press" conprahensive progran being
drawn up in the rep‘blic.

In accordance with the directives of the 26th CPSU Congress. the republic
party co-ittees are doing such to further ilprove ideological and political
education. But a great deal remains to be done. Arned with-:the historic
decisions of the party congress. the thomands-strong any of the republic's
ideological fiyzters will nits a fitting contribution to the forution of the
new nan and our great cannon cause-the building of con-miss.

*VJi. Borisenkov, secretary of the Moscow Obkon: "Increasing the Role of
Propaganda and Agitation in Rializetion of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU
Congress"

In the party organizations and labor collectives of the Moscow area. as in
other oblasts of the country. fatilisrization of the broad working people's

masses with Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report and other neterial of the congress
began while the 26th CPSU Congress was still at work even.

267

MOWUSBONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I-ediately following the congress, the obkom held an oblast conference of
ideological workers, at which Conrade v.1. Konotop, first secretary of the
Moscow Gorkom, delivered the report "Renlte of the 26th CPSU Congress and
the Taste of the Oblast's Party Organisations". 'Sinilar meetings were also
held in all gorkome and nylon: and large-scale party organizations. They
were addressed by gorkom and raykom first secretaries and congress delegates.
and reco-andations were made concerning propaganda and study of the CPS!)
Central Coulittee Report and other documents of the congress. Questions of
propaganda of the uterial of the congress were discussedat-plenuls of the
oblast Council of Trade Unions, Konoml obkon and oblsst "Znaniye" Society
organization; A uniform political day was held in the oblast in March on
the theme "Ienin's Ray of Co-Inist Creation and Peace" on the results of
the 26th CPSU Congress. Fifteen propaganda groups, which addressed 600,
predominantly rural, labor collectives, were sent to remote area of the
oblast. By the start of April we had nnagad to have nde almst all ideo-
logical personnel part of active agitation and propaganda in the majority of
party organizations.

Study of the congress' documents is currently under way in all party
organizations in the system of party and Kouomol training and economic edu-
cation. chm executives and gorkom and rsykon first secretaries and bureau
neaters and staff workers have participated in conducting classes.

The obkom bureau examined the question "Propaganda and Study of the Material
of the 26th CPS“ Congress in the Hytishchinshays City Party Organization"
and the Moscow Gorkoa Scononic Education Council examined the question "Study
of the CPS!) Central Col-ittee Report to the 26th Party Congress in the
Econonic Educat ion Systen at the Gltthov and Orekhov Cotton Works".

The classes have shown that the co-unists and nonparty people are studying
and discussing with great interest the propositions and conclusions of Con-
rade L.I. Brezhnev's report and the urgent problem of party policy. These
classes are conducted in a creative. businesslike atmosphere. as a rule. The
propagandists and the audiences are attenting to link the propositions of
the CPSII Central Col-uttee Report with the tasks of their labor collectives
and their own work. There is a frank discussion at the classes concerning
the inculcation of high political and mral qualitites, active positions in
life and la: and order, drunkenness. sloppiness and consumerist and philistine
sentinents. Questions of political vigilance and' the need for the eaphatic
exposure of bourgeois and revisionist ideology and anti-Sovietism are being
raised sharply.

Study of the congress' material is contributing to an increase in connists'
vanguard role in production and in all public-political life. The party
co-ittees are striving to ensure that every com-mist study the congress'
material in depth, propagandize its ideas actively and do everything neces-
sary for the accomplishment of the tasks outlined by the congress.

The initiative of progressive workers of Moscow and Leningrad—fulfilling
the annual quote by 7 Novelber—has been extensively supported in the oblest.

268

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Such pledges have already been adopted by approximately 150 .000 persons
working in industry, including lore than 81,000 communists, and 54 textile
workers have given their word on fulfilling two-three 5-year quotas in the
5-year plan.

Comrade L.I. Brezhnev recently congratulated the textile workers V.Ye. Iaokteva
and NJ. Grigor'yeva on the ahead-of-echedule fulfillment of the annual plan.

Each of then has pledged to fulfill 20 annual qmtas in the 5 years. And they
are keeping their word.

Questions of an inprovenent in the organisation of socialist competition are
constantly at the center of the oblaat party organization's attention. A
very important part here is played by mass-political work. The party organ-
isations one using the entire arsenal of use intonation and propaganda
nsdia in order to extensively show the experience of the pacesetters. Thus
almost all workers of our oblaet's textile industry knew literally the next
day of the lmor victory of V.Ye. bokteva and NJ. Crigor'yeva. And we have
273,000 of then. Our Iain efforts are einad at involving every working per-
son in socialist comeptition.

Son 593,000 working people are currently participating in cowetition under
the notto "Personal Efficiency Accomta for All Brigades and Workers, a Per-
sonal Creative Plan for Every Specialist". In such cities as Blektrostal'.
Podol'sk, Koloma and Balashikha practically all enterprise workers and
engineering-technical personnel are involved in this cowetition. The obkoa
bureau has approved the experience offits initiators—the Blektrostal' work-
ers. The party comittees are working persistently on a further improvement
in socialist cowetiwon on the basis of personal efficiency accounts.

A further increase in labor productivity is very iqortant for our oblaet—
there is a nanpower shortage in nany leading areas of production. Labor
productivity growth potential is being souﬂat in all the labor collectives.

A nu: direction in the movement for high labor productivity has been deter-
nined in the joint quest of textile industry operator-innovators and engineer-
ing-technical personnel. Plan-based engineering support for the work of the
multiple-loos operators in the Kurovskoye Melange Production Association and
at the Orekhov Cotton Norks has made it possible to create areas of high
productivity.

The experience of these collectives has been approved by the obkon bureau and
is being propsgandized extensively. Some 1,160 areas of high labor produc-
tivity in which the workers' labor productivity level is 20-30 percent above
the sectorial average have already been created in the oblaet's textile and
light industry. The organization of such areas affords an opportunity of
affecting the transition to the above-standard zone of servicing of the loom
and nachinery not only for individual progressive workers but also entire
brigade, shift and shop collectives. Currently 96 percent of spinners and
90 percent of weavers of the oblaet operate in an above-standard servicing
zone. The workers' nass transition to nultiple-loon servicing has nade it
possible recently to transfer 850 highly skilled workers to locus and nachinery
which were hitherto idle.

269

FOR OFFICIAL [SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The creation of high labor productivity areas and the transition to multiple-
loon. above-standard servicing have also revealed a big discrepancy between
the work of certain pacesetters and the so-callad "middling" workers. The
question arises of how to pull the niddling level of work up to the advanced
level as quickly as possible.

Accumlated experience testifies that this problen can be solved with the
help of the brigade form of the organisation and stimulation of labor. Fol-
lowing mscovitea' example, the oblast's party organisations have switched
in to the propaganda and dissenination of this experience the system of party
training and economic education. connist labor schools, the ease infornse
tion asdia and oral and visual propaganda. The brigade forn is now being
introduced in all sectors of the national econouy. Alnost 22.000 brigades
have already been created. A study of the results of their work in different
sectors of the economy persuades us that with this organization of labor a
person's creative potential, his professional training and his ears]. qualities
are revealed nore fully and a good atnos'phere evolves for people's education
in s collectivist spirit.

Any initiative ained at an increase in labor productivity requires the daily
support of the party organisations. The efficacy and efficiency of different
ferns and naans of ideological support are checked out here. The rapidity
and scale of a new initiative's dissenination largely depend on how it is
propaganized and the nature of the agitation for its introduction.

Proceeding fron the guidelines of the 25th and 26th 0280 congresses. the obkon,
gorkom and raykons and the prinary party organisations are endeavoring to
ensure the unity of ideological-theoretical. political-educational and organ-'
izing and econosdc activity. Great significance is attached here to the
skillful use of the positive experience of ideological work which has already
been accumlated.

The Elektrostel'skiy Gorkon's experience of the analysis of the state and
results of ideological education in the labor collectives and in the city as
a whole is of definite interest in this respect. An office of party work
experience was opened in the gorkon recently. It is designed to analyse,
collate and disseninate the best experience of the work of the party con-
Inittees, prinary party organizations and party groups and render the party
machinery workers and the ideological and party-economic activists procedural
and practical assistance in a refinenent of the form and netth of organi-
zational and ideological work and in an inprovenent in the style of party
leadership of econonic and cultural building. The works of the classical
authors of Haraisn-Leninisn, naterial of party congresses, 0980 Central Con-
nittee decrees. a vast mum of literature on various fieldeuof organisa-
tional-party, ideologcal and econonic work and a great deal of reference
material are concentrated in the office. The structure of the control of
ideological education in the city is graphically represented in charts and
outlines and on stands. Active use of the available infornetion is made by
party, econonic and ideological workers. The Blektrostal'skiy Gorkon has
equipped the office such that it is pleasant to work in it. The prenises are
tastefully decorated and the infornation is stored in separate files on open
stands. It is easy for everyone to find the nterial of interest to his: here.

270

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sociological research is also contributing to the collation and disse-ination
of progressive experience. A careful analysis of the results obtained en-
ables the gorkoe to objectively evaluate the state of organizational-party
and ideological work in this party organization or the other and adopt well-
considered decisions.

The obkos has studied the practice of the work of-‘.the positive experience
office in the Blektrostal'skiy Gorkon and conducted a seninar of gorkon and

reykon ideological workers, at which creative use of this experience was re-
conended.

The obkos regularly conducts seminars of ideological activists on an exchange
of experience of the best kolkhoz and sovkho: party organizations. Such a
seminar was held recently in Deitrovskiy Rayon, and its participants were
faniliarized with the experience of the ideological-political work of the
party organization of the "Dadtrovskiy" Sovkhoz and the Yakhronskiy Sovkhoa-
Tekhnikun in the spring sowing period.

Under the conditions of intensification of the national economy great signi-
ficance is attached to the economic education of the workers, kolkhcz meters,
engineering-technical personnel and the nenagers. "It is wrong to believe,"
Conrade L.I. Brezhnev emphasized, "that only inportant scientists and leaders
deal with econonic laws. These laws. if correctly understood, dictate a
logic of behavior not only to the adninistrator, engineer, scientist and
technician but to every ordinary worker and kolkhos neﬁer also.“

Many propagandists mks skillful use in the classes of Conrade 1..I. Brezhnev's '
books "Vozrozhdeniye" and ”Tselina" and his speeches on questions of the
developaent of the country's econony and problena of the working people's
co-unist education.

Scientific-practical conferences on urgent questions-of the oblast's' econoly
have becone an effective forn of econonic education here. The obkoe has held
conferences devoted to problens of an increase in efficiency and work quality
at textile and light industry enterprises and economies in live labor expen-
diture based on the achieve-ants of scientific-technical progress in construc-
tion, a refine-eat of the econonic nechsnisn end the increased role of social-
ist competition in co-nmist building.

The naterial of the conferences and the adopted reconendations are discussed,
as a rule, at classes in the economic education systen. which exerts a posi-
tive influence on the entire educational process. Thus in the course of dis-
cussion of the recouendations of the scientific-practical conference
"Progressive Experience in the Systen of Measures To Refine the Economic
Hechaniss" the propagandists presented theiinitiatiwe of a supplementary
class on the theme "Hy Contribution to the 5-Year Plan". The obkon supported
this initiative and recomended that a creative, bminesslike approach be
adopted to these classes. These classes were held everywhere in January and
February 1981; they sumaed up the students‘ fulfillnent of the counterplans

*L.I. Brezhnev, "Lenin's Way,ii Moscow, 1973, vol 1, p 383.

271

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and socialist pledges in 1980. there was a thorough discussion-of every-
one's plans for the 11th 5-year period.

In the :light of the require-ants of the 26th CPS!) Congress the oblast party
organisation has such to do to inrove work with people in the lagging col-
lectives. particularly in the countryside.

‘lhe oblast has progressive, average and lagging ferns. Following a thorough
study of the state of affairs, 100 aovkhozes and kolkhozes proved to he strag-
glers. , Serious gaps in ideological education were revealed on a under of
then.

The obkon has set the tuk of a sharp reduction in the number of lagging fares
in the 11th Five-Year Plan. Cowrehensive brigades ends up of specialists

and party workers were sent to these kolkhoses and sovkhozes at the start of
the year to render the farm practical assistance. The brigades were headed
by secretaries, bureau nssbers and dcpartnent chiefs of the obkon. Hith the
help of rayon and oblast specialists each far- has drum up develop-ant plans
for 1981 and the period through 1985. Their i-spleasntation is being nonitored
currently. The lagging ferns are visited regularly by obkon secretaries and
other executives of the oblast, who deliver political reports there md help
strengthen the econony and solve questions of capital construction. striving
for an increase in the returns on invested capital.

One of our priority tasks is bringing the lagging ferns up to strength with
personnel. prinarily ailkers. We have a shortage of th- here. There are
my reasons for this. The gem. and raykons are now working on ensuring
that each rayon send [meal-youth detachaents to the livestock far-tends.
The first such detachnent of 70 persons has already been forned in Lukhovitskiy
Rayon. It includes 53 school leavers who have expressed a wish to work as
tankers. The work anong the yomg people is also producing results in other
rayons of the oblast also. But this is only a start. Much work has to be
done to ensure that each rayon dispatch its own youth detechaent into animal
husbandry. And the party organizations have «barked on this task actively.
He attach particular significance in the solution of all these questions

to educational. sass-political work.

Our seninar-conference will undoubtedly contribute to the further improve-en:
of the torus and aethods of ideological work and its increased effectiveness
and fruitfulness in the light of the requireaents of the 26th CPSU Gangress.

*V.G. Zskharov. secretary of the Leningrad Obkoa: "For the Closer Unity of
Economic, Organizational and Ideological Factors in Party Bork"

The CPSU Central Comttee Report delivered at the congress by Conrade

L.I. Brezhnev made an in-depth and cowrehensive analysis of the Iain problems
and processes affecting unkind. This document coahines the creative develop-
nsnt of Marxian-Lennie- with the formulation of urgent tasks for the party

and the people .

272
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Conrado ILA. Suslov'a introductory ranarks and the papers at our seninar-
conference have concretired the tasks confronting ideological workers. We
have been armed with a great deal of factual. and nethodological material.
and it is our duty to the productive use of it.

Leningradera laid a good foundation in the 10th Five-Year Plan for further
progress. Industrial production in Leningrad and the oblast increased alnost
23 percent. The industrial output increase alone constituted R21 billion.

The 5-year quota for the production and sale to the state of the main types
of agricultural product was fulfilled successfully. The work of the construc-

tion, transport and services' sphere workers inproved. Many social questions
were solved.

He regard the high evaluation of the activity of the Leningrad (blast party
organization with respect to the developnent of the creative activeness of

the production collectives, the dissemination of progressive initiatives and
undertakings and the communist education of the working people which Conrade

L.I. Brezhnev made at the congress as an appeal for a further upsurge of
efficiency and work quality.

A neeting of leningrad party organization activists. which discussed the re-
sults of the 26th CPSU Congress and the co-xnists' tasks ensuing from its
decisions, determined the concrete paths of realization of the program out-
lined for the llth Five-Year Plan in the econonic, social and cultural spheres.

The obkon sees it as its priority duty to convey the ideas and decisions of
the congress and their content to the minds and hearts of every connunist and
every Soviet individual. The party organizations are organizingtthis work
with regard for the tasks and specific features of the labor collectives.
directing efforts toward an increase in everyone's awareness and responsi-
bility for his assignnent.

A great deal of work he been done in the political and economic training
systen. Particular attention has been paid to the training of propaganda

personnel. Classes have been organized withevery category thereof. The
Political Education Center has published a special "Methods Bulletin". The

gorkoas and raykons and priury party organizations have drum up nateriel on
the results of the labor oollectives' activity in the 10th Five-Year Plan

and on the prospects of their eéononic and social development.

A big role in this work is performed by the "Television School of the Prop-
agandist". The television school has organized a series of instructional-
nethods broadcasts, lectures and talks on the congress' naterial.

The obkon bureau examined the question of the organizing and political activ-
ity of the Volkhovskiy Gorkoa with respect to study and propaganda of the
material of the 26th party congress. The results of the first stage of the
work of the-vparty co-ittees of Leningrad and the oblast were sun-ed up and
ways to intensify it were outlined.

273

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The party comittees have been able to properly appreciate the tital signi-
ficance of the CPS!) Central Committee decree "A Further Improvement in Ideo-
logical and Political Education" in the last 2 years. The conclmions and
reconsndations of this decree have become the basis of the oblsst party
organization's political-educational activity and are determining the paths
of the reorganization of ideological work dealt with at the congress.

In accordance with the requirements of the CPSU Central Couittee and the in-
structions of Comrade L.I. Brezhnev, the obkom has increased its attention to
the organization of political education. The composition of ideological
comissions has been reviewed, party eomittee lecture groups have been
strengthened and so forth. As in the country a a whole. uniforn political
days have becone a part of practice. A system of the analysis and collation
of questions raised at then by the worung people is currently being worked --
out. Fuller account has come to be taken of the educational consequences of
management and administrative decisions.

The obkom has done much recently to enhance the scientific level of propa-
ganda and agitation. It has become the rule to extensively enlist leading
scientists and specialists in the preparation of party cox-ittee plenums
and bureau meetings upon an analysis of various aspects of the life of the
labor collectives.

Sociological groups or laboratories have been created in many raykom as a
public service. The working people's public opinion on the most iQortant
economic, social and political issues is studied. Thus a mass sociological
poll of the working population was conducted in Ianingrad on 5 March, 2 days
after the congress. The extent of. the workers' and employees' information
concerning the c'ongress' material and the working people's attitude toward
the urgent problem of the new 5-year plan were studied. The results obtained
are enabling us to reveal incipient problem and adopt measures to tackle
them.

The whole point is to ensure that the results of the research and the concrete
reconnendations be introduced in practical activity more rapidly. He have
many examples of the good use of the results of sociological research, but
there are also examles of these services running idle. The sociological
groups and laboratories are currently scattered. There is an urgent need

for the better coordination of all form of sociological service and the
creation of uniform methodological leadership of their actions. The USSR
Academy of Sciences' Institute of Socioeconomic l’roblens could evidently be
such a coordinating center in Leningrad.

The CPSU Central Conittee decree pays considerable attention to the need
for an iaprovement in the planning of the educational process. Definite
experience of this work has been accumulated here. The comprehensive plans
of the economic and social development of Leningrad and the oblast and the
rayons and labor collectives incorporate sections devoted to the comunist
education of the working people. Their provisions are concretized in the
party conittees' work plans. Much is being done in this respect by the
obkom's Economic and Social Development Council.

274

In OFFICIAL USE ONLY
We are endeavoring to ensure the closer unity of economic, organizational
and ideological factors in the accomplishment of the set task and work
concretely and purposefully. "1th the help of scientists a procedure of the
compilation of the section on problems of the wwrking people's com-mist
education has been developed in the plans of the economic and social develop-
ment of the labor collective. the adninistrative rayon and leningrad and the
oblast. This procedure enploys a systen of conparstive indicators which af-

ford an opportunity for evaluating not only the quantitative but also quali-
tative aspect of the educational process and conpsring its results more
objectively.

I would like to nention that the reorganization of certain areas and spheres
of ideological work has required an improvenent in the quality of political
training. We are striving persistently to ensure that knowledge becone the
personal conviction of the students and an active life position.

The obkon has supported new forms and methoh of instruction which are being
introduced in the "Kirovskiy ravod," "Svetlana," LOHO and "Blektroeila" as-
sociations, where an effective struggle is being waged for the students'
high labor and public-political assertiveness.

At the same time the accomplishment of the task set by the 26th congress of
an increase in the quality of the training requires sonewhat of an improve-
ment in its systen.

First, there is an urgent need for a revision of its structure. The time has
now come, evidently, to dispense more boldly with the primary component of
party training. The overwhelming najority of the col-mists involved here
are pensioners, for whom training should, we believe. be a voluntary matter.
As far as the contingent which is beginning political training is concerned,
it consists almost entirely of people with secondary education. Under these
conditions it is necessary to concentrate efforts on an inprovenent in the
higher fonts of training.

Second, it is essential, as observed at the 26th CPSU Congress, that party
training be the training precisely of communists. Unfortunately, ,there also
a considerable proportion of the students of the theoretical seminars and
schools are not CPSU sewers.

It was emphasized at the 26th party congress that in the organization of
political education and its increased effectiveness the main figure is the
propagandist, on the extent of whose training and maturity the scientific
level'of the political training depends. Almst all the propagandists here
now have higher and inconplete higher education, while a considerable propor-
tion of then has higher political education.

A differentiated system of the instruction and pro-pt briefing of the propaganda
personnel has been created and for:- of its noral encouragemt have been
worked out in the party cousittees. We are currently working on providing

each ideological worker, primarily the propagandist, with higher political
education.

275
FOR OFFIC’ ‘JSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Huch has been done in this area. Thus the nude: of students at the univer-
sity of Marxian-Lehman hae'increessd. The training of professors and
lecturers for the political training of rayon teachers and propagandists

has given a good account of itself. At the same tine the universities of
Harxisn-Leninisn lust concern thenselves to an even greater extent with the

graduation of propaganda personnel. This. I believe, should be their nain
task. ‘

It is also necessary to further inprove the systea of propagandist briefing.

Fulfilling the instruction of the party Central Cos-ittee, the Leningrad
(bios is endeavoring to increase the practicality, specificity and efficiency.
of ideological activity and link it sore closely with practice. At the cur-
rent stage the center of political education is concentrated in the labor col-
lectives. where, in Conrado L.I. Brezhnev'e words, the grand concepts of poli-
tics and economics are translated into the language of practice.

he obkon is directing the party. soviet and aanageaent authorities toward

an emphatic struggle for an increase in production efficiency and work qual-
ity. the acceleration of lbor productivity growth, a strengthening of

state, labor and plan discipline and an acceleration of the pace of scientific-
technical progress.

Particular simificance is attached in the acconplishnent of these tasks to
the developsent of brigade nethoth of work, whose advantages are co-on knowl-
edge. The nuaber of brigades here lore than doubled in thellast 5-year plan.
one-half of then is working on a single job-order, and the labor participation
coefficient is ewloyed in the distribution of the wage in one out of every
five.

Progressive for. of the organization of labor are contributing to the for--
tion of high moral principles and an increased sense of responsibility of
each to the collective and of the collective to each and are creating
practicable conditions for the working people's active participation in the
nsnagenent of production. Educational work is perforned sore purposefully
and individually here.

The brigades' influence on all aspects of the life and activity of the labor
collectives is growing. It was in the foremst brigades that initiatives
approved by the obkon—securing an increase in the manufacture of products

at operating facilities and an increase in the volume of scientific research
at the sane tine as an actual reduction in the nuﬂer of workers and fulfill-
nent of the 5-day quota in lo days—were born.

The brigade nethod is to hecone the nain nethod in the 11th Five-Year Plan.
With the consolidation and creation of coqrehensive trigsdes they will be-
cose significant prinsry labor cells. All this requires an increase in
their organizing and political-educational work.

we are now perfecting the systen of the instruction of brigade leaders. They
are studying the fundascntsls of pedagogics and psychology. A considerable

276

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
amount of work is being perforled on the creation of party groups in the

brigades. There is also point, evidently. in giving thought to each local
collective having an educational work organiser.

It is well known that a person's noral world is shaped not only in labor; a
system of work is taking shape here at the place of residence which permits
the more rational use of enterprise, school and public organization resources.
the strengthening of the housing offices' physical plant and the coordination
of the efforts of the sponsors, the public and the adminstrative authorities
with respect to prevention of infringe-ants of the luv.

The experience accunulated in Gatehinskiy, lbskovakiy and Petro'gradekiy rayons
prompted the idea of the creation of a rayon social In. It includes a social
description of the population, data on the physical plant of the ideological
establish-eats and also inforaation on the people participating in work with
the population. The social ID ukee it possible to take account of each
rayon's specific features. This experience is being studied and disseminated.

Proceeding from Lenin's instruction that the education of future generations
consolidates everything gained by the revolution and taking into consideration
the acute nature of the ideological struggle in the modern world, the Lenin-
grad Oblast party organization considers an improveaent in the co-unist edu-
cation of the youth as one of its most inortsnt tasks. There is a special
section in the obkom devoted to work with the yomger generation.

What is least important, in our view, is the continuous nature, consistency
and differentiated approach of the educational process. At the behest of the
CPSU Central Co-ittee Propaganda Department we are currently developing a
procedure of the organization of occupational training for different categor-
ies of the youth.

I would like in this connection to dwell on the training and education of
young men and wonen in the vocational-technical education system, which in
Leningrad and the oblast has become the principal source of the replenish-
ment of the working class.

A refinement of the vocational guidance of the schoolchildren, an improvement
in the teaching-educational process in the vocational-technical schools, a
reinforcement of their physical plant and provision with teaching personnel,
the increased role of the labor collectives in the-training of young workers
and the further development of nentorshipuall these have made it possible
to markedly inprove the training of a worthy replenish-cut of the working
class.

We have created 89 modern vocational—technical school conplexss here in the
last 10 years where there is every opportunity for fruitful study. sports
and the anateur arts. Every vocational-technical school now provides the
trainees with secondary education besides an occupation.

The following facts attest the results of the work that has been done. Approx-
imately loO percent of eighth graders go fro- high school to vocational-
technical schools snnuallyn and one out of every six schools accepts trainees

277

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following coapetitive school-leaving certificate review. In the last 5-year
plan the vocational-technical schools trained more thm: ”0,000 workers. who
constitute the nucleus of the labor collectives. And we are gratified that
the enterprises have u: ever increasing ntder of dynasties of workers who
are vocational-technical school graduates.

we believe that the set tasks have been accoqlished, in the main in a quanti-
tative respect. At the sane time work with this contingent of-hhe youth has
its difficulties and problems, including those in moral education. tor this
reason we are setting the task ofua rise in the quality not only of vocation-
al training but also of the development of the future workers.

Particular simificance is attached to the honing of the system of the per-
sonal assignment of vocational-technical school graduates. which is in its
second experimental year. The young men and women are now assigned not
merely to enterprises but to a specific shop and a specific brigade and, for
the most part, where they have done practical work hitherto. This is contri-
buting to the better retention of the young production workers and to their
developwent.

The training of highly skilled masters of industrial training, who are, es-
sentially, the aain participants in the educational process, reasins a prob-
lem. as before. To put an end to the shortage in this category of workers

we are taking vsriom paths: we are broadening the graduation of aasters with
secondary specialized education on the buis of rhhe Industrial-Pedagogical
‘rekhnikun and attracting the best workers to the schools. Thus in recent
years alone twice Hero of Socialist Labor A.P. Mikhalev. 6 heroes of socialist
labor, 2 USSR State Prize winners and over 700 production pacesetters and
innovators have transferred to work in the vocational-technical schools.

But many difficulties are being encountered here also. One such is the realm-
eration of highly skilled production workers who have transferred to the vo-
cational-technical schools. Considering the inportance of their work for the
national economy, this problem should be settled centrally, we believed

In the time that has elapsed since the appearance of the CPSU Central Col-sit-
tee decree "An Iwrovenent in Ideological and Political Education” much has
been done to improve the work of the use inforlation and propaganda media.
The press has monitored the fulfillment of the most inortant goal-oriented
coqrehensive program, particularly the power-engineering program, and the
development of undertakings and initiatives approved by the CPS!) Central Com-
nittee like the cooperation of the collectives of the-Leningrad transport
terminal or the ahead-of-schedule fulfillment of orders of the Siberian
construction sites, the development of new agricultural complexes and so forth.
Measures are being adopted to ensure that the ma intonation and propaganda
nedia be a true platforn for public opinion. The newspapers are punishing
sore readers' letters. and television hm introduced the new "Topical Com-
nentary" broadcast, which answers viewers' questions on problems ofithe life
of the city and the oblsst.

278

Ml! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Progress has mdoubtedly been made, but far fron everything has been done,

particularly with respect to an inrovenant in the quality of the publica-
tions. We still have work to do on these letters.

The executive and creative personnel of the nmpapers, publishing houses,
television and radio and the Leningrad State University Department of Jour-
nalien are being reinforced currently and the annual admittance of press
workers to the Higher Party School has been increased. An iwrovenent school
is operating in the Journalists' Center at which nore than 800 people have
been retrained. workers of the rayon and large-circulation papers and local
radio are studying in the ”Urgent Present-Day Problems" theoretical seninar
which has been organised by the Political Education Center. These and other
measures are raising the level =.' of the press' work.

The obkon is paymg great attention to the growth of party influence on the
ideological-artistic process. The political training of creative workers
and artistic group party organisation secretaries has been stepped up. A
seninar of leaders of literature and art estdilishnents under the auspices
of the gorkon and seminars of young creative workers under raykon auspices
are operating fruitfully. A seninar on questions of'literary-artistic criti-
cisn under the auspices of the obkoa has begun work. The city and oblast
production collectives' sponsorship of the creative organizations has been
increased. The artistic intelligentsia's cooperation with the collectives of
the country's shock construction projects has becone more fruitful.

The Leningrad party organization‘s work on an increase in the population's
labor and social assertiveness is being reflected in Leningraders' concrete
deeds. Conpeting under the notto "Tron the high Quality of the Bork of Each
to the High Efficiency of the Labor of the Collective," hundreds of thousands
of workers have undertaken to complete the annual quota by 7 Novedaer. The
party organizations are propsgandizing this patriotic initiative extensively.
directing the working people's efforts toward the unconditional fulfillment
of the plan and socialist pledges for 1981.

The communists and all working people of Leningrad and the oblast are apply-
ing the utmost knowledge and energy for the successful inlenentation of the
decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

6.1!. Yenukidze, secretary of the Georgian Co-unist Central Conuttee: "Ideo-
logical Hork and the Develoth of Socialist Denocracy"

Anong the urgent tasks set the party and the people by the 26th CPS!) Congress,
a special placeis assigned ideological work. Realization of the outlined
economic, political, social and organizational neasures requires ideological
support—on the level both of propaganda and study of the congress' documents
and the working people's mobilization for the successful inple-entation of
the congress’ decisions.

The party has arned us with a nethod of an approach to education called con-
prehensive. which takes account of the fact that world-outlook, moral and

occupational factors are constantly interacting with and nutually condition-
ing one another.

279

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is well known that the effectiveness of propaganda is detersined in ac-
cordance with people's actions. In each individual instance it is inortsnt
' to know on what gromd our efforts have fallen and what kind of shoots they
have produced. Re are currently working on the creation as a public service
of an informational-methods center of the scientific organization of ideolo-
gical work, the provision of the party co-ittees with prowt and concrete
intonation on the processes occurring in all spheres of the republic's public-
political life. the development of forecast models of the further development
of social processes, the study and dissenination of progressive experience
in political education, the collation}! critical observations and proposals
and the creation of statistical data on question of ideological work.

The effectiveness of the inset on people's mindstoday depends on the further
development of socialist democracy. 0n the one hand publicity and the ac-
countability of leadership,.on the other, the fullest possible consideration
of public opinion.

'lhis is promoted here in the replblic by leaders' regular meetings with the
labor collectives, specific public opinion polls organised by the Georgian
Coin-mist Party Central Comittee Ptblic Opinion Council and also press
publications.

At the sane tine now traditional form of work require revision ninly in the
extent to which the media aployed correspond to the set goal. In particular.
in order to impart a systematic nature to the leaders' meetings with the work-
ing people it was decided to organize their sponsorship of individual schools
and seminars in the political enlightennent and economic educatinnsystem.
Currently more than 500 leaders of all levels are regularly addressing
audiences on the problem confronting the republic and describing the nessures
being adopted to solve then. This forn of executives' propaganda work has
increased the audiences' social sctiveness considerably.

The uniforn political days are also developing the Leninist tradition of
executives' col-micattonwith the macs. Leaders of party, soviet, trade
union, [030001 and economic planning organizations associated in political
rapporteur groups under the auspices of the party collittees participate in
them, as a rule. But this form of sass-political work has lost its due in-
tensity in places. 9e see the designation of a uniform political day as an-
suring that general political problem be linked with the practical tasks
confronting a given region and labor collective and, what is most important,
that an exchange ofopinions and a lively dialogue be organized. The audiences
should have an opportunity to think over questions in advance and the speakers
a chance to familiarize the-salvo with their audience ahead of time. collect
the necessary material and ascertain what problens are troubling the labor
collectives, what tasks they are tackling at the given stage andwhat wishes
were expressed at past meetings and how they are being realized in practice.

'It is also necessary to raise the study of public opinion to a new level and
to grasp the very nechanisn of its formation and the structure and dynasics

of requirenents and interests in order to arm oneself with the appropriate
program of neasures of ideological influence.

28)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A certain revival of religious and ritualistic celebrations has been observed
in the republic recently. Re are perforlning a great deal of work to attract
the masses to the new rites and celebrations. has folk culture festivals

in the David-Garedzhi nonastery eagle: or in honor of Shots Rustaveli in
Kakheti and a nn-ber of other neasures amned into being new festivities
which have snbsequently becone traditional like the "Tbilisob" festival. This
is not siwly a city festival, it is a festival of internationalisn, friend-
ship, labor and the unity of the worﬂgpeople of the republic. Celebrities

and honored citizens of the city and personalities of science and culture take
part in it.

Such holidays as Alesha Drhaparidze lens-brance Day in Oaskiy Rayon, the In-
ternational Youth Friendship Festival in Rnkhi and the festivals of labor in
Gurdzhaani and Soviet poetry (Hayakovskiy Day) in Kutaisi have also become
established.

Great assistance in the realization of such neasures is being rendered the
party organizations by representatives of the republic’s creative intelli-
gentsia. who are participating fruitfully and with interest in everything
being undertaken by the repnblic party organization for the further recovery

of the noral clinate and the establishnent everywhere of the principles of
socialist life.

It is well known what role the party assigns questions of the international
education of the Iasses. Paramount significance is attached to these questions
in multinational Georgia. But this work requires further developnent and
coordination on a countrywide scale. It is gratifying that the initiative

of the republic ZARYA VOS‘I‘OKA newspaper. which began a series of articles
under the rubric "By Our Brothers We Are Strong," has elicited a good response.
Via the newspaper celebrated workers of the repntlic conduct a correspondence
with their colleagues fron the fraternal republics. and there is a kind of
businesslike and friendly exchange between delegates to the 26th CPSD Con-
gress froa competing cities and rsyons. This is jnnt one of the good initia-
tives which it is important to generalize. Such work is being performed by
the Georgian Academy of Sciences' Hmeun of history of the Friendship of the
USSR Peoples, whose valuable experience is worth popularizing. I believe.

The constant concern of the party and government and Conrade L.I. Brezhnev
personally for the all-around develop-eat of the fraternal republics, includ-
ing the 0881!. which is concretely expressed in host ilportant decisions aimed
at strengthening the economy -and culture. is regarded by the repnblic's work-
ing people as practical implensntation of the party's Leniniat nationality
policy, which is international in essence. In the sane way-sober1y and oh-
jectively~0eorgia's working people evaluate the constructive criticism of
shortcomings in their work. It is sufficient to say that the well-known
CPSU Central Coalittee decree of 1972 on the Tbilisskiy Gorkom became the
program activity of the repnblic party organization for many years.

The 26th CPSU Congress made a high evaluation of the work of the Georgian
party organization in the period under review. As a republic sctiviats'
neeting held following the congress testified, Georgia's couunists are fully
resolved to underpin this evaluation with new successes, aware of their respon-
sibility to the notherlsnd and understanding how inportsnt it is not to be
satisfied with what has been achieved. Tossther with the working class.

281
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

kolkho; peasantry and intelligentuia of the republic the workers of the
ideological front are in fighting mood.

The 26th CPS!) Congress set us the task of ensuring an individual approach in
ideological education. We are well aware that the struggle for the trimIph
of con-list ideals is not only a struggle for the future of unkind. It is
a struggle for the present and future of every individual.

*I.A. Anderson, secretary of the Latvian Co-mist Party Central'Co-ittse:
"Certain Urgent Problen of Ideological Work"

In implementing the CPS“ Central Co-ittee decree "A Further Improvenent in
Ideological and Political Education" the Latvian party organization is dru-
ing the Iain attention to the introduction of a comprehensive approach in

the practice of the ideological work of the parks- and raykou, priaary party
organizations and iaoloucal establishments.

Comprehemive work has been initiated in all party organization on propaganda
of the material of the 26th party congress, Comrade L.I. Brezhnev's report
and the Plain Directions of the USSR's Economic and Social Development in
1981-1985 and the Period Through 1990.

we are observing a nunber of positive changes in the practice of the party
organizations' ideological work. It has been possible to stimulate to a
considerable extent the participation of executive personnel and specialists
in ideological work locally. Such new ferns as uniform political days have
becone a part of practice. The work of the ideological co-issions has in-
proved. The nethods training of the propagandists is being perfected. The
Council for the Scientific Organization of Ideological Nor]: has been set up
and is operating under the auspices of the Latvian 00-min Party Central
Cox-ittee Propaganda and Agitation Departmt. It has proposed a umber of
practical reconendations for streanlining the work of various coqonents and
its planning. There has been a change for the better in the activity of the
ease infatuation and propaganda media. A creative search is under way here
for the development of urgent problens of economic, political and social life.

In a word, we are seeing concrete results of our work, although, of course,
we understand that it is far from sufficiently effective and that use has
not yet been made of such potential for its improvement.

Several problem issues need to be raised in the light of the tasks set by

the 26th 080' Congress. The importance of counterpropeganda has been en-
phasized repeatedly at the conferen . Gomterpropaganda is ained. as is
known, on helping Soviet peoplevlcomprehend the events occurring in::the world
from the viewpoint of their class content and the interests behind then,

under the conditions of the ideological struggle and the ideological sabotage

of the class enemy.

In order to tackle this task successfully our counterpropaganda mt acquire
note profound content and be based on a coeparison of the two worlds, two
sociopolitical system and two ways of life and a revelation of their

282

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-i ONLY

fundesental differences, which is of tremendous significance for an under-
standing of the events which are occurring.

After all. it is no secret that in endeavoring to introduce confuion in the
minds of the working people of the socialist countries the ideological enemy
juggles with the facts, advertising the values of the capitalist world as a

model for the socialist states. Such juggling forum the basis of the nejor-
ity of ideological diversions.

The present generation of Soviet people. which has not lived under the condi-
tions of capitalists. is insufficiently familiar with its intrinsic essence
and variom aspects of the bourgeois way of life.

Counterpropaganda's task is to help Soviet people coqrehend in greater depth
the processes occurring in the capitalist world, persuade thsnselves once
again by visual demonstration of the advantages of our socialist way of life
and to acquire ideological conditioning.

For this we need the assistance of the social scientists, particularly inter-
national affairs specialists. Various foru and areas of comterpropagands
ought to be made more purposeful and united within a system.

A few words about noral development. A system of ideological-political and
occupational training has already taken shape. But there is not as yet a
system of moral education; only disconnected form thereof exist.

Yet moral education should contribute to the organization of public influence
primarily in that part of the lﬁor group which consists of the most passive
people and stragglers, potential violators of the standards of public morals
and transgressors. idlers, drunkards and so forth, and it is essential to
employ mainly means of individml work here. We are contemplating the most
thoroudn study of the experience of oral education available in the labor
collectives in order to formulate on the basis thereof a system of means
which might be used in practical activity.

1he CPS!) Central Connittee and USSR Council of Hinisters recently adopted the
important decree "Heasures To Increase State Assistance to Families With
Children".

It is well known that the denographic situation varies in different parts of
the comtry and that there are regions where the problem of labor resources
is becoming acute and where a number of other negative phenomena are emerging
in connection with a decline in natural population growth. The Latvian SSR

is among these.

The measures adopted by the party and the government to increase state assis-
tance to families with children are of great significance. At the same time
they nust be supplemented with the ideological-educational work of the party
and public organizations on an increase in the prestige of motherhood and

the surmounting of the sometimes current negative opinion on the question
of whether it is worth having andjraiaing children. It is such work that
we are attempting to perform in the reptblic.

283

FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Raising children is a parental duty. War, in our socialist society it
should be not only a duty but also people's spiritual need. For this it is
necessary to create an atmosphere contributing to the growth of the prestige
of a family with children and to value a vonan not only as a progressive
production worker but also as a caring mother. Increased concern for the
family and children's upbringing is an i-portant task of the labor collectives,
the ease intonation and propaganda nedia and other ideological ale-eats.

L'Infornation on the work of the SeninarConference's Sections

Together with the plenary sessions nine sections were organised at the all-
union seminar-conference of ideological uorkers. Union and republic Con-mist
Party central conittee. kraykon. obkon. okruzhkon, gorkon and raykon secre-
taries, CPSU Central Conittee nachinery workers and ninistry and depart-eat
and central ideological establish-eat representatives participated.

The participants in the sections paid particular attention to problems of an
inprovenent in the fore: and nethhds of ideological and political education
with regard for the singularities of the econolic and cultural development
of each, kray, oblast and okrug and'aqusstions of a further strengthening of
the fraternal friendship of our country's peoples and an iaprovensnt in the
working people's international and patriotic education.

Reports in the first section were delivered by A.‘l'. Kuz'nin, secretary of the
Belorussian Cos-mist Party Central Omittee,A.I!. Salinov, secretary of the
Uzbek Couaunist Party,Central Co-Iittee, 2.x. Kanalidauov, secretary of the
Kazakh Co-unist Party Central Co-Iittee, 6.1!. Yenukidze, secretary of the
Georgian Commie! Party Central Coulittee, I.A. Anderson. secretary of the
Latvian Cos-unist Party Central Coulittee, LR. Kulnatov, secretary of the
Kirghiz Co-uniet Party Central Couittee, P.P. Petrik. secretary of the
Moldavian Conunist Party Central Con-ittee, INK. Shepetis, secretary of the
Lithuanian Communist Party Central Co-1ttee, 6.3. Bobosadykova, secretary of
the Tajik Commist Party Central Co-ittee. G.A. Gasmov, secretary of the
Azerbaijan Conunist Party Central Connittee, LL. Dallakyan, secretary of
the Armenian Co-unist Party Central Co-rittee, 11.“. Hollayeva, secretary of
the Turkmen Conunist Party Central Col-ittee, and 8.3. Ristlaan, secretary
of the Estonian Communist Party Cant-:al Co-ittee. lheir speeches are pub-
lished in this collection.

Gorkon secretaries of the union rsmblic capitals also spoke in the section.
Kiyevskiy Gorkon Secretary 1‘.V. Glavak spoke of the need for an increase in
occupational training. the creation in each city and village and in each
collective of a genuine cult of labor and an iwrovenent in propaganda of

the achievenenta of the production pacesetters of the fraternal socialist
countries. Bakinskiy Gorkoa Secretary AJI. Abbasov raised the question of
the broader illustration of the positive experience of the country's republics
and cities in the central press. Tashkentskiy Corkon Secretary NJ. Soldatov
expressed considerations concerning the need for the creation of textbooks
and nethods aids for propaganda personnel on worker pedagogica and

284
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ideological-political and moral education and concerning a strengthening of the
physical plant of the ideological establishments. Yerevanskiy corkom Sec-
retary A.A. Stepanyan emphasised the need for the in-depth development of

the scientific methods bases of a comprehensive approach and expressed cri-
tical remarks leveled at the press, which is as yet only rarely treating the
moral aspects of the activity of the production collectives under the conditions
of the introduction of the brigade form of labor organization. )Iinskiy

Gorkom Secretary N.S. Nsrad said that it is necessary to increase the responsi-
bility of the ministries and trade muons for ensuring people's non-1 work.
social and recreational conditions and also that it is essential to create

the uterisl base for educational work in the new microregions. Kishinevsltiy
Gorkon Secretary Ye. V. Sober emphasized the importance of the more active
participation of gorkom and raykom sectorisl departments in an inrovemsnt in
ideological education.

Reports in the second section were delivered by “LI. Akhunzyanov, secretary
of the Bashkirskiy com, H.P. Valeyev. secretary of the Tatarskiy Obkom

(his speech is published in this collection). LA. Bsdiyev, secretary of the
Buryatskiy Oblton. H.Kh. Kiuru. secretary of the Karel'skiy Whom, A.P.
Syutkin. secretary of the Komi Obkom, A.G. Kuchiyev, secretary of the Severa-
Osetinskiy Oblton. “.1. Smirnova, secretary of the vdmurtskiy (than, 14.0.
Buzurtanov, secretary of the Quecheno-Ingmhsluy. Whom. K.Ye. Yusupov, sec-
retary of the Karakalpakskiy Obkon, and M. Pedorov. secretary of the
Yakutskiy Obkom.

The speakers shared their experience of the organisation of ideological and
political education and the introduction of a comprehensive approach to edu-
cation in the autonomous republics.

A plan of scientific research into questions of the working people's co-unist
education has been compiled and is being comistently implemented in Bashltiria,
Tataria and Udmurtia. Scientists of these republics are participating active-
ly in the development and implementation of plans of the socioeconomic develop-
ment of the rayons, enterprises and establishments. Social 10's of the labor
collectives containing extensive information on the workers. technicaleeconomic
indicators, data on personnel turnover and so forth are being cmiled in the
Komi ASSR, Buryatia and Northern Osetis. The practice of the program-goal
planning of ideological work with its close linkage with the plans of the
economic and social development of the labor collectives and rayons is being
established. Sectorial departments of the party comittees, soviet ispolkom
departments. scientists and economic planners are being actively enlisted

in the development of program of co-unist education.

Research centers have been created in the party committees of Tataria and
Udnurtis for study of the problems of the labor collective and the base party
organizations have been determined for a number of most important areas of
ideological work. Uniform political days and conferences on questions of

the moral-political atmosphere in the labor collectives conducted by the
managers (ideological [planerkiD have given a good account of themelves.

285

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY

Ideological worker schools are operating under party consittee auspices,

the training of party organization deputy secretaries according to the .sec-
torial principle on the basis of the best party organizations has been organ-
ized and plans of the work of enterprise party organizations in sectorial
departments with the participation of workers of the ideological departments
are analyzed monthly in Karelia and Udmurtia. The following theoretical
seainars have been organized in Chuvashia for the purpose of an inrovemsnt
in the political briefing of lecturers and teachers:."of W2 and scientific
establishment workers under the auspices of the obkom and of tekhnikun, col-
legs and school lecturers under raylwm and gorkom aupices.

Long-term plans of measures for international education have been developed
and are being implemented in the Severo-Osetinskaya and Checheno-lngushskays
ASSR's. Harxist-Ieninist theory of the nationality question is studied
extensively in the systen of party and Komsosnl training and economic educa-
tion. International friendship clubs operate at the working people's place
of residence; and the publication of joint issues of rayon, oblsst and
republic newspapers of the North Caucasm is practiced.

The speakers spoke high-mindedly and self-critically about unsolved questions
and gaps. It was noted that atheistic education was being conducted inade-
quately in certain areas. New, Soviet rites are not becoeing a part of every-
day life quickly enough. A stimulation of the struggle against the antipodes
of co-Iunist morality and instances of the eiaezzlemsnt of public property.
lax management, bribe-taking. parasitism, drunkenness and hooliganism and a
callous attitude toward people is required.

The following proposals were also expressed in the section: for assistance
to be rendered the autonomous republics in the training of journalist person-
nel; concerning the need for an isprovement in the agitator institution;

on increased propaganda of the development of inter-nation relations in the
USSR; and on an increase in exactingness toward ministries and departments
with respect to questions of the comprehensive economic and social develop-
ment of the rayons.

The participants in the third section concentrated their main attention on
questions of an increase in the effectiveness of ideological education smug
rural workers, particularly in the RSPSR's nonchernosem zone. The speeches

of Kostromskiy Oblton Secretary V.A. Tupichenkov (published in this collection),
Vologodsltiy (bkom Secretary V.A. Zhukov. Bryanskiy Obkon Secretary V.A.

Ssirnov and Orlovskiy Obkom Secretary A.I. Bachurin raised sharply the prob-
lem of the retention of the youth in the countryside and the training of work-
ers of the mass occuaptions, prisarily nachine operators and milkers. The
question was posed in this connection of coordination of the actions in this
sphere of the USSR Ministry of Education and the vocational-technical educao

tinn system.
Great attention was paid to the retention of personnel in animal husbandry--
the shock front in the-countryside. Aktyubinskiy Obkon Secretary M.P.

Slinchenko described the introduction of social contracts between base
enterprises and farms with sponsored schools for the training of rural

286

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
occupation personnel and the creation of specialized youth brigades for work
on the sheep farm. As Kirovskiy Obkom Secretary Yudlltarachsrov observed,
the practice of the formation of composite Normal-youth detachments, which
are directed into aninal husbandry, has given s good account of itself in
Kirovskaya Oblast.

The obkom secretaries pointed to the need for a fundamental change in the
attitude toward the construction of cultural establishments in the country-
side and increased ministry and department responsibility for the building
of schools and sports sndcultural-everydey installations primarily in the
nonchernozem oblasts. Ryatmksiy (bkom Secretary 17.“. Shestopalov observed
that when visiting the localities ministry leaders and workers rarely meet
with the working people and confine themselves merely to meetings with offi-
cials. Many speakers spoke of the importance of an increase in the authority
of the teacher in the comtrysids. the creation of the necessary conditions
for him and the encouragement of and awards to the best.

Developing the theme of the unity of organising, econodc and educational
work, Vladimirskiy Obkon Secretary 11.1. Shagov and other obkom secretaries
observed that it is necessary to raise the responsibility of the central
departnents for the organization of the economic training of the working
people of the corresponding sectors, particularly ini'the countryside, and
a long-term plan of this work.

wishes were expressed in the section in a streamlining of the staffs and a
regulation of the status of rayon workers of the USSR State Connittee for
Television and Radio Broadcasting and an inprovement in the training of jour-
nalists for rayonnewspapers, and the restoration of the journalism departments
in the party schools was proposed, inter alia.

Vat-10m aspects of a further improvement in ideological work in the light of
the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress and Comrade L.I. Breshnev's instruc—
tions were addressed in the fourth section by Altayskiy Kraykom Secretary
LN. Nevskiy (his speech is published in this collection). Dnepropetrovskiy
Obkom Secretary I.V. Vasil'yev, Sverdlovskiy Whom Secretary V.A. Zhitenev,
Khabarovskiy Kraykom Secretary v.1. Stepanov, Orenburgskiy Obkom Secretary
LN. Shevsrshov, Kemerovskiy Obkom Secretary v.14. Dorofeyev. Perukiy Obkom
Secretary LP. Bykova, Dzhezkasganskiy Obkon Secretary D.A. Aralhayev,
Donetskiy Obkom Secretary G.P. Yerkhov. Novosibirskiy Obkon Secretary L.P.
Kolesnikov and Chelyabinskiy Obkom Secretary NJ. Sonnov.

The speakers consider the audience's participation in the substantiation of
socialist pledges and personal savings accounts and the adoption of decisions
on questions of the life of the labor collectives a striking indicator of

the effectiveness of party training and economic education and of the strength-
ing of the connection with practice. Form and methods of ideological

support for the development of the key sectors of industry, construction.
transport and agriculture were discussed with interest. Party workers of
Altayskiy Kray and Perukays. Sverdlovskays. Chelyabinskaya and other oblasts
described how the 26th CPSU Congress‘ appeal "The Boonmsy Must be Economical"
is being realized.

287

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interesting experience of a differentiated approach to propaganda and agita-
tion with regard for the singularities and the nature of the activity of dif-
ferent categories of the population has been accmaulated in Sverdlovskaya
(ideological workers' creative meetings with brigade leaders, foreman and
shop chiefs) and Donetskaya (the organization of systematic speeches to lis-
teners by obkom secretaries and bureau members and other oblast executives)
oblasts and in Khabarovekiy Kray (the organization of propaganda and agitation

with regard for the specific conditions of the activity of geologists, sailors.
hunters and lumberjacks).

me speakers highliyzted as an essential facet of a comprehensive approach to
ideological work the use of ecommic and organizational factors of the working
people's education. Thus it was a question of the great educational effect of
the brigade form of the organization of labor in Dnepropetrovskaya and Sverdlov-
skaya oblasts; of the development of the active use of a system of the intro-
duction of progressive experience in Donetskaya Oblsst; and of the high edu-
cational role of socialist competition in Altayskiy Kray. The section parti-
cipants familiarized themselves with great interest with the Dnepropetrovskiy
Obkom's experience of the development and application of a single system of

the control of ideological work and the performance of sociological research.

The following wishes were also expressed in the section: for a significant
reduction in the number of different conferences, reviews, competitions and
so forth; for an increase in the role of the sectorial departments of the
party connittees and management authorities in work with people; for the
development of the universal primary pedagogical education of parents; for
the development of ways and methods of the inculcation of reasonable require-
ments under the conditions of the constant growth of well-being; and for

the creation of a single system of economic education and training in the
home. the school and the labor group.

The participants in the fifth section shared experience of the comprehensive
planning of ideological work. Nikolayevskiy Obkom Secretary V.A. Vasil'yev
described the activity of the oblast staff with respect to ideological support for
agricultural operations and the biggest and most crucial construction projects like,
for example, the South Ukraine ABS. Ul'yanovskiy Obkom Secretary V.N. alerkslov
and Kustmmyskiy Obkom Secretary LA. Basov described the practice of the prep-
aration of questions of ideological work at raykoms and gorkom bureau meetings
and plenums and the work of the ideological commissions.

Leaders' increased responsibility for education's closest connection with
organizing and management practice was described by Ksyl-Ordinskiy Obkom
Secretary 0. Aydarov; the increased role and responsibility of the party
comittees' sectorial departments inideological-educational and ideological
work was described by Kuybyshevskiy Obkom Secretary N.N. Panov.

Questions of a rise in the theoretical level of party training occupied a
large place in the speeches in the section. It was said that the social
sciences as yet basically deal with a study of the past, while problems of

modern social development and the prospects of the dynamics of the Soviet
society are being examined insufficiently deeply and coqarehensively.

288

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A number of speeches eaphasised the need for an inprovenent in supervision
of the teaching of the social sciences in the “12's and the strengthening
of social scientist personnel. Odesskiy Obkon Secretary 6.1). Haksinenko
shared experience of the briefing of V02 workers on the nest important poli-
tical problem.

Mention was made in the section of the positive significance which the intro—
duction of uniform political days has exerted on the content of ideological
work and its actualization.

GurEyevskiy when Secretary A. Kernzhebayev described the practice of the hold-
ing of ideological operational naetings at which there is a discussion of

the state of labor discipline. the creation of a healthy total-psychological
atnosphere in the collective and the course of fulfill-cut of socialist pledges
and shop chief reports on educational work are received. Krasnodarskiy
Kraykon Secretary A. Solodukhin described the experience of work with ideologi-
cal personnel.

The participants in the section focused attention on the need for the me of
active methods in propaganda and agitation which involve the audience in a
dialogue and prompt reflection on pressing, urgent questions of people's
real life. '

A request was expressed for more effective assistance on the part of the CPS!)
Central Conittee Acachy of Social Sciences to the party covuittees in the
study of public opinion, an analysis of concrete ideological situations and
recosnendations of a procedural nature.

The questions discussed in the sixth section concerned the reorganization of
ideological work in the light of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The participants in the sectional meeting heard reports from Belgorodskiy
(bison Secretary VJ. Sobolev, Khar'kovskiy com Secretary V.A. Ivashko (his
speech is published in this collection), Volynekiy when Secretary A.G. Marty-
nov, Cherkesskiy (bkos Secretary G.V. Sukhoverahko. Saasrkandskiy Ohkoa Sec-
retary Kh. N. Normradov, Chardahomkiy Obkon Secretary I. Hurtazahunov,
Ivano-Frankovskiy Obkon Secretary P.D. Sardachuk, Su-skiy (bkon Secretary
I.Ya. Hakhukin, Vinnitskiy Obkon Secretary 6. Ya. Burtyan and Grodnenskiy
Obkon Secretary Ye. Ye. Yenel‘yanova.

The participants in the section draw attention to the need to ilpart aggres-
siveness to ideological work. a differentiated approach to different cate-
gories of the population. the stianlation of all form of work along "Znaniye"
Society lines, the sore active use of visual agitation in the labor collectives
and a reorganization. of the work of the co-ittee rooms and voters' clubs.

The speakers shared experience of long-tern and current planning of ideologi-
cal work and described the improvement in ideological-political, occupational
and aoral education and mas-political work in the collectives and at the
place of residence in the lidat of the decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress.

289

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The participants in the seventh section focused the main attention on ques-
tions of an increase in the efficiency of the ideological activity of the ~
party organizations and the struggle against bourgeois ideology and the hostile
propaganda of the imperialist centers and Beijing hegenonists under the
specific conditions of the border areas. Primrskiy Iraykon Secretary D.
Safronov, Ales-Atinskiy (bkom Secretary 1.3. Baltagulov, Ashkhabadskiy (bkom
Secretary '1'. Amangel'diyev. L'vovskiy Obkom Secretary ILA. Yaremchuk, Brest-
skiy Obkon Secretary v.1. Boris, Kaliningradskiy Ohkom Secretary K3.

Shchekin (his speech is published in this collection) and Oahskiy mkom
Secretary 8.3. Ryspsyev, who spoke at the meeting, exchanged experience of

the reorganization of individual components of the system of political.

moral and occupational education and "the quest for new forms of the patriotic
and international education of the working people. particularly the youth.
There was nention of the need in this connection for the creative develop-
ment of comprehensive plans of political education and a careful consideration
of national singularities and the mentality. level of education and nature

of activity of people.

The participants in the section apprehended with interest the experience of
the Primrskiy Kraykom and Kaliningradskiy Obkom on the organization of
political education among the seanen. of the march sit and fishing fleets, who
spend a long time in navigation far from native shores. and the experience of
work among the youth of the L'vovskiy Ohkom and among the rural population
of the Alma-Atinskiy and Oshskiy obkou.

There was emphasis in the section of the importance of class education and the
incul-eanion of interest in political knowledge in the younger generation, the
use to this end of more modern organizational form of the political briefing
of the working people and an increase in work at the place of residence and
at places of recreation. Mention was made of the need for more attention to
be paid to the struggle against vestiges of the past and reactionary clerical
currents and to propaganda of the principles. of scientific atheism and work
among women.

The importance of the more extensive use in the party organisations' practical
activity of the results of studies in the sphere of the social sciences and
the enlistment of scientists in the work of the party comittees' ideological
co-aissions and in the development of comprehensive plans and concrete prop-
aganda and counterpropaganda measures was pointed out.

The eighth section discmsed questions of an inrovemsnt in political educa-
tion. agitation-lass work, education or‘ the urban population at the place of
residence and the development of scientific research activityin the sphere of
party propaganda. Reports on these questions were delivered by Sverdlovskiy
Gorkom Secretary V.V. Andrisnov,Tyndinskiy Gorkom Secretary G.A. Cherkasov
(the speeches are published in this collection), Krivoroshskiy Gorkom Secre-
tary c.s. Osadchuk, Gor'kovskiy Gorkom Secretary Yu. A. Harchenkov, Novosibri-
skiy Gorkon Secretary LP. Tsyplakov, Dnepropetrovskiy Gorkom Secretary

L.H. Tonyuk, Nshereehnoohelninskiy Gorkos Secretary L.'l. Shilova. Brestskiy
Gorkon Secretary V.A. Churo (his speech is published in this collection), '
Rostovskiy Gorkon Secretary G.V. Osioenko and Khar'kovskiy Gorkom Secretary
A.A. Gorshkov. The speakers exchanged experience of the party comittees'

290

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
activity with respect to the creation of socialspedagogical coeplexes. the
analysis of the production and social activity of the labor collectives, the
state of the moral-political clieate in than, introduction of the best exper~
ience of ideological work and of the organization of oounterpropaganda groups.

The participants in the section spoke of the-need for agitators to be oriented
toward differentiated work with the individual categories of the working peo-
ple and a stimulation of the propaganda of positive sample in production

and social activity and everyday life. The isportanee of the intensification
of educational work sung the creative intelligentsia -and the more extensive
enlist-ant of scientists in the develop-eat of form and netth of col-mist
education was eephesized.

The ninth section erasined questions of ideological education in the autonomm
oblasts and okrugs.

V.T. Hartynov. secretary of the obkon of the Jewish Autononous Oblast. de-
scribed the organization of ideological education with regard for the speci-
fic singularities of the oblast, its border situation and national coqosi-
tion (uniform political days; sociopolitical readings, meetings with delegates
to the 26th CPSU Congress and the creation in renote centers of population

of propaganda groups and political intonation worker groups mder gorkoe

and raykon auspices and agitation canpaign convoys).

In their-speeches Nagorno-Karabakhskiy Obkoe Secretary Ye.G. Sarkisyan,
Yugo-Osetinakiy Obkon Secretary A.G. Parastayev. Bvenkiyskiy atruzhkon Sec-
retary Yu. P. Gordeyev and Koad-Pemyatskiy Okrushkon Secretary Yu.P. Zubov
spoke of the practice of the preparation and holding of unifora political
days, the extensive participation therein of party. soviet. trade union

and Konsonol workers and managers and of the sharp and pro-pt reaction to the
working people's critical observations and proposals. '

An important place in the work of the section was occupied by questions of
ideological support for the accomlishnent of econonic and social tasks and
the participation of management personnel in educational work. This was
described by Adygeyskiy (bkoe Secretary A.S. Kmhu and Ust'-0rdynskiy Okruzh-
kon Secretary ILA. Hitenova (their speeches are published in this collection).

The ideological emission of the okruzhkon-u-such was the subject of Renetskiy
Okruzhkon Secretary P.T. Khantanyskiy's speech. The practice of work at

the place of residence was described by Gorno-Badakhehanskiy (bkon Secretary
1’. Dzhueayeva, and Como-Altayskiy Obkoe Secretary B.l(. Alushkin shared
experience of the work 'with stockbreedsrs. Karachayevo-Cherkasskiy Obkon

Secretary S.l<h. Senenov reported on measures to strengthen ideological-
political and international education.

The participants in the section paid great attention to questions of the
consideration of local, including national, singularities in educational work
and of a differentiated approach to diffeer categories of the population.

291

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table of Contents

”IA.
KO“.

MN.

v.1.
“.8.
3.19.
LN.
I.V.
K.V.
V.N.
G.I.

A06.

FLA.

V.P.

8.6.

3.1.

S.A.
R01.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m-
Suslov, Introductory Renerks 5
anernenko. "mocking Ourselves Against Lenin, Operating

Lenin-Style". Report at a ceremonial nesting in Moscow

devoted to the 111th anniversary of V.I. Lenin's birth.

Nentytvo April 1981 12
Ziuyanin, "Priority Tasks of Ideological and Politics].

Education Ensuing Pros: the Decisions of the 26th CPSU

Congress and Conrade I..I. Breahnev's Report" 34
Dolgikh. "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Party's Economic

Policy in the Sphere of Industry and Construction'.’ 86
Gorbachev, “Urgent Questions of Agrarian Policy in the Light

of the Decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress"110
Ponoserev, "The Results of the 26th CPSU Congress and Certain
Question of the World Co-unist lbw-ant" 139
Desichev, "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tesla of Cultural

Building" 17!.
Kepitonov. "Questions of Party Building in the Lidlt of the

Decisions of: the 26th CPS!) Congress" 206
Rusakov. "The 26th CPSU Congress on the Developsent of the

World Socialist System" 227
Hakeyev, "The 26th CPS!) Congress on s Further Rise in the

Soviet People' s Well-king" 253
Harchuk, ”Problem of the Acceleration of Scientific-

Technicel Progress" 272
Yegorov, ”The Creative Contribution of the 26th CPS!) Congress

to the Develop-ant of the Theory end Practice of Scientific Co.-
nuniss" 276
Prokof'yev, "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of an

Improve-ant in the Ideological-Political. Occupational

and Moral Education of Schoolchildren" ”7
Telyutin. "The 26th CPS]! Congras and the Tasks of an

Inprovenent in the Ideological-Political. Occupational and

Moral Education of the Student Youth" 316
Bulgak'ov, ”The 26th CPSU Congress and the Tasks of an

Improvement in the Ideological-Political, Occupational

end ﬂoral Education of Vocational-Technical School Trainees" 329
Ogerkov, "On Guard of Peaceful ”or" 339
Tsvigm, "The Subversive Activity of the Special Sevices and
Ideological Centers of the Inerislist States Against

the USSR" 357
Lapin. "Increasing the Role of Radio and Television

in Propaganda of the Decisions of the 26th CPSD Congress" 381
Statsliu, "Our Main Concern—the Ideological Content of

Ptblicetions" 388

Losev. "For the Topicality and Intelligibility of Intonstion'! 396
Kosolspov, "The 26th CPSU Congress and the Developnent of
Herdst-Leninist Theory” 398

292

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ye.I.

“0“.
A0".
AeSo
v0“.
v.6.
A.T.
Ad].
2.1.
GI“.
G.A.
LR.
POP.
IOAQ
IL".
3.60
KOL.
“UH.
R.B.
A.A.

Am.
LZ.

H. P.

V.A.
A.S.

VIA.
KOF.

ILA.

Chazov, "The Struggle for People's Life and Health-
amniotic Mission of Soviet lbdicine"

Blokhin, "The 26th CPSIJ Congress and the Develop-ant of
Soviet lbdicine" .

Rosanov, "The Party Organizatione' rim Ties

to the Massesncuarantee of Successful Ideological Work"
Kapto, "Cowrehensiveneee and Purposefulneee for

Col-mist Education"

Borieenkov. "Increasing the Role of Propaganda and Agitation
in leplanantation of the Decisions'of the 26th CPS!) Congress"
Zakharov. "tor Closer Unity of Bconolic, Organizational and
Ideological Factors in Party work"

Kuz'nin, "Ensnring Ihity of Word and Dead in Ideological
Education"

Salinov. "Hakim; More Extensive Use of the Best Experience of
Political Education"

Kanlidenov, "Ideological Suppo.t for the Plans of Socio-
econouic Develop-eat"

Yanukidzs, "Ideological Work and the Developnmt of
Socialist Denocracy"

Gasanov, "Conveying the Ideas of the 26th CPSU Congress to
All "orking People”

Shepetis, "Fame and Hethoda of Educational Work—0n a

Par with Current Tasks"

Petrik, "Taking Accomt of the Canada of the fines"
Anderson. "Certain Urgent Problem of Ideological Work"
Kulnativ, "Daily Quest"

Bohosadykova, ”Reaching Buryone”

Dallekyan. ”The Propagendist'a Imasioned Word"

Eblleyeva, "Not by lit-her, but Ability!"

Ristlaan, "Strengthening Ideological Education's Connection
With Practice"

Korobeynikov, "Perfecting Ideological Hort and Linking it
More Closely with Economic Activity"

Nevekiy. "Ideological Work-“81‘: Fruitfulnul"

Borisova. "Striving for the Unity of Ideological.
cramming and Economic Pork"

Valeyev, "Increasing Party hactingnsss in Political
Education

Ivashko. "A ladle: Level of Jaurnalist Skill"

Kushu. “Experience of Ideological Work on Propaganda and
Fulfillnent of the Decisions of the 26th CPS!) Congress"
Tupichenkov, "The Rural Youth Matures in Labor"

Shchekin, "Stimulating the Activity of the Ideological
Conissions"

Hitenova, "To Lead hens To Educate"

293

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
5'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V.V. Andrunov. "Hay: ‘l'o Inprow Political Education"

V.A. Web”, "For a Creative Appronch in Work With People”
(LA. Qatkuov. "A: the toward lomdary of 60-111": Building"
VJ. Churn, "uniting Patriots and Intcmtimlutu"

Intorgtion on the work of the Section: of the smut-Confers“.

‘ 8850
cso: 8144/1009