N
C8 Historical Paper
No. 150

 

TINE SERVICES HISTORY

aIN TUNNEL OPERATION
1952 - 1956

Controlled by: [;;:;::::;:;;;J
Date prepared: ugus
Date published: 24 June 1968

' Written by: l
W

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE. . . . . . . .'. . . . . . . . . .
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. . . . . . . . . . .
I. INTRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . .
II. PLANNING. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III. IMPLEMENTATION. . . . . . . . . . .

IV. TERMINATION . .

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
e

V. PRODUCTION. . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI. AFTERIATH . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Appendix A - Analysis of the Reasons for the
Discovery of the Tuanel

Appendix B - Recapitulation of the Intelli-
gence Derived .

Appendix C - Typical American Press Comment

Appendix D - East German Press Comment
S E E T

PREFACE

[:::::::::](the Berlin Tunnel project) came into being
sometime in 1952 (the exact date cannot be established) and

ceased as an active operation in the summer of 1956. The
writer served as Headquarters case officer on the project from
the winter of 1952-1953 until the summer of 1954 and then as

the field case officer until February 1955.

   
    

were intimately associated with the
planning and implementation of the project at the policy level
and very kindly offered suggestions for the preparation of
this manuscript. Their comments have been incorporated and
are greatly appreciated. Several other individuals, including

[::::::::::::::::]who were in a position to offer valuable
advice were absent from Headquarters during the period the
paper was being prepared and thus unavailable to assist.

When this project was first discussed with the then
Director of CIA, Mr. Allen Welsh Dulles, he ordered that, in
the interests of security, as little as possible concerning
the project would be reduced to writing. It is probable that

few orders have been so conscientiously obeyed, and yet there

8 E T
are a great many cubic feet of files connected with this pro-
ject. These files mainly concern technical and administrative
matters. Only those details which, in the opinion of the
writer, are necessary to a broad understanding of the manner
in which the project's objectives were accomplished have been

included in this paper. AThose interested in additional data

may wish to consult the files.

In addition to setting forth significant developments,
the writer has attempted to provide insight into the reasons
for certain courses of action. At times this required a
speculative approach. The judgments derived from such specu-
lation were shared by all those actively concerned in the
management of the project, and it is the writer's hope that
they are accurately expressed in the following paper. Any

error in this respect, however, is the sole responsibility of

the writer.

;ugus;, ;;;;

11
S R E T
owqmmbwuw

N a: H rd H v4 H h‘ is h' rd H
HOOWQGUIIbWNI-‘O

ﬂap of Berlin

Detail ﬂap of Rudow Section, Berlin
Aerial View of Rudow Section, Berlin
Dirt in the Basement

Vopos Studying the Installation
East German View of the Compound
Blinds on the Shield

Excavating Using the Blinds

View of the Completed Tunnel
Construction of the Vertical Shaft
Completed Vertical Shaft

View of Cables and Taps

Shaft and Tunnel Entrance in Warehouse Basement
Converted Fork Lift and Dirt Box

Target Cables Exposed

Schematic View of Tunnel

Initial Stage of Construction of Pre-AmpAChamber
Pre-Amp Chamber

Tapping Bridle

Lead-Away Lines

Soviet Press Briefing
I. INTRODUCTION

The exact moment when the idea emerged of digging a
tunnel to intercept Soviet and East German communications is
somewhat obscure; A number of factors must be considered,
among them the following:

a. As early as 1948 U.S. Intelligence Officers
became interested in the benefits to be derived from
tapping Soviet and Satellite landlines on a scale not
previously considered necessary. The loss of certain)
sources during this period created gaps in our intelli-
gence coverage which were particularly unfortunate during
this period of Cold War_esca1ation. It became evident
that the tapping of certain selected landlines might pro-
duce the information needed to fill a number of the gaps
in our overall intelligence picture.

b. In the late 1940's and early 1950's the 0.8.,
through the briefings of "returnee" German scientists
(those who were taken by the Soviets after World War II

to work in Russia) and other sources, became aware of a

new
c. .In the late 1940's the Office of Communications,
in the course of its continuing efforts to provide secure
communications for the Agency, became aware of a principle
which, when applied to target communications, offered
certain possibilities. Plans to exploit this technique

were immediately formulated.

These factors then served as additional incentives (above
and beyond our normal collection requirements) to focus attenF
tion on Soviet landline targets. In mid-1951 exploratory
discussions were held in Washington to plan the mounting of an
attack on Soviet landlines in East Germany with special empha-

sis to be placed on the Berlin area.

Vital information on the

 

first became available [::::::::::::::::::]

' 2
W

during the latter part of 1951, and by March 1952 all of the

pertinent technical material had been assembled and sufficient-

ly analyzed to permit the pinpointing of the most important

    
    

Soviet circuits.

Subsequent events proved ;
this intormation to be completely correct.
Various methods_of tapping these circuits were explored

and one sampling operation was run in the East Zone, unfortu-

nately with negative results. By January 1953, however, the

[::::::::::::::::::]had become such that a 15-minute sample

was obtained of the prime target circuit.

 

/ The longest continuous sample obtained was

29 minutes and most samples were of two to three minutes'
duration. Special mention should be made of the fact that
it was necessary to maintain a 24-hour watch over a six-

month period on "our" end of the cable to record these

' 3
S E E T-
mm :

Heantine collateral collection effort continued on the

communications systems involved and the

 

 

At this point (mid-1953) we knew it could be done - the next
step was the problen or installing a-pernanent tap on the

target lines.

Precisely at what point the idea of a tunnel for the
purpose of tapping the target cables began to come into focus

cannot be pinpointed.’
S\EC‘R~IH\

 
 
       
 
 

 

While it should perhaps be possible to credit
one individual with the initial concept,

bit ditticult to do so.

it appears to be a
At any rate

the idea of a tunnel to
tap the target cables began to take definite shape.
II. PLANNING

 

Inspection of all sites from which it might be possible

served to narrow the choices to two spots: [:::::::::::::::::J

[::::::::::::]was selected after careful deliberation which
included, but was not linited to, the following factors:

a. The location of the permanent water table
(which is normally relatively high in Berlin) was ascer-
tained to be 32 feet below ground surface. It was con-
sidered that this fact would obviate the necessity for
the use of compressed air, watertight locks, and water-
tight construction with a corresponding reduction in the

attendant engineering problems.

b; The length of the tunnel was considered to be

not impractical although it far exceeded anything which

c. Land was available on which to construct an

installation from which to begin the tunnel.

d. Complete collateral information on the area

was available

N



meﬂ-u— -—- --‘ . _.. .. .
a..-

M

At this point the following major questions remained
unanswered:

a. Was it indeed possible to dig a tunnel of this
magnitude (approximately 1500 feet) clandestinely, con-
sidering the fact that the border at this point was
heavily and constantly patrolled by the East Germans,
and hit the targets?

b. If the answer to the above was favorable,
what was to be done with the spoil (reckoned at approxi-
mately 3,000 tons of sand)?

°~ “at W °—
in such a remote area (this portion of Berlin was at that
time a "squattersville" of shacks and hovels constructed
from rubble by refugees from the East German Zone)?

In retrospect the first question, "Could the tunnel be
dug?", was never really a debatable one---those concerned more
or less decided that given sufficient money and personnel the
Job could be done. (This Judgment fortunately proved sound.)
The second question, "Where do we put the dirt?", haunted the
minds of project personnel for many weeks and a great many
ingenious ideas were brought forth and discarded for one rea-
son or another until the suggestion was made facetiously that

we "dig a hole and put the dirt in it." This in effect was

the solution.' At this time no convincing[::::::::::::::]

NT


RET

WT
N

[:::::::::::::::]planning for.the project continued

throughout 1953 and in December of that year the Director of ,

Central Intelligence approved the terms of reference which

tation of the project. A series of conferences in late 1953
and early 1954 led to the following decisions:
a. The U.S. would:
(1) procure a site, erect the necessary

structures, and drive a tunnel to a point beneath

the target cables;

(2) be responsible for the recording of all

(3) process in Washington all of the tele-

graphic material received from the project.

b—

(1) drive a vertical shaft from the tunnel'g

end to the targets;

10
N
«Hmcum w I

<ouom macawwsw Hum Hnmnmwwmdwo:
S E E T

(2) effect the cable taps and deliver a
usable signal to the head of the tunnel for

recording; and

[::::::::::::::::]to process the voice recordings

from the site.

Activity thus proceeded on three fronts - in Berlin steps
were taken to lease the necessary land and right-of—way ease-
ments for the site and a contract was let with a German con-
tractor. The compound, which was roughly the size of an aver-
age city block, was fenced with chain-type high security
fencing and contained the main operations building (the one
story with basement type warehouse previously described),
combined kitchen-dining facilities and barracks, and another

building which housed three diesel driven generators to

provide power for all facilities. [::::::::::::] Sanitary

11

N

-‘———..- _—WWW~ *‘hw‘ ' ' ‘ ' '

provisions consisted of a cesspool. (The logical placement

of the cesspool was such that it was situated only a few feet
from the tunnel site. It later developed when the tunnel was
dug that this was quite unfortunate because working conditions

in the sector adjacent to the cesspool were, to say the least,
highly unpleasant.) Planning called for the completion of
this work on 27 August 1954.

For assistance in actually digging the tunnel it was
decided to request help from'the

were briefed_ on the project. The initial contact with [::]'
[—:::]was made personally by “r. Allen Dulles to:

trained engineer, had just been appoin—edl::::::::::::::::]

From the first moment he learned of the operation, General

Trudeau was an enthusiastic supporter of the concept. [::]

member of the[:::::::::::::::::]with any experience in

tunneling)to head the project. This proved to be an excellent

choice for[::::::::::::::::]turned in an outstanding job. By

mid-summer of 1954 he had firmed up the engineering plans,
selected a crew of engineering personnel, and actually con-

structed a mock-up tunnel some 150 yards long working under

operational conditions at a high security base in[::::::::::]

- 12
Some mention should be made of the actual method of construct-
ing the tunnel. Studies of the soil structure in the Berlin
area showed a high percentage of sand. For this reason it was
decided that the tunnel should be lined with steel. The same
sand content contributed greatly to the danger of cave-ins at

the face of the tunnel, and to eliminate this risk a shield

was devised [::::::::::::::::::]with horizontal "blinds"

so arranged across its face that should even dry sand be
encountered the danger of cave-ins was virtually eliminated.
The tunnel liner was formed of sections of heavy steel plate
so constructed that, when bolted together, five sections formed
a steel ring approximately six feet in diameter and 15 inches
long. Provision was made for bolting these rings together to
form a continuous tube of solid steel. The men worked under
cover of the shield described above (which was slightly larger
in diameter than the steel liner) and when sufficient material
had been excavated, the shield was forced forward with hydrau-
lic Jacks and a new section of liner was bolted in place.
Since this method left a void of approximately one and one-
half inches around the liner (remembering that the diameter

of the shield was greater than that of the liner), screw-type
removable plugs were built into every third section of tunnel
liner. This permitted removal of the plugs and the forcing

of grouting material under high pressure to fill the void

' 13

W
o: :40 mrwmﬂq

SE. 'r

after the liner was in place. It was calculated (and subse—
quently proven to be true) that this method of construction

would not permit_settling of the soil and detection of the

tunnel from the surface. (See fig. 9.)

Meantime e-gineers constructed a mock-

up of the tunnel's terminal end

Available

 

plans indicated that the cables were buried some 27 inches
deep along the side of a heavily traveled highway. The t0p

of the vertical shaft (see fig. 11) then needed to be
approximately 12 to 14 inches below the surface of the high-
way in order to give the tapping crew room to work below the
ceiling of the shaft, and the whole structure had to be
capable of supporting the weight of heavy trucks since the
tunnel and tap chamber lay directly beneath the highway. (See

fig. 12;) Considerable care was devoted to insulating the

14

S‘ﬁ‘G—R_E_EL“‘.

_ v-7... - ~ new”. ~

'.a

Figure 12

View ()1‘ (‘nhlurs and Taps

/
3/

tap chamber to prevent its acting like a huge drum.
Considerable thought was given to the quantity and
content of the material available from the target and the
manner in which it was to be processed. It was in this
field, perhaps, that we experienced some of our greatest
problems. It had been decided very early in the project's
planning stages to maintain the strictest possible security
measures. As a minimum precaution security checks were made
on each individual who in any way became knowledgeable of the

project's mission, and the same standards in force for clear-

ances for _ere utilized. A list of

briefed personnel was maintained, special secrecy agreements
were executed, and special briefings were given to all knowl-
edgeable personnel. It was in the assemblage of a processing
team that we experienced our greatest problem in maintaining

security standards. Since the material to be processed was

largely Russian voice, it was thought that we would need
linguists with near native fluency in Russian. It is axiomatic

that native fluency is usually available only in natives, and

2/In spite of the insulation, it was a weird sensation
to be in the chamber when an iron-shod horse trotted across
it. We also suffered some anxious moments one foggy morning
when the microphone in the tap chamber gave forth with a
continuous series of dull thuds. After the sun burned away
the fog, visual observation showed that the East German
police had set up a temporary automobile checkpoint directly
over the chamber. The "thuds" the microphone picked up were
caused by the police officer in charge stomping his feet on
the road surface to keep warm.

15

~thléiiilihT
natives were not clearable for the project.
II. IMPLEMENTATION

By 17 August 1954 things were beginning to take shape
and the situation was as follows:

a. The German contractors had completed the
compound and we were in possession.

b. All of the basic supplies, equipment, and
personnel were in Berlin ready to start construction
on the tunnel. This in itself involved transporting 125
tons of steel tunnel liner from the 21 to Berlin. The
initial shipment across the East Zone to Berlin consisted
of one and one-half freight trains, the loss of any pack—
age of which could have blown the project. For security
purposes all sensitive items, such as the tunnel liner,
were double crated and handed and subjected to severe
drop tests before they left the 21. Similar items were
differently packaged for deception purposes.

0. Space at Headquarters was secured and the
—had assembled a crew and was
well under way in fabricating the unique equipment
necessary to process the anticipated telegraphic traffic.

d. Initial personnel had been selected and were

17

‘TS‘B-C—R_E_1L“‘-
[:::::::::::] It should be noted that personnel and equip-

ment were programmed initially to exploit approximately

[:::]percent of the anticipated take. In retrospect, per-

haps this could be considered overly cautious. In

Justification of this decision it should be said that no

one had ever tunneled 1,476 feet under clandestine condi-

tions with the expectation of hitting a target two inches
in diameter and 27 inches below a main German/Soviet
highway. There were those who manifested certain reser—
vations on the feasibility of so doing, and it is greatly
to the credit of those senior officials, both civilian

and military, that, in spite of these reservations, the

project was permitted to proceed.

In late August a vertical shaft some 16 feet in diameter
was started in the warehouse basement floor (see fig. 13) and
ground water was encountered at 16 feet instead of at the pre—
dicted 32 feet. Such examination as could be safely undertaken
under the steady observation of East German border guards and
Soviet officials indicated that a clay lens existed in this
Vparticular spot, creating a "perched water table" the magnitude
of which was unknown. Available information indicated that the
clay lens possibly sloped down in the direction of the target

and it was decided to proceed with the tunnel even though the
top cover was to be less than half what had been anticipated.

18

M

C R E T

Careful visual observation was maintained and tunneling
operations stopped each time the German guards walked over
the tunnel on their regular patrols. Pumps were installed

to take care of the excess water. Observation logs were

maintained, and since the highway under observation was the
main road from East Berlin to the Schoenfeld Airport, consid-
erable Order of Battle information was obtained. It was also
possible to estimate quite accurately the relative importance'
of individuals visiting East Berlin by observing the security
precautions taken by the East Germans and the Soviets.

Both sides of the tunnel were lined with sand in bags
as the tunnel proceeded and the excess spoil was hauled back
to the basement of the warehouse.’ Tb facilitate movement, a
wooden track was laid on the floor of the tunnel and a con-
verted electric fork lift was used to pull a string of rubber-
tired trailers back and forth in the tunnel. (See fig. 14.)
Cool air was supplied to the face of the tunnel through duct-
work from an air conditioning unit located in the warehouse.
The tunnel was completed on 28 February 1955. Construction
of the tap chamber commenced 10 March 1955 and was completed,
with the three target cables exposed, on 28 March 1955. (See
fig. 15.)

Tb appreciate this accomplishment it is necessary to

remember that the tunnel was 1,476 feet long (roughly the

19

S E T
‘.p i‘

JLLLR-

 

mwmdwo H»

ooa<onnma monw bwmn nun Own» wox

,. It,
”it, ‘11"! I 1 l l J 414,.
. S“ K
S E E T

length of the Lincoln Memorial reflecting pool) and that the
first half sloped down and the second half sloped up. (See
fig. 16.) The lack of an adequate base line made the survey-
ing problem especially difficult. The engineers decided at
one point that an object of known size in the East Zone would
be useful as a reference point, so a baseball game was organ-
ized with the objective of knocking a baseball as far into the
East Zone as possible. VThis scheme was frustrated by the
friendliness of the East German guards who kept returning the
baseball. Nonetheless, the engineers expressed confidence
that they knew their position when the tunnel was completed
to a point which could be contained in a six-inch cube. They
were correct. 5
Excess humidity is probably one of the greatest enemies
of electronic equipment. To guard against this problem the
section of the tunnel immediately adjacent to the tap chamber
was insulated and sealed with marine-type plywood to form, in
effect, a closed room. (See figs. 17 and 18.) Vapor barriers
were erected and, in addition, a heavy "anti-personnel" door
of steel and concrete was constructed to seal off the tunnel
some 15 yards.from its terminal end. From the beginning it
was realized that the duration of this operation was finite.
Considerable thought was given to the posture the U.S. Govern-
ment would adopt upon the tunnel's discovery and to those

20


m

measures which would be taken at the site. The following
position was finally approved:
a. The posture of the U.S. would be one of flat
denial of any knowledge of the tunnel. 7
b. The tunnel was mined at the point it crossed
the East-West Zone border with demolition charges capable
of caving in the tunnel liner should the Soviets attempt
forcible entry into the cover installation.

c. The "anti-Personnel" door described above was
4/

installed.
d. It was agreed that the installation would be

defended against forcible entry with all means at hand.

All equipment for isolating and preampli-

fying the signals and passing them down the tunnel for record-
ing was in place before each tap was made so that monitoring
of each pair could begin as soon as it was tapped. (See figs.

19 and 20.) Careful check was kept of the temperature and

i/This door bore the following inscription neatly lettered
in German and Cyrillic: "Entry is forbidden by order of the
Commanding General." It was reasoned that this sign might give
pause to Soviet and/or German officials and gain time. As a
matter of fact, there were those Communist individuals who
considered the posting of this sign as one of the most auda-
cious aspects of the entire undertaking.

21

N


l'“irzure 2o
M

humidity in the tap chamber to prevent the possibility of the
introduction of moisture into the target cables thus causing
faults. The moisture in the air caused by the breathing and
perspiration of the technicians doing the tapping operation
forced the suspension of the operation several times to
permit the air conditioning equipment to dehumidify the
chamber. All the components in the electrical isolation net-
works were individually selected and subjected to rigorous
tests to insure maximum reliability, and the lead-away cables
were constructed of the best available materials, sheathed in
lead, and handled in accordance with the highest telephone
company standards. The strictest possible visual watch was
maintained with the tap crew. In short, in this, as in all
aspects of the operation, every effort was made to guarantee
success even though in many instances it meant delay in

achieving the objective.
__ _ ._ < .... -m-ﬁ—MWV 4 ‘- .~~_W¢—_~—u—o __,.._ -c-o—v-n—uv ~-- 4 ‘

N

IV. TERMINATION

The tunnel was discovered (see fig. 21) 21 April 1956,

after 11 months and 11 days of operation. A memorandum pre-

pared on 15 August 1956 (reproduced in its entirety as

Appendix A) examines in detail all evidence available as of

that date on the reasons for the discovery. The conclusion
reached was that the loss of this source was purely the result
of unfortunate circumstances beyond our control - a combina-
tion of the fact that one of the cables was in very poor
physical condition (this was known from the beginning) and a
long period of unusually heavy rainfall. It appeared that water
entered the cable in sufficient quantity to make it inopera-
tive, thus necessitating digging up sections of the cable and

causing discovery of the tap.

23
a
e
m.
mm.
mm

Sov ie t Press Br i0 1' i ng
24
-......_—-—-—----
V. PRODUCTION .

tatistics may be of interest in evaluating

The following 5

the project:

 

a.

25

S E T
.w—mr-_‘ .“~.~‘.~—W—w-—p oo——__._.a—.

d. A Small processing unit

was maintained at the Berlin site to permit on-the-spot
monitoring of engineering circuits for the protection of
the project and scanning of the more productive circuits
for the "hot" intelligence. Daily reports of sufficient
value to warrant electrical transmission to Washington

[::::::::::]were produced.

e. Processing of the backlogged material con-

tinued until 30 September 1958—

t:

The information from this material was disseminated in

a closely controlled system[:::::::::::::::] Appendix B

consists of a summary of the value of the material received

together with typical customer comments.
W
v1 . AFTERMATH

As previously noted, considerable thought was given
during the entire life of the project on the result its
discovery would bring. In retrospect it is probably correct
to say that, among those most actively concerned with the
project's management, a consensus developed that the Soviets
would probably suppress knowledge of the tunnel's existence
rather than admit to the world that Free World intelligence
organs had the capability of successfully mounting an opera-
tion of this magnitude. In other words, it was felt that for
the Soviets to admit that the U.S. had been reading their high
level communications circuits would cause the Soviets to lose
face. Perhaps fortunately, fate intervened, and as a possible
consequence the Soviet course of action was exactly contrary
to expectation.

The Commandant of the Soviet Berlin Garrison, who would
normally have controlled the handling of the situation when
the tunnel was discovered, was absent from Berlin and the
Acting Commandant, Colonel Ivan A. Kotsyuba, was in charge.
There is some reason to believe that he (for whatever reason)
was forced to make a personal decision on a course of action
without benefit of advice from Moscow. At any rate his

reaction was unexpected in that he invited the entire Berlin

27

N
M

press corps to a briefing and tour of the tunnel and its
facilities. As a result the tunnel was undoubtedly the most
highly publicized peacetime espionage enterprise in modern
times prior to the "U-2 incident." Worldwide reaction was out-
standingly favorable in terms of enhancement of 0.8. prestige.
Non-Soviet Bloc sentiment can be generally summarized as follows:
a. There was universal admiration (and this
included informed Soviets) on the technical excellence

of the installation and the imaginative nature of the

undertaking.

b. The non-Communist world reacted with surprise
and unconcealed delight to this indication that the
0.8., almost universally regarded as a stumbling neophyte
in espionage matters, was capable of a coup against the

Soviet Union, which had long been the acknowledged master

in such matters.

c. Coupled with regret that the Cold War necessi-
tated such measures, thoughtful editorial comment
applauded this indication that the U.S. was capable of
fulfilling its role of Free World leadership in the
struggle.

Appendix C contains a sampling of typical U.S. press
accounts and editorial comment on the tunnel. Predictably
the Communist press treated the tunnel as an outrage and an

28

N
. ....___..__-._.._.--, . . ... .... .mn—v-¢———...————.— ..—.———-——..... ..

intolerable indecency. Appendix D consists of a study of

East German press reaction to the incident.

For their contributions to ProjectE;;::::::]awards

were made to the following individuals:
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
Intelligence Medal of Merit

After the project went into the production phase it was
necessary to brief a great many people to properly utilize
the product. In all almost [::::::::]personnel were cleared

é/Unfortunately the writer has been unable to locate an
exact record of those persons who received other recognition
from the Agency for their participation in this project and
any omissions are regretted. It should also be noted that
approximately people participated wittingly or unwittingly
in this underta ng. In fact thereare very few, if any, of the
elements of CIA that were not called upon for assistance, either
directly or indirectly (such as providing manpower), during
the life of the project.

 

29
S E T
30
Aﬁw >
W

APPENDIX A

NOTE: This assessment was prepared by the[:;:::;:;:]staff
Immediately after the discovery of the tunne an 3 based

on --rtinent information available.

15 August 1956

DISCOVERY BY THE SOVIETS OF l I

Analysis of all available evidence - traffic passing on
the target cables, conversations recorded from a microphone

installed in the tap chamber, and vital observations from the

site - indicates that the Soviet discovery of[:::::::::]was

    
 
  

purely fortuitous

A descrip-
tion of the events leading to these conclusions is contained

in this paper.
Following heavy rains in the Berlin area a number of tele-
phone and telegraph cables were flooded and began to fault

between Karlshorst and Mahlow on the night of 16 April 1956.
The first major fault was discovered on cab1e[:::::::::]

[:::::::::::::]on 17 April. The fault was repaired by cutting

the defective stretch of cable and replacing a 3000 meter

length with a temporary replacement cable. Between 17 and 22

R E T
RET


RET

RET

MT
SE

ET
_-_~.m

N
10
_ m-.~m

'11
RET
12,

 

ET
13

15

CRET
abw w
Wﬂm

 

“an—g...-

N

APPENDIX B‘

RECAPITULATION OF THE INTEEEIGENCE DERIVED

Set forth below are a recapitulation of intelligence

derived from the[:::::]nater1al and some typical consumer

comments.

NT

-«m-u. “a.“

BET

ET


M

APPENDIX C

TYPICAL AMERICAN PRESS COMMENT
WASHINGTON 9057
1 May 1950

The Tunnel of Love I '

The United states Government has not yet made
any oflicial reply to the Soviet and East German
allegations and protests concerning the 3Wyard

tunnel that American intelligence operatives are
said to have built underneath the border-between

West and East Berlin for espionage purposes.
Meanwhile. assuming the story to be correct—we
cannot help thinking the Communists have made
a grievous mistake to raise so much fuss about their
discovery. They are even said to (have conducted
special propaganda tours through the tunnel and
to have exhibited the wiretapping and other record-
ing apparatus that the Americans are supposed to
have installed inside it.

The probable result of all this" has been to give
the anti-Communist resistance in East Germany a
good deal of amusement and encouragement. Cer-
tainly it must have served to strehgthen the im-
pression of American resourcefulness and thereby
to restore some measure or our prestige--which
apparently had been deteriorating since the equivo~
cal attitude taken by the American authorities in
the East German uprisings of June. 1954—among
the captive population. The reaction of their
kinsmen in West Germany is probably a pretty
good index to their own. .

in West Germany the story has been accepted
at face value with astonishment and deiightas an
evidence that the tradition of Yankee resource-
fulness and ingenuity is not a myth after all.
Espionage is one game in which the Communists
were deemed, even by their enemies. to be par-

‘tieularly expert and our own side to be dismally

inept. Very few Germans. as the Frankfurter
Neue Presse exultantly observed. even suspected
that the Americans "were capable at so much
cleverness"; and it would be even more devastating
to Communist prestige it it were disclosed that
the espionage tunnel had been in operation for
some time before the Communists became aware
of it.

indeed, if the tunnel episode turns out to have
been the product at Yankee ingenuity. there is an
interesting parallel in American history. During
the siege of Petersburg in 1864. an enterprising
Union oflicer trom the Pennsylvania coal tields
conceived the idea of mining the Confederate
positions tram a tunnel under them. The tunnel
was dug and the mines were finally set oil; and

though the operation was a ﬁasco in part because‘

of the failure of Union commanders to execute
orders. the boldness of the stroke,has_ compelled
admirationeverslnce.‘ ' ' ' . -'

._‘. ;
‘

6-2

-- r- ... ..-n...-".-.--. e.— .-
O

\u

.4'

BERLlN
Wonderful Tunnel

licrlin, city of rubble. refugees. and
occasional patches ot‘ glitter. is an Alfred
Hitchcock dream of subterfuge and suspi.
cion. in back streets. darkly mysterious
houses lurk behind high wire icnces sug-
gestive of darker .qu ntore mysterious
doings witltiu. Newsnten recently counted
:7 separate agencies ot' Western intelli~
gence known to be at work in Berlin.

 

Their operatives—some

sters bulging under blue serge—report to

.ulit't'ercnt headquarters. and rarely know

\t hat their t‘ttllc‘:t'..'ltc.~ are up to.

in .l” llerlin there is no spot better
:llilt‘ll to the liittlumk \(ltt'lnt‘ of things
than a rustic. semi-deserted corner known
on tltc L25. side as Rudow and itt the
Russian zone. just mer the way. as All-
lIlienicke. Self-important ducks and
chickens strut like commissars in All-
ttlientcke‘s cobbled st rect llerlio‘s ottly
working windmill turns lillJl)‘ itt tlte
breeze near by. atnl close to the boundary
sepamting I'Iast attd West stands a LES.
radar station. bending its reticular Bar to
the tan-rations at liast llerlt'tt's busy
Scltiinet‘eld Airport. 'l'wo rings ol' barbed
wire guard the lonely radar post, and

__..

 

behind them a deufhmentlo'f uniformed.
rpe men we a ie . -
andisolatedumonha. , " secret

o

. _ fashionably E
clothed in the grey llanttel of New York's '
.‘ladoon Avenue. some with armpit hol. ;

 

 

“'1 "’

.. mnuuweg'm-Mrr 1'" ' ‘

TIME MAGAZINE
7 May 1956 -

The Big Cellar. For many a month,
the super-secrecy surrounding the con-
struction and operation of Rudow's radar
station had led the gossip of bored Amer~
icans in the occupied city. There were
those who remembered a civilian engineer
ltired to supervise the job: he had quit in
disgust because the blueprints seemed so
crazy. “Why build a cellar big enough to
drive through with a dump truck?" he

, asked. and was told to mind his own busi-

ness. Others recalled seeing friends whom
they knew to he engineers suddenly ap-
pearing at the station wearing the insignia
of the [5.5. Anny Signal Corps. \\'by? An
amused shrug was the only answer ques-
tioners ever got—but last week the Rus-
sians thought they had found a better one.
' One night at 7 o'clock. an angry,
chunky Soviet colonel named Ivan Kotsi-

. uba called a press conference in East Beth ,-

:'ltn. Purpose: to protest the building by'

"American organi/ations” of a secret
tttnnel ttttder I-Zast (iemtan'territory. "with
tlte criminal intent oi spying." Oiiered a
chance to see for themselves, the Western
men were taken to a site some soo

,' yards from the radar station at Roam-I;

0-3

A Lot of Money. Truckloads of Red
army troops and squad ears crowded with
l'oll'spolizci stood by. Mobile generators
were ltuntming to provide lights for the
occasion. and at the entrance to a hole
dog in the ground. a colonel ot' the Rus-
sian signal corps was on ltand to explain it
all. 'l‘en feet below. its entrance a hole cut
in the roof by the Russians. lay the tunnel
itself: a cast-iron tube about six t'eet
itt diameter and 500-609 yards long.
cratnmed with electronic equipment. ca-
bles. tape recorders. ventilating apparatus
and pumps of both llritisb attd American

I make. .-\I the littsl German end. tables led

.. ....—-- -.. . ..

out of the main body of the tunnel to a
separate chamber where they were liokttl
to two liaft (ierroan cables aml a third
used by the Russians. What was at the
American end? The newsmen were not
permitted to know. As they crawled west-
ward. .l satnlbag barrier barred the way.
its purpose t'tltpllzh'ila'tl by a sign reading
itt linglislt and tierman: "You are ttow
entering the American sector."

"'l‘his tunnel." said the Russian expert.
with a note ot' admiration. "was built to
last years. The party responsible must

' have bad a lot of money."

Who was reslmnsilile? Nobody. neither
the Pentagon. the State Department. nor

1 the Central Intelligence Agency. was say-
ing. llut as llerlin's‘tmtu-rs erupted glee-

fully with the news. one llerlin editor told
a ranking U.S. official: ”i don‘t kttow
whether your people dog that wonderful
tunnel or not. but whoever it was. let me
say 1 think it was too bad it was found.

. It's the best publicity the 0.8. but had in

a ,. -.. “pnovo on...“ ... .s a .-
. i .

Berlinioraloogtime.".
—-———-—_—Iﬂ———n-.‘

. 11051011 051' ; MAY 41E
3 s 196,496 !
i '.

from E I Other
hoe Pal-0176;: ' : -

'DWAY 5595’ .
' Hope It Is True 31/:

Soviet charges that American intelligence agents.‘
dug a tunnel in Berlin. tapped a. telephone cable. and;
Irecorded conversations-over the Red communication_net-‘
'work. which the Reds made with considerable fanfare
'and during a conducted tour of the spy tunnel for cor-4
irespondents, gives us some faint hope. ='
1 Frankly, we didn't know that American intelligenc
Lagcnts were that smart. In fact. we we1e beginning t
:thlnk that what the Qntgallntelhgeng Agency needed
mnemrsaaas on the fundamentals of espionag e‘
-from some defected Russian agent. But noxuve take it:

.ov—o—- -~.- - -.

fall Tacmf the Soviet charges are c, American intel-;
:lifience agents have actually. collected some important1
vin'i’ormation concerning Soviewnuitaiy operations and.
.instaliations in East _Ge1:m__a_ny,. mm" i
“We hope that American intelligence agents have.
:inﬁitrated the Soviet department of foreign a'ffairs.’
planted western sympathizers in the heart of the SovietI
bureaucracy and started a stream of microﬁlmed copies
50f important Soviet document i: towards thgagaain- .
'Washingto .j'
l e hope all this because that is precisely what the
fSoviet spy network did and is probably doing right now _
3111 the United States. This is not just tit for tat—but. a

.stark necessity in “the world of cynical power politics. i
L'.....-—°-—-—--—-1-

..a—-‘,,

“— -..—u—. ._.1..._._.'.'..‘.._...
..- ...—...” -..-.-—- ...- ‘
-..“. .m

 

-- i
i STAMFORD gem-m.) ;

ADVOCAT-
Circ.: c. 23,166

 

A from E o Other
- ”$0 Page

A , Pm 3...,
0 use '12 4.9.96

Date: ‘

 

... .. ...-

‘r -
: Money Well Spent / ‘
i There is only one agency in (Rah-:3!
{ ington which does not account or the}

I money it spends. The Central Inteiilg
igcncc Agency, headed uﬂ‘i‘lcn 'Wq

fDulics, has never reported to Con-
' gross. A special c0mmittee, appointed
‘by the President, did make'a survey
3 or the agency's activities and was ap-
2 parentiy satisﬁed that it was emeicnt.
ESo scare. are the activities of this
I group that even the amount 0:
;moncy it- spends is unknoym. Ac-
;countants have estimated that there
-is roughly $2 ‘-billion in budgets oi:
:other departments whichiis diverted
‘ to the CIA. ' ’

_ Naturally enough, Congress worries
from time to- time that this money
may not be well spent. Last week some
_ news came out of Berlin which should
calm such tears; '

1 The Russians discovered that their
ithrec main. telephone cables irom
East Berlinto points east were tapped.

C) QA tunnel from the western zone, con-

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 

  
   
  
  
  
   
   
  

nected with the tapped lines an'd .
wires, led to sandbags at the zone
boundary. The Russians were greatly
disturbed. They claim that all mes-
sages ior several years have been in-
tercepted. They blame this violation
of privacy on American Intelligence.

Our ofﬁcials have expressed horror
at the charge. They haven't; they say.
the slightest idea '0: where the lines-
‘iead or by whom they were laid. The
Russians are just old meanies to claim'

we wire-tapped.

3 _West Berliners are laughing. Good‘
for American Intelligence. they say.’ 1
They hope. and so do we, that the'
Russians have only discovered one of '
several taps. At least, the expose:
shows that some .olthemoney spent
bpr may- vebeen very well spent

indeed...;.’.."_ . ..

'.‘ -

 

...——
CIA MK! HAVE ORDERED WIRETAP TUNNEL '9 DREIER

Alex Dreier at 6:00 PJ-I. over WMAQ (Chicago) and the NE
Radio Networks.

"And now under the heading, special report, part one.

JGreat—Bri—tain-with—irogman ‘spy'who'tm'n‘ed "out " to be" not
W‘smncaeggiuLin—his-sccrctivcnessms..nothing..on. us. We have a
» tunnel we dug under the communist sector of Berlin and which the
reds exposed to .the light of day, as you probably know, a short
while ago. Well, our NH: correspondent, good friend and colleague, .
Frank Burkholzer, has investigated the story of the wiretap tunnel
and he says there's just one conclusion -- it's ours. We dug it,
we equipped it with electronic equipment to listen in on commnist
East German conversations for a whole year before they found us out.

"Presumably we should be embarrassed but nobody in Berlin is.
In fact, there is a hint of American and West German pride in know-
ing that 'we pulled off an espionage trick on the Reds for a change.
of course, the East Germans are making a good thing of it by con-'
ducting tours through the tunnel to impress their people with the
dastardliness of the American spies, but that maybackfire on them
because the East Germans are not beyond getting a quiet chuckle at '
this outwitting of their conumnist rulers. '

"Burkholzer tells us that the United States is stamped all
over the listening post tunnel. Now, the tunnel is on the outskirts
of town with our end being located under a so-called experimental
radar station beside a garbage dump. It runs straight under a plowed
field that has white border marking posts above it. The Russians
have made three openings for the tourists. One is near the wiretap,
another at a point about 150 yards out in the field. When anyone
asks an American why there isn't any radar at the experimental radar
station, the usual answer, according to Burkholzer, is, we said it
was experimental, didn't we? Want to make something of it?"

- - "Naturally the arnv and the government in Washington aren't

going to admit anything unless they have to. No one tells who
ordered the eavesdropping tunnel built or who paid for it or who
did the listening and the digging. Perhaps it was the work of a
local Berlin outfit, Just a curious bunch of boys. 01‘ perhaps it
was done secretly on orders direct from the Pentagon or the CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY. Amway, it was done well because it wasn't
discovered for a year and now the Russians may be wondering how
much we learned from recording all the phone talks, possibly includin
everything that went through the switchboard of the nearby Soviet
airfield. So thanks for the information, Frank Burkholzer, and now
we have a question for you. Why don't we open a tourist entrance
at our end of the tunnel and cash in on the publicity? Step up,
one and all. 011157 a quarter. See modern espionage in electronic
form and all underground, and who knows? Perhaps you will meet an
occasional commniet tourist." -

nl
- iM‘U-w. .. ...

.... ...----...- .. _.___.___...._. . . MAY 27.1956"

‘ i
. l 259 Communist lone-distance A study or the area‘ “we“:

c—-..~«-—v--.-—-.———-..muo . —-

 

_.i..... ...

MW route
{mum TRIBUNE

Bari:

.~,a.F-"-.—U-U—-.-

   

"ill Retis Mack. to, See

|
. ‘U- 8. Wire -Tagi Tiiiirieil’i . - .. -_

ByGaston Coblcniz ‘ _- Sandbag Barricade ' . '. . ‘
'BulVircimtotheucraicirribuiic “We have no iauit whatsoever , .

' :201956.N.Y."Cf¢ld rriounc inc. i” ﬁnd. W“ "m WWW” °”°
I“. 'DERLI‘I Mil y ”6 iii! 0‘ attendant said.
. I . - ~"° '. l-‘rom the eastern entrance. a

the greatest slnhts of the comivimtor can walk westward {or

.war is the "American spy tun-i .
. .. . I' perhaps i 0 yards post the point
"I” now on exhibition m "where th tunnel ('l'OMOtI under

Del-lin.

tor er. en a sand-
Thc 5004“,“ tunnel "9““ ngsgarricﬁir: harncountered
tents a venture of extraordinary and a voice calls out “halt'” “f

audacity—the stun or which German. , .
thuller films we made. It in It is clear that it the visitor. '
“I“ ““3 by American Intel " could continue westward past
‘3")? forces—and that ‘5 the. the barricade he would emerge.
“3'?“ “”“mpmn’” ‘3 “ soon at a .low but prominent, .
I‘u'm‘“ "“th °‘ 9"“ American building with radar.

capacity {or darineundertakincssmmpmcm on the £00“ The

mffmgﬂiogn~1x§g u'32.“?51:3:[buildiniz'is surrounded by barbed

'sk'i‘lliulﬂzaltd difficult operation \Aﬁrc Tnd “lard“: comunuy by; ...-....

. mcr can soldiers. Signs in Ger -. ””t' ‘i' .- t.“

itiii.i““Ji.“‘°.‘:'-“i}£‘“f£ it ‘2: .... ...... «m. mm B °°':‘:L“.';::'.:':‘.'L..
a ..ee ' 0 W t: iorbidden.” ’ merictyosrcvencieet lonir hossinc

equipment to maintain certain
levels or temperature and hu-i
midity. "the Communists say!

.....-- -

telephone lines runnmit under-mo ossibilit other tha h t
.jcround in Berlin.. 711° “M5 aI"-the gadar buyilding encloses‘tl‘i‘

parently included some maniac“,cs
tern end o! the tunnel. this w” necessary to protecti

‘. to Soviet satellite state in East- I
'crn Europe. as well as Soviet ‘71" "Wk“ AW” delicate equipment in the other-i

-‘ gormy circuits in Germany. The men who dug the tunnel wise dank and cold tunnel. ,
.. x . snack “-5; 'rh'ri'ves' '- -* obviously labored under two Finally. there is the complex’
{major handicaps. They had to tapping equipment. all oi Ameri-l
‘ l The tunnel. discovered by the work very silently to avoid-dc. can or British manutacturc '

,Comniunists a month ago ond.tcction. and they had to haul '1‘th includes eight racks o
mow the main sightseeing ataaway secretly the thousands otnboosters to carry the tapped con-
.traction in Berlin. can be vuucdtons of clay they dug out. since'versation back to the western
by making a twenty-minute big piigs of earth near the sector end of the tunnel and also to
.drit'o (mm the center of Berlin border would have alerted the help prevent detection of the

.to the'southeast corner or the Communism ltaps. »

city. Apparently the excavated”; There are three power-control
A mobile snack bar is doinc.c=\rlh was hauled away in closed‘units near two long racks of
..1 thriving business ”near incﬂrucks brought into the radar equipment into which the 259
Yeastera end at the tunnel.catci‘éi"ull§‘nﬁ- Pow“? “10 same Communist lines lead from
‘ Him; to East German {actoryl'mc‘s bought in the sections 0‘ threo main cables. Iicre the in-
Edeieuations bi'ourzht to see tliel“_°TN:-'M¢d “‘0“ “mini: Which dividuai ‘ monitorini: taxis are
“work oi'mmerican irnpcrialisLS."|1"‘° the tunnel. The utmost tnadc.‘lilmiiz the opposite Wall
| After inspecting the tunnelechCCY mil“ have We“ used to of the tunnel is arow of benches,
mic ractoiy workers record thein‘mld “mm“ “P ‘0‘“ W‘- with microsccnt lithtinit over-
. The Communists estlnate that head. The compafLment u

I"indignation" in a visitors' book.-
l'rhe book contains the sicnn~ltms 9“" °‘ ‘h" “'°"“ w“ “V“ pointed a battleship tray.

itures oi iorcicners on both sides'""1 months. Considered Croat Experts
at the Iron Curtain. Even it “7““ the tunnel completed At the wary end of”)... eastern
Sudanese oiiicial is listed. ~. there came the job of installing _ _ . '

, the momwﬂm. l‘Qlﬂl’lmt’lW lin- compartmmt there is another
- -- The tunnel. six feet in di-. - ' .. .

i - . parentiy this had to be done 5““ d°°“ On the eastern Mic
ameter and with its root twelve! ‘ . . , of 1. k one man. inl'm"l‘t.llt mm
feet below the surface. was magnify”ﬁﬁﬁmﬁ°m§mcmw3 ' v . 1" I. . z ' d
from a point 200 yards side' . . ° ' - .—an ultra-sensitive mi r l
the American sector of math“? equipment Md "“3 m""mwy'wliich would have repo‘rtzghsgg
Berlin. It runs eastward to a;"'“’" °‘ preventing: detection °flhctivity by the Communists atl
paint 300 yards inside the Bus-in" phone taps. The mass 0' the point where their lines were;
sian sector. The western en- ‘elouipment w” pa‘"""‘km3‘y'lapncd.liny activity there would‘
trance .lies in a sparsely-popu- "“1““ through the “““mhave meant that the tunnel haul
lated locality called nudow. Iialonc "'° wooden “'1‘ ‘ndbcen discovered. ' '

Only the eastern end 0‘ mjlioused in a special ninety.-!oot-' The men who did the actual

e—ma‘ ‘V

tunnel is open tor visitors. AW“: compartment “ the “5WD

tnpplnc must it be '
. i ave en amen . -
detachment oi Communis ““3 0‘ "“3 tunnel. ,thc ercat experts in the held: '

People's Police and a communi- Th“ compartment ”"3“” with They di .
cations expert m, on hand “:3 thick steel door at its trestei’ri.'}m.¢e of 3,53,. remarkably “‘5’:
explain every detail.'rhcy readily entrance. 9“ "“3 ““4“” ° The Communists to th 1";
express their admiration tor the the tunnel ' ““9“ “Mb“- stallation apparently yams“;

skill 0‘ a build written in _Russian and. Ger
. . ;. ..%M§..~—-— ~ :—. man: {.3an iorbidden by order!“ “'33:; Eighth! M10" 1'. w"!
oi the Commandine General.” ‘ [m e“ " “° “91"“.

, . _ ..-- ... ...“...Juegwmimad-

Eﬂu-O‘.‘

..- -.
' attempt to I se_
statcmcn n .wc
tunnel ' 1 into. thcwrotcdn my handwriting: "
lommy - 2-. . ewe . _
, . Encascd in steel and cart-f
crctc was :11

I 0 thank the
e alleged-wire tap V° “PM“ V - ..
a "Iaboraloxy." directly undeta 'belng kmd’fnougn “”2“"
a (334.59: from Bcr- the wand). . ~. ,:.. .
m to the Russian air base at

Schocnfcld. e commander;
[who declined 1

° ‘é'ive his'. - - '
- name. said 1:

 
  
          
     

_ anc
. merican army; .011 0" an:
radar station, [the Russians "'9‘“? or
_'say it is a dumm 1, owner— {WNW
-' ship of the tun '

behin

_ crh'ncrs are cdnJyOung Vo
Vmccd (h

e Americans built "19"? . qn

. bquippcd it wjm'ZScarchhght, aimed up I)

5. 'e 'pcnsivc apparatus. and then, "9’ "We? 01
'Iislcncd in on Red army’tch W'- . . .

s. smc'cl 0mm a
-. ‘Imandc'ra ‘

wag. an astoundJ 1": ”"3 r

Jug feat. which'h

hon
as greatly] .Slatosif
enhanced A cric '
'1‘
ebw U
”-mcnpsn-“ m—"m-W.—— —_..._. ., , .

C R E T

APPENDIX D
NOTE: This analysis was prepared by thel;;;;:::::]
staff as part of the wrap—up of the oper .

ROUND-UP OF EAST GERMAN PRESS
REACTION TO THE DISCOVERY OF THE
WIRETAP TUNNEL AT THE BERLIN SECTOR BORDER

(Sources as Indicated)

The following is an analysis of the East German press
reaction to the discovery of the wiretap tunnel at the sector
border between West and East Berlin. During the period under
review - 24 to 26 April 1956 - a total of 31 dailies per day
and four weeklies were available for scrutiny; however, only
the dailies reported and commented on the incident.

Mostly concerned with reporting and commenting on the
incident were the East Berlin papers which, in some instances,
devoted full pages of their local sections to reports and pic-
,tures on the tunnel in addition to their front-page or second-
page accounts of developments. The provincial press gave front-
page treatment to the matter only in few instances, generally
refrained from large articles or commentaries, and often

carried pictorial material with only brief explanations. The

least coverage was noted in the provincial press of other
«nu—c».— -w- v-wo'"i r m...‘

 

I

than SED (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands -
.Communist Party Germany) affiliation; none of these papers
published any commentary, or any cartoon of their own, on
the subject up to 26 April, in fact.

Describing the tunnel as inspected by the Journalists

after the Soviet press conference, the papers pointed out

that the installation was well designed and constructed, that
the installation was costly and equivalent to a modern teler
phone exchange, and that the material - of British and Ameri-
can origin - used in the installation was of such quality as
to guarantee long service.

The East Berlin papers, which were leading in the reports
on the issue, treated the matter as a "bitterly serious inci-
dent" which represents an "international scandal" and a
"breach of the norms of international law." The papers, in
their commentaries, addressed the West Berlin Senat, demand-
ing an all-Berlin understanding and stressing the necessity
for united action, and insinuated that Berlin is being kept
divided merely for the purpose of providing the espionage
centers in West Berlin with a base for launching provocations

against the GDR. Other commentaries by central and provincial
papers contained calls for vigilance and for defense prepared-
ness. Only one paper printed an editorial on the incident.

In commenting on the incident the press did not draw a line

2

W
S E E T

between the different developments, such as the press confer-
ence, the Soviet protest, the GDR Government protest, etc.,
but, as a rule, the commentaries dealt with the incident as
a whole. Later, when the first reaction of the West Berlin
press was available, the central press swooped down upon the
West Berlin press for attempting to belittle the incident and
to divert attention from the "seriousness of the matter."

The few caricatures published by the papers were designed

to slander the Americans.

Day by.Day Reaction

24 April 1956
On 24 April 1956 six East Berlin papers printed the ADN

(Allegemeines Deutsches Nachrichten Bureau - General German
News Office) release of individual reports on the Soviet press

conference, reported on the inspection of the tunnel by the

journalists, and carried excerpts from General_Zarenko's letter
of protest (l - 6). DER MORGEN and BERLINER ZEITUNG (5 and 6)
printed only the abbreviated version of the ADN release. Six
provincial SED papers (7 - 12) carried announcements of the
discovery, brief reports on the press conference, and merely

an announcement to the effect that a letter of protest has

been sent to the American Chief of Staff. Only NEUER TAG,
Frankfurt/Oder, printed the long version of the ADN release(12).

3

NT
M

Provincial papers of other party affiliations carried no
reports.
25 April 1956

On 25 April 22 provincial papers came out with the ADN
version of the report on the discovery of the tunnel (13 - 34);
the six provincial SED papers which had carried a brief announce-
ment the day before followed up their reports by more extensive
accounts of the press conference, the letter of protest, and
the inspection of the tunnel (l3 - 18). Papers of other party
affiliations joined in the reporting campaign on this day.
Only MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIHME, of all provincial papers, published

an "eye-witness" report containing a description of the tunnel
and quoting individuals who had voiced their "outrage at such
a thing" which produces new material for conflicts in foreign’
policy (16). SCHWERINEB VOLKSZEITUNG, which printed the long
version of the ADN release, reproduced the first picture of
the tunnel (22).

Meanwhile the central press, in addition to supplementary
reports on the discovery of the tunpel, descriptions of the
tunnel, and pictorial material showing sections of the tunnel
such as the amplifier station, etc., came out with the first
commentaries. A total of five commentaries appeared on this
day. The press treated the matter as a "bitterly serious

affair" which represents an finternational scandal" and a

4
S E T
R E T

"breach of the norms of international law," pointing out that
the United States violated the Buenos Aires Treaty on Telecom-
.munications on the one hand and the GDR's sovereignty on the
other hand (35 - 39). NEUEB DEUTSCHLAND spoke of a new,
hitherto unsurpassed "gangster act" of the 0.8. secret service
(35), NATIONAL ZEITUNG termed the incident as a "sensational
international scandal" (36), NEUE ZEIT stressed that there is
no word "strong enough to brand such wickedness“ (38), and
JUNGE WELT declared that "this had to happen Just to those

who always babble about Communist infiltration but can never
prove it" (39). All commentaries were addressed to the West
Berlin Senat, demanding an all—Berlin understanding for the
purpose of discontinuing the "stubborn adherence to NATO
policy," achieving the withdrawal of the "cold war experts of
all shades," dissolving the espionage centers in the Nfrontier
city," and achieving a "normalization in the situation in
Berlin." Three papers reported on a meeting held by the
National Front at Alt-Glienicke, at which the population adopted
a resolution protesting against this "provocation." Franz
Fischer, First Secretary of the Kreis Treptow SED Executive
Board, was reported to have said at the meeting that the
people of West Germany and West Berlin have to pay for this
installation through the occupation costs and to have termed

the tunnel as "an appendix of the cold war" (38, 40, and 41).

5

\§\E\Q‘E\F T
TRIBUENE, moreover, referred to a report by the HAHBURGER
ANZEIGER to underscore the fact that the installations in the
tunnel were not of provisional nature but designed for long
service (40). DER MORGEN, describing the tunnel, added that
West German correspondents who inspected the tunnel noted with
satisfaction the declaration of the Soviet Lieutenant Colonel
that "quite obviously, German quarters have no part in this",
(41), while NATIONAL ZEITUNG briefly referred to an announce-
ment made at the Alt—Glienicke meeting to the effect that the

tunnel was open for public inspection (36).

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND reproduced the first caricature on the
issue. The cartoon showed a garden which is divided into two
parts by a sign indicating the "Democratic Sector" - full of
flowers, and the opposite side - a barren piece of land with
a molehill topped by a flag with the dollar sign.’ A strong
arm is pulling out of a hole in the Democratic Sector a mole
wearing "U.S."-marked earphones, some sort of Army trousers
with plugs and pliers showing from the pocket, and a 0.8.
Army cap bearing the legend "Espionage.” ”The cartoon is
captioned, "Do Not Burrow in Other People's Yards" (35).

26 April 1956

On 26 April 27 papers continued reporting on the issue
(42 - 68). In 17 instances the reports were supplemented
with pictures as outlined above. A total of 15 papers

6
R E T

printed the text of, or large excerpts from, the press release
on the GDR Government protest (42 - 56). Six papers reported
on the inspection of the tunnel by the population, the press,
and representatives of the diplomatic corps (42, 49, 59, 60,
'65, and 67). Four papers referred to a report carried by the
West Berlin TAGESSPIEGEL according to which Western Journalists
were prohibited from inspecting the mouth of the tunnel on the
Western side (42, 43, 51, and 58), and four papers referred

to FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which had spoken of an "eloquent
silence" about the affair on the part of the Americans (42, 51,

55, and 58). A total of four papers reported on the Alt-
Glienicke meeting (51, 60, 61, and 67). NEUES DEUTSCHLAND

gave excerpts from Fisher's speech, quoting him to the effect
that the people of West Berlin, in particular the SPD members,
will be invited to inspect the tunnel (51). Three papers re-
produced caricatures (51, 52, and 56), six papers carrieda
commentaries (51, 52, 53, 54, 57, and 58), and one paper came
out with an editorial (55). Three East Berlin papers, through
their commentaries, swooped down upon the West Berlin press
for its attitude toward the incident. NEUES DEUTSCHLAND
accused the West Berlin papers of attempting to belittle the
incident and of lauding the efficiency of the American "goblins,"
adding that the West Berlin press is thus making vain attempts

to divert attention from the seriousness of the matter (51).

7
_—mw—_‘-m_~‘ﬁ‘_’m.-—_~ ..._.. ,

N

JUNGE WELT lashed out at the West Berlin DER TAG, saying that,
by its opinion, the West Berlin paper manifests its total loss
of any sense of decency._ Besides, DER TAG is not in the least
disturbed about the violation also of West Berlin's territory
(52). NATIONAL ZEITUNG held that DER TAG now admitted what it
has been denying at all times, namely that West Berlin is a

de facto part of NATO, adding that DER TAG now regards as ,
"customary" the military espionage of the United States on
GDR territory in addition to the "customary frontier-city
policy," the "customary" partition, and the "customary"
diversionist activities of the KGU and other underworld
organizations. The paper stressed that all Berliners fully
agree with the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which said that the
people must demand the discontinuation of "such things" (58).
NEUE ZEIT, carrying the only editorial, said that the wire-
tapping post is a feature of West Berlin's misuse as a NATO
base. The paper emphasized that GDR policy will continue to
serve all-German understanding and relaxation of international
tensions. "But it must be kept in mind that the success of
this policy will not only depend on the volume of the appeal
for peace but also on our preparedness to defend our homeland
as well as on our vigilance regarding the prevention of dan-

gers resulting from the fact that one part of Berlin has be-

come a frontier city against peace," the paper added. "What

8

NET
S R E T

we need are contact points above the ground and in full
light, namely all-German talks, and not underground trenches
in the cold war" (55).

The first commentaries carried by provincial papers dealt
with the incident as an example of proof for East German press
reports on hostile espionage. VOLKSSTIIME, Karl-Marx-Stadt,
pointed out that the tunnel represents "a document" which is?
quite apt to dispel all doubts of those who have hitherto
been inclined to regard East German press reports about the
underground activities of Western espionage services as
"exaggerated" (57). MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME quoted several
workers who voiced_their indignation over "such a vileness"
which makes German unity more difficult to demonstrate that
the "Western side" is Just as quiet about this "unpleasant
affair" as the population ié outraged (53). And LEIPZIGER
VOLKSZEITUNG stressed that anyone reading about the discovery
of the tunnel will inevitably weigh the Soviet attempts at
maintaining peace against the efforts made by the U.S. espio-
nage service, adding that this "breach of international law"
also places the West Berlin administration "in a peculiar
light." The paper reminded its readers that war preparation,
which vformerly marched on Prussian Army boots," is now
marching on "American rubber soles, chewing gum, and tapping

telephone lines" (54).

..—..._.. --.___.._‘ --..4 .
m— .... .. ........
—-—. ..-~..n—.u——wﬂ_-n-a.~- «ﬂu-MW w

8 R E T

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND's caricature showed an American soldier try-
ing in vain to "milk" a disconnected, oversized telephone re-
ceiver into a bucket marked "CIC" while another soldier is
thoughtfully standing by (5i). JUNGE WELT reproduced a car-
toon showing a mole wearing a 0.8. Army cap on its head and

a telephone receiver on its back halting before a sign which
warns that "spies are now facing danger." The cartoon is .
captioned, "The Underworld that Shuns the Light," and foot-

noted, "Damned, we did not put up that sign" (52). FREIES

 

WORT showed rats wearing U.S. Army caps being disturbed by
a Russian soldier in the operation of what looks like a
communication center. Two rats are shown facing the soldier
in surprise, another standing with arms raised, and still
another escaping through an opening in the wall. The
caricature is entitled, "Unpleasant Surprise," and footnoted,

"It is an Effrontery of the Russians to Disturb Us in Our
(Burrowing) Work" (56).

10-
S B E T
wmdmmhwuw

10.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

SOURCES

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND

NEUE ZEIT

TRIBUENE

NATIONAL ZEITUNG

DER MORGEN

BERLINER ZEITUNG
FREIHEIT

SAECHSISCHE ZEITUNG
VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-Marx—Stadt
MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME
LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
NEUER TAG

FREIHEIT

SAECHSISCHE ZEITUNG
VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-Marx-Stadt
MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME
LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
NEUER TAG

LAUSITZER RUNDSCHAU
VOLKSSTIMME, Magdeburg
DAS VOLK, Erfurt
SCHWERINER VOLKSZBITUNG
FREIE ERDE

OSTSEE ZEITUNG
VOLKSWACHT

FREIES WORT

SAECHSICHES TAGEBLATT

DIE UNION
NORDDEUTSCHE NEUESTE NACHBICHTEN

MAERKISCHE UNION
BRANDENBURGISCHE NEUESTE NABBR.
BAUERN ECHO '
DER NEUE WEG

LIBERAL DEMOKBATISCHE ZEITUNG

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND
NATIONAL ZEITUNG
BERLINER ZEITUNG
NEUE ZEIT

JUNGE WELT
TRIBUENE

DER HORGEN
-——.—u-- Warm-nun urn-'2 9:.--m~

42.
43.
44.

45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
6.4.
65.
66.
67.
68.

BERLINER ZEITUNG
SAECHSISCHE ZEITUNG
DAS VOLK, Erfurt

NEUER TAG

FREIHEIT

DER MORGEN

TRIBUENE

BAUERN ECHO

DER NEUE WEG

NEUES DEUTSCHLAND
JUNGE WELT

MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME
LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
NEUE ZEIT

FREIES WORT
VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-Marx-Stadt
NATIONAL ZEITUNG
VOLKSSTIMME, Magdeburg
MAERKISCHE UNION

FREIE ERDE

LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG
VOLKSWACHT
SAECHSISCHES TAGEBLATT
OSTSEE ZEITUNG
LAUSITZER RUNDSCHAU
DIE UNION

SCHWERINER VOLKSZEITUNG