FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10207
22 December 1981

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 14/81)

Economic Bases for the Defense Might of a Socialist State

By

A.I. Pozherov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appzopriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas n/iozo7
22 Decanber 1981

USSR REPORT ' . ..
HILITARY AFFAIRS
(2000 14/81)

Econonlc Bases FOR THE Dereuss HXGMT or A SOCIALIST STATE.

Moscow BKONOMICHESKIYE OSNOVY OBORONNOGO HDGOSHCHBSTVR SO@SIALISTICHBS-
K060 GOSUDARSTVA in Russian 1981 (signed to press 20 Nov 80) 'pp 1-192

[Book ”Economic Bases for the Defense Might of a Socialist State”, by
Aleksandr Ivanovich Pozharov. Voyenizdat. 25,000 copies, 192 pages]
Coureurs
Author'sPorevord............................... “1
CHAPTER I. 1'!!!) METHOD OF PRODUCTION AND ECOMIC SUPPOKI OF WAR . . . . . . . 3
1. The Relationship of War ano Economics. The General Concept of
Military Econoaics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2. Military Econoaics in Class Antagonistic Socioecononic Fornationsll
3. Military Bconoaica of a Socialist State . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
lo. The Scientific-Technical Revolution and Beononic Support of a
War . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
CHAPTERII. masu'rs'saoommnmur. - . ~ - - - - . - . . . . ' . . - . . 5°
1. The State's Bcononic Potential and Economic Might . . . . . . . 5°
2. The Structure of Economic Potential and Economic Might . . . . 57
3. The Constant Growth of Economic Might-—-The Backbone of the
Party's Economic Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
CHAPTER III. MILITARY-ECONOMIC POTENTIAL AND ITS REALIZATION . . . . . . . . . 81
1. Essence of Military-Economic Potential and Maya of ‘ -
ReinforcingIt........................81
2. Military Production and Realization of Mi1itary-Econonic
Potential 0 O 0 O 0 O I O I O O O O O O O O O O O O O Q 0 O O O 87
3. Distribution and Consumption of Military Products . . . . . . . 98
lo. Socialist Integration and Military-acoustic Potential . . . . . 10‘
- a - [III '- USSR - 4 9000]

m Omﬁ" I” “NI V
FDI‘OFIICIAI.USEINVLY

 

CHAPTER IV. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ECONOMIC SUPPORT #08 DEFENSE . . . . . . . . 115

l. The Need, Essence and Features of an Econoaic Approach to
Defense Problems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

2. Military Economics as a Science end Its Significance in
Training Military Personnel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
3. Current Issues of Military-Econolic Theory and Practice . . . . 125

Brief Description

On the basis of the Marxist-Leninist thesis on the interrelationship of war and
econonics, the book exanines the origin, essence, historical development phases and
ferns of military economics. After explaining the basic directions of economic sup-
port of defense under present-day conditions. the author analyses ways of strength-
ening nilitsry-econoeic potential. features for i-plenenting it and issues on the
effectiveness of military economics.

The book is intended for officers, generals and other readers studying ailitary
economics.

FOIIOFFIDAI.USI(I‘BY

———— -——-- -
FOI‘OFFNJAI.USEZONIY

AUTHOR'S FOREHORD

The developed socialist society built in our country is a supreme achievement of
social progress and a natural stage along the path to communism. In a world where
aggressive reactionary forces still are preserved we need a reliable and effective
defense of revolutionary achievements. This is one of the most important functions
of the socialist state and a matter for all the people.

A country's defense capability rests on its economic capability, since "nothing
depends so much on economic conditions as the Army and Navy." The scientific-
technical revolution extremely reinforced the interconnection and interdependence
of war and the economy. Fundamental changes occurred in the nature of possible
warfare and throughout military organizational development. At the same time there
was an extraordinary strengthening of the reverse inf' .uence on the economy by
measures involving economic support of the armed forces. By virtue of this, eco-
nomic basis of military policy and of every concrete step in national defense has
taken on especially great importance.

In order to achieve the set goals with the least costs (and here specifically is
the meaning of the economic basis), one has to know the economics of a specific
sphere of activity and, to master it, one needs above all general military-economic
knowledge. "...Hhoever takes up specific issues without first resolving general
issues," cautioned V. I. Lenin. "inevitably will 'stmble' on these general issues
at every step without realizing it."

The foundation of military economic knowledge consists in the Marxist-Leninist
theses on the relationship of war and economics, on the principles of economic sup-
port for defense, on characteristic traits of the military economy in a socialist
state, and on its fundamental distinctions from the military economics of imperial-
ism.

of fundamental importance to resolving specific issues is the thorough understand-
ing of the extraordinarily complex mechanism for strengthening and realizing
military-economic potential and of the ways for increasing the effectiveness of
using funds allocated for defense. This book is devoted to an elucidation of these
theoretical issues.

The scientific-technical revolution and the rapid development of economics and
military affairs are constantly introducing new elements to the resolution of many

issues of military economics. It is important to comprehend theoretically the
changes occurring and draw necessary conclusions for practical endeavors.

1

FOR OI1ICLALIJSEiﬂVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A study of the essential interconnections of econonica, politics and war helps to

overcosc oversimplified impressions and bourgeois paeudoscientific theories on the
most vital issue of nodern tines—that of war and peace. A correct understanding

of these issues is of especially great importance under present-day conditions.

when international relations are at a crossroads as it were, leading either to in-

creased trust and cooperation or to a renewal of the Cold War and the arms race.
FOOTNOTES

1 x. Marx, and r. Engels, "Soch." [Horks], Vol 20, p 171.

2 v. I. Lenin, PSS [Complete Collected works]. Vol 15. p 368.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1. TI!!! METHOD OF PRCDUCT’ION AND BCOWIC SUPPGT 0? "AR

1. The Relationship of Her and Economics. The General Concept of Military
Economics

The question of the relationship between war and the economy or nilitary and eco-
nomic night of states has been a key one over the ages. There are theories which
make a fetish out of the role of the economy. For example, there is the well-known
catchword that for victory in a war three things are essential-money, money and
more money. But the opposite views are equally widespread. "Not gold, as vulgar
opinion has it, comprises the nerve of war, but good soldiers do, for gold alone '
is not enough to find good soldiers but good soldiers will always find gold,"l
wrote Machiavelli.

The essence of the argument has been magnificently expressed by A. 8. Pushkin in
his poem "Gold and the Sword":

"Everything is mine," said gold;
"Everything is mine," said the sword.

"I will buy everything." said the gold;
”I will take everything,” said the sword.

There have been various attenpts to overcone the absolutizing and opposition be-
tween economic and military night. Thus. the military historian H. Delbruck on the
issue of the opinions which put economic and military might into opposition.
stated: "Either one is equally right and wrong. When money is put foremost,
strategy shows a tendency to maneuver; but when a state shifts to the soldier, it
becones involved in the engagement."2 This attempt to rise above the one-sided
approach of the opposing opinions cannot be termed successful as it generally
avoids the issue and does not solve it.

A scientific solution to the question of the dialectical relationship between war-
fare and the economy has been provided by Harsiam-Leninism which established that
were are economically detersined and in turn they have an inverse effect on the

economy.

The technical and economic relationship is also known to bourgeois science but it
has energetically avoided and at present continues to overlook or consciously dia-
tort its socioeconomic aspect for reactionary. class apologetic interests. But the
closest attention must be paid to this due to its great isportance.

FOI1NHHC1AI.USE(XVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The economic causality of wars means that reasons for their occurrence are rooted
in the economy of an antagonistic society and that the economy predetermines the
essence, nature and political goals of the vars. In actuality, wars became a
natural social phenomenon only at that stage of economic development where the rule

life of the people,"3 wrote 1". Engels. Wars are the continuation of a political
line by violent means. But political life, reflecting the relations between classes
and states, is rooted in the economy and in the economic interests of the ruling
classes of antagonistic societies. Wars are conducted for the sake of these inter-
ests. The slaveholders, landowners and capitalists employ military violence agaimt
the exploited masses for preserving and strengthening their class domination, for
intensifying exploitation and for increasing income. Wars against other countries

are aimed at preserving and broadening spheres of domination and at acquiring addi-
tional sources of enrichment. since "violence is only a means, while, on the con-
trary, economic gain is the aim."“

The economic relationships which form or. the basis of private ownership give rise
to a policy of wars, militaristic ideology, morality and law. For this reason

V. I. Lenin pointed out that “war is not contradictory to the bases of private own-
ership but is rather the direct and inevitable development of these bases,"5 and
that militarism is a "vital manifestation" of capitalism.6 As capitalism developed,
military force found ever-broader application. Hilitarism achieved its flourishing
when it grew from premonopolistic capitalism into imperialism and with the develop-

On the basis of a scientific analysis of imperialism, V. I. Lenin proved that the
greater aggressiveness of imperialism derives from its very economic essence. that
is, the rule of monopolies. "Imperialism is, economically, monopolistic capital-
ism. In order that the monopoly be complete, it is essential to eliminate competi-
tors not only from the domestic market (from the market of a given state) but also
from the external one, from the entire world."7 The struggle for a "complete"
monopoly gives rise to a policy of world domination and this leads to were between
states. "World domination" is. putting it briefly, the content of inerialist
policy and a continuation of it is the imperialist var."a

olies caused a struggle among the imperialist states for its territorial partition-
ing. But as a consequence of the uneven and abrupt development of capitalism in
its monopolistic stage, the agreements concerning the economic and territorial ap-
portioning of the world between the monopolies and states were inevitably only
tru'ces between wars. "Fence treaties prepare for wars and in turn grow out of
vars, in determining one another and giving rise to an alternation of the forms of
peaceful and nonpeaceful struggle from the same grounds of the imperialist ties

and relationships of the world economy and world policy."9

Thus, aggressiveness, a striving for vars, their preparation and conduct are not a

random phenomenon but rather an inseparable property of imperialism stoning from
its economic essence and developing with it.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The entry of capitalism into the age of general crisis further intensified its reac-
tionary and aggressive nature and the brunt of aggressive drives is now directed
against the USSR and the other socialist nations and against the revolutionary and
national liberation movements. "...To their defeats in social battles, to the loss
of colonial possessions, to the abandoning of capitalism by ever-new nations, to

the successes of world socialism and the increased influence of the communist
parties in bourgeois states--to all of this the aggressive circles in the capital-
ist world have responded by a feverish initiating of military preparations. The
military budgets are inflated, new types of weapons are being developed, bases are
being built, and military provocations undertaken. Relying on this 'position of
strength,’ imperialism is hoping to keep hold of the opportunities slipping from

its fingers of commanding other nations and peoples."1 As the deepest roots of
wars are to be found in the economy, hence for eradicating them and excluding wars
from the life of mankind it is essential to alter the economic relations. A start
to this was made by the Great October Socialist Revolution which eliminated private
ownership of the means of production, the exploitation of man by man and the divid-
ing of society into antagonistic classes, having eliminated the economic roots of
militarism in our nation. 0n the basis of socialist ownership and a unity of fun-
damental economic interests among friendly classes and social groups, between the
people relations of comradely cooperation and mutual aid have been established;
concern of all for the good of each and the concern of each for the good of all have
become a law of our life. with the development of socialism the substantial differ-
ences have gradually been overcome between the city and countryside and between men-
tal and physical labor. The social homogeniety of society and its political and
ideological unity are growing stronger. All of this means that in the system of
internal social relations of socialism--in the economy, policy and ideology-there
is no room for socialism.

Socialism also fundamentally transforms international relations. Even in their
"Communist Manifesto," K. Marx and P. Engels wrote: "To the degree that the ex-
ploitation of one individual by another will be eliminated, so the exploitation of
one nation by another will be eliminated.

"Along with the antagonism of classes within nations the hostile relations between
nations will be done away with."11 This inspired prediction has found brilliant
confirmation in the relations of friendship, cooperation and comradely mutual aid
which have developed between the socielist countries. The policy of peace has been
legally reinforced in the Basic Law of a mature socialist society. This law es-
tablishes that the USSR consistently carries out Lenin's peace policy and is in
favor of a strengthening of security among peoples and broad international coopera-
tion. At the same time the USSR Constitution in legislation prohibits the props-
gandizing of war.

The growth and strengthening of the world socialist system have undermined the eco-
nomic, political and ideological bases of wars which reside within imperialism, for
the sphere of action of the economic laws of socialism is growing wider while the

influence of its peace-loving policy and ideology on the development of internation-
al relations is growing. “The growing superiority of the socialist forces over im-
perialist forces, the forces of peace over the forces of war has led to a situation
where even before the complete victory of socialism throughout the world, with the

preservation of capitalism in a portion of the world, a real opportunity will arise

FOR‘0FFKJAI.USE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to exclude a world war from the life of society."12 This program conclusion of the
CPSU has gained ever-new confirmation as a result of the steady struggle of the USSR
and the entire socialist comonwealth to maintain peace.

But as long as socialism exists, the social roots of militarism and hence of a mili-
tary threat to peace survive, since "although the opportunities for aggressive ac-
tions by imperialism are now significantly curtailed, its nature remains as be-
fore."1 Under these conditions, in order to prevent the unleashing of a world war
and to give an irreversible nature to the favorable changes in international rela-
tions, it is essential to strengthen the international influence and increase the
might, unity and solidarity of the world socialist co-onwealth.

The economic causality of wars goes beyond what has been said here. The economy is
the material basis for conducting wars and has a determining influence on their
scale, duration and intensity. In order to conduct wars, it is essential to have
armed forces and significant means are required for their creation and support.

The amount of means a society can allocate will depend upon the economic development
level. The higher the economic development level the more weapons and military
equipment, and of higher quality, the armed forces can employ and, consequently, the
higher their combat capabilities.

The economic development level also determines the possible size of the armed forces
and the fighting qualities of the men and their ability to master the weapons and
military equipment and employ them skillfully. This notion is particularly pertin-
ent under present-day conditions, for "wars are now conducted by peoples," wrote

V. I. Lenin, and they require "high quality husan material."”

In speaking of the economy as the material basis for the conduct of wars, it is es-
sential to bear in mind not only the development level of the productive forces but
also the production relations. The growing of socioeconomic contradictions into
military conflicts and the duration and intensity of wars depend upon the depth,
sentences and cowlexity of these contradictions. The nature of the production re-
lations and the degree of their conformity to the productive forces in addition in
a decisive manner influence the realisation of the capabilities residing in the pro-
ducrive forces and the degree to which economic might is subordinated to military
interests. "In modern warfare, as everyone knows, the economic organization is of
decisive significance,"15 pointed out V. I. Lenin. This statement has seemed
particular pertinence under the conditions of the historic clash between capitalism
and socialism, the two systems which represent two opposing types of society's eco-
nomic organization.

Finally, the economy has a determining influence on the development of all military
affairs, that is, on the size, structure and organization of the armed forces, on
the forms and methods of waging war and on the state and development of military
art. Here it is also essential to distinguish two aspects: the technical-economic
and the socioeconomic. The development of the productive forces tells in a direct
and indirect manner on the quantity and improvement in weapons as well as on the
fighting qualities of the men and through them on the state of military art. 0n
the basis of analyzing military history, 1'. Engels convincingly proved that "it was
not the 'free creativity of the mind' of inspired military leaders which operated
here in a revolutionizing manner but rather the inventing of better weapons and the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

change in soldier material; the influence of great military leaders at best was
limited to the fact that they ada ted the method of conducting combat to the new
weapons and to the new fighters." 5

The increase in the power of weapons, the radius of their action, mobility and mass
nature has led to an unprecedented increase in the scope and intensity of combat
operations in the world wars and to a change in the forms and methods of armed com-
bat. The general engagement has given way to operations by armies and fronts in
Horld War I and to strategic offensive and defensive operations in world "at 11.
The qualitative changes in the productive forces on the basis of the scientific and
technical revolution have made it possible to rearm the Army and Navy with nuclear
missiles and this has led to a revolution in military affairs.

Military affairs also constantly are diversely influenced by the socioeconomic sys-
tem which, in determining the goals and nature of the war as well as the morale of
the people and the army, tells directly on the nature of military organizational
development, strategy and tactics. V. I. Lenin has written that in the wars at the
end of the 18th Century, the French revolutionary people showed "gigantic revolu-
tionary creativity. having recreated the entire system of strategy, having broken
all the old laws and customs of war and having created a new, revolutionary peoples
army and a new conduct of war in the place of the old troops."l7 Here V. I. Lenin
drew attention to the fact that in France "an economic basis was first created for
a new, higher method of production and as a result a strong revolutionary army was
the superstructure."le The advantages of socialism over capitalism have been vivid-
ly manifested in the military organizational development of the socialist nations
which have created fundamentally new armed forces which differ basically from the
imperialist armies in terms of their purpose, nature, structure and organization.
Soviet military science and art have withstood the severe testing in the harshest
wars which mankind has ever known, in the wars to defend socialism against imperial-
ist aggression.

The economy influences the method of a wsr's conduct not only as an internal factor
in the military organizational development of a given state but also as the exter-
nal environment. Within the system of conditions characterising one or another
theater of war, economic conditions are of exceptionally important significance.
These include: the level of industrial development, the transportation network,
fuel and energy resources, population density. the socioeconomic system and so
forth. P. Engels pointed out that the method of waging a war depends upon the de-
velopment of the productive forces and upon the means of communications "both in
the rear itself as well as in the theater of war....“‘9 V. I. Lenin also drew
attention to this. For example. he pointed out that during the Russo-Japanese Her,
the Japanese occupied the better and most populated part of Hanchuris and this made
it possible for them to support the army by the means of the conquered nation and
with Chinese aid. The Russians were restricted to the supplies transported from
Russia over a single railroad and this did not make it possible to have full use of
the available economic and military capabilities in the war. V. I. Lenin pointed
to this as one of the reasons for the futility of continuing the war and the in-
evitability of a defeat for tsariat Russia"!0 Horld "hr 11 which involved many
nations and entire continents in its orbit provided vivid examples of the depend-
ence of military art and the nature of combat operations upon the development of
the productive forces and means of communications in the various theaters of war.

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This dependence has also been confirmed by the numerous local were started by the
imperialists in the postdwar period. It is particularly important to consider all
of this in solving the present-day questions of military organizational development.

Thus, wars and military affairs are economically determined. The dependence of wars
and military affairs upon the economy is their most essential relationship, a per-
manent, repeating one which tends to intensify. This is an objective law. But it
must not be absolutized and it must not be assumed that superiority in economic
strength in and of itself guarantees military superiority and victory in war. In
the first place, military affairs is influenced not only by the economic factor but
also feels the effect of the political goals, the national and geographic features
of a nation as well as the subjective factors, including the assessment by states-
men of the real capabilities of their nation and the enemy and the ability of the
military leaders to more or less completely and quickly adopt the methods of warfare
to the new weapons and new soldiers. Secondly, economic might does not convert
automatically into military strength. In order to realize military economic poten-
tial in a state it is essential to create a military economy and to subordinate as
fully as possible all resources to satisfying the needs of a war. Consequently,

the question arises of the demands made by a war on the economy.

The inverse effect of wars on the economy is a diverse and contradictory one and ex-
tends both to the productive forces and to the production relations. This happens
in two basic ways. The first is related to the immediate armed effect or action
from the enemy and the second to ensuring the functioning of one's own armed forces.

The inevitable consequences of wars are human casualties and material destruction,
the destruction of a portion of national wealth and a reduction in a society's pro-
duction capabilities. With the existing means of waging wars, a real opportunity
has arisen for destroying the economy in the process of conbat operations and eradi-
cating the population over enormous expanses. For this reason, under present-day
conditions, in economic construction one must consider ahead of time the problem of
ensuring the stability and survival of the economy in a possible war here being
guided not only by economic but also military strategic considerations.

Wars have a substantial influence on the economy in the fact that they give rise

to specific social needs and particularly the needs for personnel used to man the
armies, for weapons, ammunition and other military-end articles. The satisfying of
these needs, in the first place, diverts a significant portion of the populace
called up into the army from participation in production and this restricts the op-
portunities for economic development. Secondly, for satisfying military needs, the
production of military-end articles is organized and this also requires manpower,
and above this, also the means of production.

However, the question does not come down merely to diverting a portion of society's
forces and means to military ends. For supplying military production with the es-
sential means, substantial structural shifts must occur in the national economy.

The basic national economic proportions are altered as well as the sectorial and
territorial structure. This is particularly apparent in the period of preparing
and conducting the wars. Preferential development is given to the sectors and areas
which are militarily important at the expense of the sectors which satisfy civil'
needs. World War I, as V. I. Lenin pointed out, led to such a growth of the

FIMICNNWCJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military industry that even the production of the absolutely essential minimum of
consumer goods and the means of production was impossible.2 The negative conse-
quences of World War II in this regard were even more significant. The arms race
which has developed in the postwar period has led to a situation where in the im-
perialist nations during peacetime a significant scale of military production has
been initiated and this has had a substantial impact on the entire economy.

The preparations and conduct of wars also tell on the production relations. 92th
the occurrence of particular military needs, economic processes arise which work to
satisfy them and economic relations develop in the sphere of production, distribu-
tion, exchange and consmption of military-end articles. Let us term these
military economic relations. As is known, economic relations are manifested as
interests. This also applies to military economic relations. As militarism has
grown in the capitalist world, one has felt evermore strongly the interests of those
social groups for whom the satisfying of the military needs of the ruling class has
become the social function determining their place in the social division of labor.
It is no accident that under present-day conditions the military industrial complex
operates as a state within a state, applying pressure to the economy, politics and
ideology of a capitalist society.

In generalizing, it can be concluded that on the basis of developing the dialecti-
cal relationship between the war and the economy. a portion of social production is
specialized in the supporting of military might. This also forms the military
economy. In other words, the military economy is a system which serves the state' a
military needs and the preparation and conduct of wars. V. I. Lenin, in speaking
about the capitalist economy which operated for war, defined it as an "economy
directly or indirectly linked with military deliveries...."22

In order to turn the military economic potential into military might, it is essen-
tial to produce the weapons, military equipment and other military-end articles, to
deliver them to the armed forces and ensure their efficient use. Hence the mili-
tary economic process includes three consecutive phases: production, distribution
and exchange and consunption of the military-end articles. For performing the cor-
responding functions there are special elements of the military economy: produc-
tion, distribution and the element which serves and military consumption.

The military economy can be viewed from two aspects, the technical and the social.
The technical aspect is made up of the material and physical elements of its indi-
vidual units and the personnel employed in them. The production element of the
military economy is a part of social production while the elements serving distribu-
tion and consumption--the dumps, depots and rear facilities of the armed forces and
the systems of logistical supportnare a component part of the armed forces.

The military economy can also be viewed as a system of social relations which de-
velop in the process of the production. distribution, exchange and consumption of
military end articles. These relations are manifested in the various spheres of
society's vital activities, that is: in social production, in that portion which
is directly concerned with the supplying of the armed forces and in the armed
forces thaselves. In accord with this it is possible to isolate three groups of
military economic relations: the relations caused by the ties between military and
civilian production, the relations of military production per se and the relations

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the distribution and consumption of end military product. In their aggregate
these encompass all aspects and phases in the process of the economic support of
defense, starting by determining the volume of military needs and the means required
to satisfy them and ending with ensuring efficient consumption of the end military-
end products. '

Military economic relations are specific ones. Their. specific features are deter-
mined by the particular purpose of the military economy and by the derivative
nature of these relations. In being based upon the production relations of one or
another specific method of production, they reflect their essence and change along
with them. But one must not derive military economic relations directly and solely
from the economic base as they are formed in an interaction between the base and
the superstructure. Thus, in a socialist society these relations are of a requi-
site nature and are caused by the policy reflecting the need to defend socialism
against the externally-arising military threat.

The military economic process is directly linked to the production process. The
military products going to the troops are removed permanently from this process and
for this reason its on-going renewal is inconceivable without special ties to the
civilian economy on the basis and at the expense of which can the military economy
only exist.

Objective laws are inherent to the military economy and these reflect a definite de-
velopment level of the economy and military affairs, their dialectics caused by this
level, the relationship of military production and military consulption, current
military production and reserves, the relationships of the various elements of the
military economy, civilian and military production and so forth. The development

of the military economy is subordinate to the economic laws inherent to the given
socioeconomic formation and these laws define its social essence, qualitative
uniqueness and particular features. For example, a capitalist military economy is
subordinate to the operation of the law of surplus value and the other economic

laws of capitalism. Also inherent to it are the antagonistic contradictions,
anarchy and competition indemic to capitalism. In opposition to this the social-
ist military economy is subordinate to the operation to the economic laws of social-
ism.

As for the imanent laws internally inherent to a military economy and which can be
termed the military economic laws, these arise on the basis of the economic laws
and laws of war and are derivative from them in the same manner that military eco-
nomic relations are derived from a given society's production relations and are
shaped under the impact also of political and military factors. These laws are
historically transitory and change with the development of the economy and military
uf fairs. During various historical ages there have been different military eco-
nomic potentials of states, different form and methods for realizing these poten-
tials, and different relationships between the component parts of the military
economy, current military production and accumulated reserves and so forth. Thus,
the hierarchical landowning system in a feudal society gave rise to a decentralized
system of supplying the troops. 0n the basis of the concentration and centraliza-
tion of capital and vi th the growth of the economic and political strength of the
capitalist state, new ._rstems for the economic support of were developed and these
have their intrinsic quantitative and qualitative different ties and relationships,
that is, new military economic laws.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Along with the military economic laws inherent to just one or another historically
specific form of a military economy there are also certain general laws of a mili—
tary economy which operate in all stages and levels of its development. These ex-
press the most general relationships which do not depend upon the social natureof
military economic relations. Among such laws one could put the law of the depend-
ence of military might upon military production and the law of the dependence of
military production upon the development level of the productive forces and the
method of production. F. Engels pointed to these relations: "...The victory of
violence is based upon the production of weapons and weapons production, in turn,
is based upon production generally...."23 The inverse effect of war on the economy
and the growing relationship of the economy and war also are of a natural nature.

From an examination of the relationship of war and the economy, it follows that in
their dialectical interaction the military economy is that connecting link through
which the economy has a determining impact on the war and the war subordinates the
economy to its interests. Because of this the social essence of a military economy
is predetermined by that economy which has created it as well as by the wars which
it serves.

Since the existence of a military economy under socialism derives not from its in-
ternal essence but rather due to external conditions, it is quite understandable
that these external conditions have a significant impact on the socialist state's
military economy. For example, the scale of this economy is influenced by the
nature and the degree of military threat at a specific historical moment and by

the military preparations being carried out by probable enemies. Hence in order to
correctly solve the problem of economic support for the defense of a socialist
state, it is essential to know the present military economy of imperialism and for
cowrehending its essence, laws and development trends it is essential to at least
generally trace the historical process of its rise and development.

2. Military Economics in Class Antagonistic Socioeconomic Formations

A study of the historic developmental process of the economic support of wars, of
the objective military economic laws and specific forms of their manifestation at
various stages helps in elaborating a scientific approach to solving modern mili-
tary economic problem. Certain methods and forms tested out in previous wars can
be employed in practical activities under present-day conditions while others have
lost their importance and should be replaced by new ones. But ”it is impossible to
learn to carry out one's tasks by new procedures to day," pointed out V. I. Lenin,
"if previous experience has not opened our eyes to the incorrectness of the old
procedures."2‘° -

The basic turning points in the development of economic support for wars have been
determined by the change of socioeconomic formations, each of which has its own in-
herent method of economic support for a war and its own military economy. A gen-..
eralized expression of the technical-economic and socioeconomic aspects of a mili-
tary economy are found,. in the first place, in the development level of the material
means of armed combat, and secondly, in the forms and methods for satisfying the
needs for these means. Precisely the quantitative and qualitative certainty of

the material requirements of a war and of the forms for satisfying that character-
izes a military economy as a natural outgrowth of a given level of social develop-
ment.

11

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0FF“JA1.USE¢DNLY

The Origin and Development of a Military Economy in Slaveholding and Feudal
Societies

The conditions for the rise of a military economy began to develop with the split-
ting of society into an antagonistic classes and with the rise of the state and
army. During the age of primitive society their existed an automatically operat-
ing armed organization of the population. With armed clashes the entire adult pop-
ulation assumed the role of warriors and employed ordinary implements of labor as
weapons. Under these conditions there was no need for a separate military economic
organism and it arose only in the development stage when a war and the organisation
for a war became regular social functions and arsed detachments of men were organ-
ized which were separate from the people and specialised in the performing of these
functions. At this stage there was a differentiation of military and civilian
needs and military production and military economic relations arose.

Thus, a slaveholding state imposed military taxes. both monetary and in-kind. on the
population. it used loans and made collections of food and fodder. In Ancient'Rome
expenditures on the army were set for the year and annual estimates were drawn up.
Accounting rules were established for supply questions. In the large slaveholding
states, armies were created of several-score thousand men and fleets consisting of
hundreds of ships. These required a large amount of weapons, food and other supply
articles. Military production developed out of this and there was also the process
of its specialization. Shops based on slave labor were organized to manifacture
weapons.25 and in the troops there were special detachments of military craftsmen.
K. Marx pointed to the presence of an incipient shop system in the Roman corpora-
tions of military craftsmen.26

In the army troop services developed and these served to meet the needs of the
troops for food and fodder. Often the source for satisfying these needs was the
military plunder. tribute and direct ravaging of the population in those areas
where the troops were quartered. Food was issued to the soldiers in-kind or in

the form of script. In the latter instance markets were org-vised in the areas
where the troops were located. In the Roman army the questor under the consul was
in charge of the treasury, he sold military loot and slaves to the merchants, he
manufactured the necessary supply articles and issued rations to the troops. Wagon-
trains with food and military loot moved behind the troops.

These were the incipient elements of the military economy which arose with the rise
of armed forces in a slaveholding society. From the material and technical aspect,
the arising military economy was defined by the comparatively low development level
of the productive forces while its socioeconomic essence was determined by the
nature of the slaveholding production relations.

The long era of feudalism during which there were repeated substantial changes in
the economy, political relations and military affairs clearly illustrates the close
dependence of the forms and methods of economic support for wars upon the develop-
ment level and the particular relationship of the economy and the war in various
stages. In a feudal society, military economic relations were determined primarily
by the then-existing landowning relations. "The hierarchical structure of land
tenure and the related system of armed companies gave the nobility power over the
peasants,"27 wrote F. Marx and P. Engels. Military organizational development was
carried out on this basis and the army provided with everything necessary. The

12

FOR 0F11CLA1.USBGMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

standing companies of princes and feudal lords were the core of the feudal army.
Along with this, during wars, people's militias were created. Economic supply of
military needs was decentralized.

Thus,_in preparing for the campaign against Kazan', Ivan the Fourth in 1565 sent to
the Novgorod military leader an ukase to assemble 2,000 arquebusiers, 1,000 on

foot and 1,000 mounted. "And those arquebusiers, both mounted and on foot, for
every man there should be an arquebus, for every arquebus 12 copper rounds and 12
lead rounds for shot."2° Upon the demand of the central authorities, the feudal
lords reported "with horse, men and weapons" and were themselves concerned for sup-
plying their troops.

Hith the development of the productive forces, particularly metallurgy and trades,
and with the growth of the cities there were fundamental changes in the means of
armed combat, in the nature and structure of military might, in the methods of con-
ducting wars and their economic support. Of particularly great significance were
the appearance and improvement of firearms. Hith their introduction, small arms,
guns, ammunition and other articles began to hold a significant place in military
consumption and in contrast to the feed and personal supplies these had to be pro-
vided, as a rule, from one's country. In line with this it became necessary to
organise large enterprises for producing them and maintain regular close ties be-
tween the army and nation. The role of the lines of cal-unication grew and the
necessity of organizing centralized troop supply increased.

Peudal relations did not help to solve arising new problems. The feudal lords were
not interested in strengthening central power or the centralizing of military organ-
izational development and troop supply for this undermined their feudal autonomy.
They desperately resisted the broad introduction of firearms. As for military art,
here as well the reactionary political positions of the feudal lords made themsehes
felt. The feudal lord realized that in carrying out the will of the monarch, he
was risking his own armed force and consequently his own feudal independence. Hence
the desire to replace strategic operations by strategic gestures. Strategy was con-
stantly in opposition to policy.2

F. Engels has written that firearms brought about a major change in military affairs
and influenced in a revolutionizing manner the political relations of domination and
suppression. "In order to have powder and firearms, an industry and money were
needed and both these were possessed by the urban citizens. For this reason from
the very outset firearms were a weapon aimed against the feudal nobility by the
cities and arising monarchy which relied on the cities."30 The cannons of the burgers
destroyed the walls of the knights' castles, the bullets of the towns' guns pierced
the knights' armor and the rule of the nobility. write P. Bagels, collapsed along
with the-noble armor-clad cavalry.

In individual states there were permanent and temporary troops recruited as mercen-
aries combined with compulsory recruitment and supported by the state. The German
troops provide a typical picture. These were poorly organized hordes of men for
whom war was a trade and means of existence. They served whoever paid more. here
were representatives from all estates and various nationalities. In receiving pay,
the Landsknecht had to provide himself with everything required. In one of the
documents from those times entitled "Military Regulation at Sea and on Land," it
states: "...Each soldier should eat and drink independently of who pays for this,

13

FOIIOFIHCLALIJHE(HHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the priest or the sexton; the Landsknecht has neither home, farm, cows or calves and
no one brings him dinner. For this he must seek supplies where possible and buy
without money, regardless of whether the peasant likes this or not."31 In other
words, the plundering of the population from those areas where the troops were quar-
tered comprised the most important source of their existence. With this system of
supply. the soldiers on a campaign provided for their own needs. like an itinerant
peddler. For every infantry regiment there were up to 6,000 women and servants.

In s march a 3,000-man regiment took with it at least 300 wagons with women. child-
ren, servants and all sorts of baggage.

The Thirty Years War (l618-16h8) which involved a significant portion of Europe
showed all the unattractive failings of this system. It was bad enough that the
Landsknechts everywhere carried out wild plunder, terror and destruction. This sys-
tem involved a constant danger that the soldiers would scatter in all directions,
turning into bands of highweymen.

After this war, the magazine supply system became widespread in Europe. Its roots
can be found even in the slaveholding armies and were occasionally observed in the
feudal states. This system which presupposed the availability of significant re-
sources in the hands of the state developed fully in the 18th Century. It was
characterized by the construction of a system of magazines in the theater of war.
Food supplies were delivered to the magazines. With the aid of special wagontrains
the food was transported from the magazines closer to the troops. Bread from bake
eries was delivered by special wagontrains for the troops. Such a supply system
freed the army from the necessity of moving cumbersome wagontrains with it and made
it possible to limit the food supplies to a quantity which was needed for moving
from one magazine to another. But this system tied an army down to the magazines,
it limited the range of its operations to the organization of wagontrains and neces-
sitated significant funds.

The magazine supply system was the last word of feudalism at that stage in its de-
velopment when capitalist relations had already become widespread and the atomistic
feudal system was replaced by an absolute monarchy with its comparatively large
standing armies. "The very thing which had occurred in the organization and per-
manent recruitment of armed forces was also to occur with their supply," wrote K.
Clausewitz. "...The government was forced to view the supplying of the troops as

a question resting completely on its shoulders.... It was essential not only to
create a separate military caste (Kriegsvolk) but also a special supply organization
and develop it as much as possible."32 This system disappeared at the end of the
18th and the beginning of the 19th centuries when mass armies appeared, when the
scope of wars broadened unprecedentedly and when the methods of waging then changed
substantially.

The Capitalist Military Economy

The development of the productive forces and production relations and the increased
degree of worker exploitation under capitalism created an economic opportunity for
a further growth of the military economy and the necessity for this was determined
by the intensified class and international antagonisms and by the ever-broader use
of military force. "Her is the constant accomplice of capitalism. The system of
exploitation of man by man and the system of the annihilation of man by man are two
aspects of the capitalist system."33 Because of this progress in the area of

14

FOR¢OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

science, technology and the economy is evermore fully subordinated by capitalism to
militaristic interests. Military production becomes the most important component
in social production and a developed military economy is formed.

Machine-based industry, the material and technical base of capitalism, made it pos-
sible to create powerful weapons and to industrialize the armed forces. "A modern
ship of the line is not only a product of large-scale industry," wrote P. Engels,
"but at the same time a vivid example of it, a floating factory; in truth, one
which serves chiefly to spend money."3“

The development of weaponry accelerated particularly with the growth of premonopo-
listic capitalism into monopolistic. Thus, during the years of world War I the
armed forces underwent a technical revolution. In the course of its many new types
of weapons appeared and became widely used, including: antiaircraft artillery,
mortars, tanks, aircraft, toxins as well as equipment such as optical devices, the
telegraph, telephone and radio. "...For the first time in history the most power-
ful victories of technology were employed on such a scale, so destructively and

with such energy for the mass annihilation of millions of human lives,"35 wrote
V. I. Lenin on this question.

With the creation of large armies equipped with powerful weapons, means of trans-
port and communications. there was also an increase in the scale of the wars,
their scope, duration and the intensity of armed struggle. There was an abrupt

rise in the material needs of wars. The budget cost of World war I reached 186
billion dollars and World War II cost 662 billion dollars.36 But the matter does
not come down to the quantitative growth of the material needs of wars. Qualitative
changes also occurred in the structure and nature of military consumption.

One of the characteristic shifts in the structure of the material needs for the
armed forces was in the increased share of weapons and military equipment and the
reduced share of personal consumption articles for the servicemen. While during
the time of the wars of Peter the Great, Russia spent 11-12 percent of the total
military expenditures on military equipment, with 15 percent in the war of 1812-
lSlh and 25 percent in the Russo-Japanese War, during World War I the helligersnts
spent almost 60 percent of their military expenditures for these purposes and in
world War II 70~75 percent.37 The proportional amount of weapons and military
equipment in the total volume of military expenditures increased in Germany from
7.6 percent in 1872 up to 19.7 percent in 1913 and 64.8 percent in 1938; in the
United States, respectively, from 25.9 percent to 40 percent and 41.7 percent.38
Another structural shift is that in the total composition of weapons the most ad-
vanced and powerful ones develop at more rapid rates. Thus, in Uorld War II the
production of firearms and ammunition increased by 2-3-fold in comparison with
World War I (in the United States, England and Germany taken together), while guns
increased by 5-fold, mortars by 16-fold and tanks by 65-fold.39

Thus, the development patterns of the productive forces show a specific reflection
in the army and the military economy. Corresponding to the growth of the technical,~
value and organic structure of cepital are analogous changes in the relationship of
equipment and personnel in the troops and in the structure of the material require-
ments for the wars. In military affairs the increased combat might of the troops
and the destructive force of wars correspond to the increased labor productivity

in the national economy.

15

IN)R¢0ilWClAL IEIEIMVLY
FOR OFFKJAI.USEIDNLY

As is known, the material requirements of the armed forces per unit of time are
higher the greater their equipping level. The material losses of armies in the
course of armed combat grow in the same if not in a greater proportion. It is pos-
sible to judge the increased intensity of military consumption of fighting armies
from the amount of material and equipment going per soldier per day. This has in-
creased from 6 kg in World Her I up to 20 kg in Horld War II. how has all of this
influenced the military economy? A corresponding increase has been required in the
might of military production and the other elements of the military economy in
order to ensure the reproduction and delivery to the troops of a large quantity of
intensely destroyed weapons, ammunition, military equipment and other military-end
articles.

The growth rates of military production and consumption during the age of imperial-
ism have significantly outstripped the growth of civilian production. For example,
in comparison with the 1870‘s, in the 1930's industrial production had increased by
10-fold in the united states and military expenditures by 19-fold; in Germany the
corresponding figures were 6.3-fold and 27-fold. During the years of Horld War II
the level of industrial production in the United States was only 3-fold higher than
the level during the period of world Her I while the volume of military expendi-
tures was almost 20-fold more; in Germany. respectively, by 2.2- and 4.5-fold.“°

The increased military consumption in comparison with the growth of all social pro—
duction has meant a rise in the degree to which the latter is subordinate to mili-
tary aims. '

The increased volume, the more complex composition of the material needs of wars and
the greater intensity of military economic processes have necessitated qualitative
changes in the military economy and a fundamental revision in the entire system of
military economic relations.

Capitalism, in comparison with its preceding methods of production, has created
more favorable conditions not only for the growth of the productive forces but also
for subordinating all economic capabilities to the interests of war. This has been
caused by the characteristic concentration and centralization of production and
capital under capitalism and by the concentration of all economic power in the hands
of a small class of capitalists, its monopolistic upper clique which has subordin-
ated the state to itself and has entrusted to it the representation of its most gen-
eral class interests, including militaristic ones. '

The process inherent to capitalism of the socialization of production has become
most vividly expressed in the production of military—end articles. Military prod-
ucts are manufactured, as a rule, upon the state's order which, in essence, guaran-
tees and recognition of its socially necessary nature as it is known beforehand
what is to be produced, in what quantity, by what time and at what price sold. In
the sea of universal anarchy and confusion. military production operates as some-
thing unusual and unique. V. I. Lenin emphasized this uniqueness: "When the capi-
talists work for defense, that is, for the treasury this clearly is not 'pure'
capitalism, but rather a special type of national economy. Pure capitalism is comr
modity production. Commodity production is working for an unknown and free market.
But a capitalist who 'works' for defense is 'working' not for the market but rather
upon the order of the treasury and quite often even using the money received as a

16

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

loan from the treasury.“1 A bourgeois state, in carrying out the will and repre-
sentirg the interests of the capitalist class, places the burden of military expend-
itures on all society and performs the function of the henchmen of the bourgeoisie.
"Governments are the henchmen of the capitalist class. The henchmen are well paid.
The henchmen are the very shareholders. And the lamb is fleeced accompanied by a
stream of noise about ‘patriotisll'....""2 Thus, V. I. Lenin defined the socioeco-
nomic content of this phenomenon.

Hilitarism is older than capitalism but only under capitalism. in its monopolistic
stage, does it reach its apex. At the same time the system of military economic
relations gains its full development. In the place of duties established by social
positions and the in-kind decentralized supplying of armies, universal military ob-
ligation is established and the support of armies becomes exclusively a question

for the state. Weapons production is turned into one of the most profitable spheres
for the employment of capital and for this reason in the place of state-owned mili-
tary manufacturing enterprises, large capitalist factories arose which mass produce
military-end articles.“3

with the general class interest of the capitalists in strengthening militarism and
consequently in the existence and development of military production, among than
individual groups of weapons manufacturers arise the interests of whom are directly
tied to wars. having invested their capital into the production of military-end
articles, they thirst for an arms race and wars. On this basis ever-closer ties
began to develop between the weapons manufacturers and the upper military in the
state system. The concrescence of the monopolies with the state system and mili-
tary led to the formation of the military industrial complex.

The military industrial monopolies did not restrict the sphere of their activities
to national limits but went beyond them, involving the entire world in the sphere

of military economic relations. As early as 1886 there arose an international alli-
ance of military monopolies in the form of the Nobel Dynamite Trust where the lead-
ing role was played by English and German industrialists; in 1890 there was the
Harvey International Syndicate of Armor and Battleship Manufacturers which brought
together English, German, French, Italian and American businessmen. In 1904, agree-
ments were concluded by the military concerns of the German Krupp, the Austro-
Hungarien Sheds and the French Schneider-Creusot. These agreements provided for

the setting of prices, the establishing of quotas and the apportioning of markets
and the exchange of patents. In obtaining enormous profits from weapons deliveries
and being directly interested in their expansion, the military concerns in every
possible way accelerated the preparations for Hbrld Var I. "...The shipbuilding
and cannon, the dynamite and firearms factories and plants represent international
enterprises in which the capitalists from various nations together dupe and fleece
the ‘public' of various nations with equal ease building ships or cannons for Eng-
land against Italy or for Italy against England,"““ wrote V. I. Lenin in 1913.
Certain international agreements of the military industrial monopolies continued
operating even during the period of the world wars regardless of the fact that the
monopolies which were members in these agreements were located in hostile countries.
In the postwar period, on the basis of the increased integration processes and the
growth of militarism, there has been further development of international military
monopolies.

I

17

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Military economic relations have developed not only in breedth.but also in depth.
The very military economy has been transformed, the relationship of its structural
elements and ties with the national economy have become altered and a number of new
patterns have arisen. Certain development trends in the military economy have been
noted by representatives of classic bourgeois political economy and military sci-
ence. However. bourgeois science was unable to provide a scientific analysis of
the social essence and objective laws of military economy and it has degenerated
into a servile apology for the existing order. It has also been unable to promptly
raise and grasp the pertinent questions of economic support for a world war which
is being prepared by imperialism.

Here are certain characteristic examples of the "foresight" of bourgeois science on
the eve of world "at I. Thus, the representative of the German General Staff,
Schlieffen, in 1909 wrote that now it would be futile ”to achieve further advances
and set new tasks for the inventors. Everything imaginable has already been
achieved."“5 In Russia, A. A. Gulevich proved that the food question would be of
crucial significance in a war while financial poverty and the poor development of
industry and the railroads would not be of decisive importance. I. s. Bliokh as-
serted that "the low level at which the development of agriculture stands in Russia
will increase its defensive strength. The abandoned fields are not worked out be-
cause they have not been tilled as they should." Even certain bourgeois authors
have pointed out this reactionary nationalistic blindness.“6

It is not surprising that the waging of the approaching world war as before was
planned basically from supplies created in peacetime and from comparatively small
weapons production at the regular military plants with the involving of a few civil-
ian enterprises. But life repudiated these plans having fundamentally altered the
method of economic support for the war.

One of the distinguishing features in the economic support of Horld War I was the
meeting of military needs from current production of military-end products. For
this purpose enormous capitalist military production was organized. In the Barents
nations (not including the United States), it employed over 60,000 enterprises with
13 million workers and in the nations of the Austro-German bloc, around 10,000 on-
terprises with 6_million workers. As a total during the war years these countries
produced more than 24 million rifles, 1 million medium and light machine guns, al-
most 150,000 artillery pieces, 17,500 mortars, 8,200 tanks, almost 170,000 aircraft,
over 1 billion artillery shells, 64 billion cartridges and much other military
equipment and weapons. Military production reached even greater scale during the
years of World War II, its structure became extremely complex ani new major sectors
of military production appeared.“7

Another particular feature was that on the basis of the transforming of weaponry

and the increased scale and intensity of military consumption, the nature and mech-
anism of interaction among the component parts of the military economy were altered.
In previous times the weaponry products had been produced ahead of time and stored
at state depots. with the start of the war a period of intense consumption began
without the corresponding reproduction of military products. For this reason upon
the depletion of the stockpiled supplies the war would halt or be interrupted. Con-
sequently. there was no direct interrelated link in time between current military
production and current military consumption and the distribution network also

18

FOR 0!?!(1A1.USB¢0NLY
FOR OFIWCTAI.USEIDNLY

performed the role of a sort of storage capacity. Due to the fact that now the re-
quirements of the war began to be met from current production of military products,
fuller coordination was required between production and consumption in terms of the
volume. composition and delivery dates while the distribution network had to facili-
tate their interrelation and reciprocal adaptation. Thus, the production, distribu-
tion and consumption of military-end products now operated as organically linked,
mutually determining and related elements of a single whole, the permanently func-
tioning military economy. This was the essence of the occurred change.

The third change involved the nature of the relationship between the military and
civilian economy. The colossal growth of military needs and the necessity of cover-
ing then from current production brought about a sharp increase in military produc-
tion during the war and reﬂuired the diverting of all the means of production to
serving the cause of war,“ wrote V. I. Lenin. Thus, by the end of World War I, 75
percent of France's and Germany's industrial product was used for military ends
with the figures of 65 percent in England and 60 percent in the United States."6

In order to achieve this. it was essential to fundamentally alter all the national
economic proportions, adapting them to the interests of the war. But the question
did not come down merely to altering the sectorial proportions. Since the military
economy required direct centralized management of it. the reorganization of the en-
tire national economy in the interests of meeting military needs presupposed the
introduction of state regulation. Universal labor conscription was introduced along
with a state monopoly of food products and the compulsory regulation of the alloca-
tion of raw materials and production. Military-state monopolistic capitalism under-
went rapid development.

Thus. in the process of the growth of premonopolistic capitalism into monopolistic
on the basis of changes which had occurred in the method of production, in the meth-
od of waging wars and in the relationships of war and the economy, a series of new
patterns in economic support for were had arisen. These patterns were vividly ap-
parent in world wars I and il and continue to operate under today's conditions. The
further development of the economy and military affairs in the postwar years have
also been reflected in the economic support of wars. This will be taken up below.

Being the embodiment of the dialectical relationship between the economy and war, a
military economy is internally contradictory. Its contradictions are dynamic. as
they reflect the development of the economy and military affairs and the change in
the social essence of the very military economy.

Inherent to the military economy of class antagonistic societies is the contradic-
tion between the insatiable desire to increase military might and the limited capa-
bilities determined by the achieved economic development level. This contradiction
achieves particularly great acuteness in those stages of historical development when
the given socioeconomic formation has outlived its age and the class which has ex-
hausted its historical mission evermore widely employs military force in domestic
and international relations for the sake of continuing its rule.

with the growth of premonopolistic capitalism into imperialism, the designated con-
tradiction became sharply more acute and took on a new content. An imperialist

struggle developed for world domination and for reapportioning the already divided
world. This strengthened the gap between the aggressive military political aims of
the imperialist powers and coalitions and their actual economic capabilities. This

19

FOR'OFFﬂDAI.USE(NVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

achieved even greater acuteneso when capitalism entered the age of general crisis
and when militarism was given the insolvable task of preventing the development of
the replacement of capitalism by socialism and turning the wheel of history back.
Its absurdness becomes evermore apparent for all mankind with each new stage in
the exacerbation of the general crisis of capitalism. Thus, the limited capability
of the capitalist military economy was predetermined by the historical limitation
of the capitalist method of production.

In all capitalism's development stages theories have been created which justify the
existence of the military economy. Under present-day conditions, bourgeois econo-
mists. politicians and the military represent the military economy as a factor in
scientific and technical progress, an effective means to combat economic crisis and
a stimulant of economic growth and increasing the public's employment and income.
The reactionary, class apologetic essence of such theories is apparent. However, it
is not enough to point this out but rather it is also important to elucidate the
scientific unsoundness of military product fetishism. For this it is essential to
disclose the actual relations between military and civilian production as the dis-

tortions of these are used by bourgeois apologetics for the militarizing of the
economy.

The Harxist-Leninist theory or reproduction has proven scientifically that military
production does not directly serve to reproduce either the labor force or the means
of production and ultimately restricts the possibilities of expanding social pro-
duction. A war, according to the definition of Marx, "in the directly economic
sense is the same thing as if a nation dropped a portion of its capital into the
water."so Fortresses and military ships, wrote V. I. lenin in 1902, are not a plus
but rather a minus in the national economy.51

Of course, the bourgeois state, in relying on its increasing economic role and ex-
treme measures, can create a significant demand for military end articles. In this
instance the accelerated growth of military production causes a chain reaction in
increased production in the servicing sectors. This can lead to a decline in unem-
ployment and greater profit. But this is a temporary and decaptive relief as will
be discovered sooner or later and the more starkly the higher the scale of military
production. "era are most indicative in this regard.

Thus, World Var II interrupted the development of the economic crisis. In the
course of it, in the belligerent nations initially a rapid rise in military produc-
tion could be observed against a background of a certain increase in the overall
volume of industrial production. Then the growth of the total volume of industrial
production slowed down and finally a decline set in which was followed by a drop
also in military production. Such development was caused by the following. With
the aid of extraordinary compulsory measures it was possible to increase the mass of
employed labor and to raise the degree of exploitation and the load factor on pro-
duction capacity. As a result of this production grew. But military consumption
which rose simultaneously with this absorbed the entire increase in production and
in addition to this also a portion of the previously accumulated national wealth.
As a result there was s “consuning” of fixed capital and an irreplacable wasting of
manpower. An economic collapse under these conditions was inevitable. As for the
time of its occurrence, this depended. in the first place, upon the ratio of the
intensity of these opposite processes, and secondly, upon the scale of a state's
economic might (Table l).

20

INJI<0FINC1AI.lEﬂE(M!LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1

Dynanics of Industrial Production and Military Expenditures in
the United States. Great Britain and Germany (1938-1945”

 
     
 

 

Industrial : . '
”mind“ Germany 1 .21 - 1 . _

‘ | t . . V.
"“1"" "5* : H 3-: n“ was. ' r
““‘Wum' an“), n . 1:01 3:0! qll 8:10 '1
‘sm r 111- ‘ L8 1.9 i 2.2 5,0 18,6 31.: «.o «,4
taryecgnsu’ 3? 5.4 12,4 53.9 53,9 88,! 00,5 ‘01.: 157.9.
tion in net on Germany 35.5 - . . ,sverage' s11! y ’
2} income (in , 1’.

 

‘\

* Compiled and calculated fro- the book of H. I. Burlakov "Voyennoye
potrebleniye i kapitalisticheakoye vosproizvodstvo" [Military Consumption
and Capitalist Reproduction], pp 201, 227.

** Due to the absence of data on industrial production, the national intone
index has been calculated.

From the table it can be seen that during the years of Horld War II, in Germany the
maxim industrial production level was reached in 19“ (the 1938 level was exceeded
by Liv-fold). By this tine military consmption had also reached a laxilmn, having
increased by 7.6-fold in comparison with 1938. But since the share of military con-
sumption during the war years was 67.8 percent of national intone, ultinately
Germany's national wealth did not increase but declined by slnost 2-fold.$2 In the
United States, industrial production over the sane tins increased by 2.6-fold, in-
cluding by 46-fold for military production, but here the degree of nilitary acoustic
stress was significantly lower. 0n the eve of the war military consuption was 1.8
percent of national incone (in Ger-any, 25.5 percent), while the naxinln during the
war years did not exceed 1.4.1. percent. [1.8. national wealth over the war years did
not increase and it has been estimated (in 1967-1909 prices) at 986.5 billion dollars
in 196C and 984.0 billion dollars in 1955. During the war years fixed capital in-
creased by just 6 percent, while military assets rose by nore than 20-fold and their
share in national wealth rose from 0.8 to 11.3 percent. 3 Thus. even in the United
States, where the ratio of military and civilian production was the nest advantage-
ous, an overall increase of 2.6-fold in industrial production actually did not pro-
duce an increase in national wealth for this basically occurred fro- nilitary pro-

duction.
21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFNJAL.USEIDNLY

Since the impeding influence of military production is not directly apparent on the
surface of phenomena and moreover since the growth of military production is accom-
panied by an increased demand for manpower, the apologists of militarism. the reac-
tion and aggression as well as the supporters of the arms race have been able to
assert that a decline in military production leads to a further economic drop and
to a new growth in unemployment. But life has unmasked such assertions. In the
postwar period the highest economic development rates have been observed in those
capitalist nations and during these periods of their development when and where the
military expenditures were relatively less. The United States if the moat militar-
izcd nation of the capitalist world and the bulwark of militarism. But it is pre-
cisely the United States that suffers most from those illnesses for which the mili-
tarization of the economy is prescribed as a medicine. With increased militariza-
tion in the FRG and Japan, their economic development rates have slowed down.

The contradictions of the capitalist military economy do not end with those men-
tioned above. Fully inherent to it are all the contradictions of capitalist produc-
tion which in the military-economic sphere assume specific forms. The basic contra-
diction of capitalism in this sphere is characterised by a very high level of social-
ization in military production and by the concentration of it in the hands of a
handful of military industrial monopolies. From this derives the specific contradic-
tion of the capitalist military economy between the aim and means of achieving it.
The military economy is rreated to satisfy the needs of the armed forces. However,
in being a sphere for the application of capital. it becomes a means of enrichment
and for this reason helps to satisfy the needs of the armed forces only to the de-
gree that such service provides a high profit. This cannot help but have a negative
impact on the efficiency of the military economy.

The contradiction characteristic of capitalism between the organization of produc-
tion at individual enterprises and anarchy on a scale of the entire society is also
inherent to the military economy, although in a somewhat unique form. The competi-
tive struggle between the military industrial monopolies for advantageous military
orders, for positions in the military departments and tor using highly placed mili-
tary officials on their own boards underlines the framework of state regulation.
Decisions about what weapons are to be produced in what quantities are often eat-
tled not so much by the actual needs of military organizational development as by
the balance of forces and the influence of fighting military industrial groups who
for the sake of increasing profits expand the production of their products without
considering the actual need for them. Along with this the proportions of the mili-
tary economy are disrupted under the influence of the general market forces, for
the movement of the economic cycle also affects the the military economy. In turn,
the militarization of the economy complicates the entire system of production ties,
the proportions and selling conditions for aggregate social product. The interac-
tion of these two processes aggravates the anarchy and instability of the capital~
ist economy.

The contradiction between production and consumption is manifested in a very unique
manner in the capitalist military economy. The gap between the production of mili-
tary end articles and their consumption is inevitable even due to the desire to
create the necessary supplies and reserves. But how should one determine the ad-
visable limits to such a desire? In benefiting from this ambiguity, the monopolies
expand these supplies and often melt down completely unneeded surplus articles. The

22

FOR‘OFFKIAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

competition between the military industrial nonopolies leads to a separation of
military production from the actual needs for military-end articles and intensi-
fies the disproportions between military production and consumption. Finally, as
a result of the increased military production, the contradiction is intensified

. between production and consunption in society as a whole. The relative independ-
ence of capitalist production from worker consumption increases with a rise in the
share of silitary production and hence the pernicious consequences of this gap are
intensified.

The growth of the military economy exacerbates the contradiction inherent to capi-
talism between labor and capital as well as other social antagonism. Military-
state monopolistic capitalism, in the definition of V. I. Lenin, is nothing more
than "military hard labor for the workers and the military protection of capitalist
profits."5“ The increased militarization of the economy and the fabulous enrich-
ment of the military industrial complex deepen not only the basic class contradic-
tion between the working class and the capitalist class but also the contradiction
between the handful of military industrial magnates and the enormous majority of the
entire nation.

Finally, international contradictions are also characteristic of a capitalist mili-
tary economy. These assmae ever-greater acuteness with the growth of imperialist
integration and with the broadening of external military-economic relations. The
international military industrial monopolies have grown up on the basis of these
contradictions and cause their further exacerbation. As historical experience has
shown, the creation of military political blocs of the NATO type cannot eliminate
the fierce struggle for the markets of strategic raw products and materials and for
the weapons markets. This struggle is intensifying particularly now between the
U.S. and Western European monopolies as well as between the monopolies of the Rest-
ern European nations.

An examination of the development process of economic support for wars discloses
its dependence upon an aggregate of scientific-technical, economic, political and
military factors. In this process one can establish a number of stages or qualita-
tive shifts related to the change in the methods of production and the major stages
in the development of the given method of production. The military economy has
achieved its greatest development in the monopolistic stage of capitalism. But,
having created exceptionally favorable conditions for the flourishing of the mili-

tary economy, imperialism at the same time has left on it the imprint of an‘obso-
lete method of production, the imprint of irreaolveble antagonistic contradictions

which do not make it possible to utilize military-economic potential fully and most
effectively. This has become particularly apparent in the age of the general crisis

of capitalism and in the wars which it has started up against the world's first
socialist state.

3. Military Economics of a Socialist State

Economic support for the defense capability of a socialist state and for wars in
defense of socialism is characterized by a number of specific traits which reflect
the fundamental properties of a socialist society, its economic, political and
social system as well as its military organization. F. Engels foresaw that the
liberation of the proletariat "will have its specific reflection in military af-
fairs and will produce its own special, new military method."~"s This prediction

23

FOR OFFICIAL LEE ONLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USE(NVLY

has been confirmed by life. V. I. Lenin, in analyzing the experience of the Civil
war, concluded that "in the political and military area we have taken a world his-
torical step forward which has gone down in world history as the change of two
ages."56 The fundamental qualitative changes in the economy, political life and

military affairs could not help but bring about fundamental changes in the economic
support of a war.

The method inherent to socialism of economic support for defense capability has not
remained unchanged. It has developed under the impact of changes in internal fac-

the various stages in the economic maturity of socialism. Since the existence of a
military organization under socialism is dictated by external factors, it is quite
obvious that its forms also depend upon external conditions such as the scuteness

of contradictions, the balance of forces between the opposing systems and the forms
of struggle employed by imperialism. The unique combination of internal and exter-

nal factors also determine the specific traits of economic support for the military
defense of socialism in the various stages. -

periods which are marked by unique development conditions, tasks to be carried out
and methods for implementing them. These are: the period of civil military inter-
vention and the Civil War, the years of peaceful socialist construction under the
conditions of hostile capitalist encirclement, the Great Patriotic Bar and the post-
war period in which a number of stages can also be established. Let us briefly de-
scribe the first three periods. During this time there were formulated and became
clearly apparent the basic traits and fundamental distinctions and advantages of a
socialist military economy which withstood the severe testing in the largest mili-
tary clash of socialism with the shock forces of imperialism. All the subsequent
chapters are devoted to urgent military economic problems of the postwar period.

any and mobilizing all society's forces to defend the socialist fatherland. The

duction. A large portion of the plants filling military orders was-in enemy-held
territories (3,500 out of 5,602 plants), many had been destroyed by the white Guards

26

FOR OFFKJAI.US£(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and interventionists while the surviving ones were in a had way. Thus, the rule
Gun Plant in July 1918 produced only 8,350 rifles while in July 1917 the figure
was 60,500.57 Simultaneously it was essential to carry out the task of maintaining
general economic potential, without which military production could not exist.

supply of guns, ammunition and clothing. The Decree of the VTsIK [All-Russian
Central Executive Committee] on the organization of the Defense Council stated that

military production. Thus, at its very first session (1 December 1918) it was de-
cided to introduce a third shift at the Tula gun and cartridge plants and to supply
the plant workers with food using the standards of the Red Army rations under the
condition that production was brought up to maximum amounts. Bonuses were also in-

troduced. As a result of the measures undertaken, the Tula Gun Plant in February
1919 had doubled rifle output in comparison with July 1918.

Due to the party's unceasing activities the nation began to reestablish military
production. In the first half of 1919, 355 enterprises were operating directly for
defense purposes, including 231 enterprises producing weapons and 124 producing uni-
forms.$9 As a total during the 3 years of the war, the military plants provided

the Red Army with around 2.5 million rifles, 21,000 machine guns, about 1.5 billion
cartridges, 3,973 guns, around 8 million shells, over 1.6 million grenades, and 669
new aircraft; some 1,576 aircraft were overhauled.5° During the war years the vol-
ume of military production fluctuated in rather large amounts. Thus, in February
1919, more than 50,000 rifles and 26.3 million cartridges were produced; in April,
16,000 rifles and 16.6 million cartridges, in September 51,200 rifles and 34.5 mil-
lion cartridges, and then a period of a decline in production followed and this was
overcome only in 1920. In July of this year, up to 36,000 rifles and more than 33
million cartridges were produced. These fluctuations were caused both by difficul-
ties in the supply of the enterprises and manpower shortages as well as by the very
course of the war. But, regardless of all the difficulties, the party succeeded in
ensuring the necessary level of military production. During the period of the

fight against the third Entente campaign, the basic portion of the military products
obtained by the front had been produced at Soviet enterprises. The operational army
received 252,700 rifles, 2,193 medium aechine guns, over 215 million cartridges and
much other weapons and supply articles.61

In creating a military economy, the party was concerned not only for the production
of military-end articles. but also for their correct allocation, prompt delivery to
the troops and efficient use. A portion of the weapons, clothing and food acquired
at a price of enormous effort sat idle at the dumps and depots, it was sent out
where it was not required, it was wasted, squandered or was not promptly received
by the troops. This reduced the effectiveness of the party's and people's efforts.
For this reason the creation and improvement of an economic organism in the army
itself was a most important concern for the party. V. I. Lenin personally worked

25

FORGJFFKJAL.USE(NVLY
FORGDHHKJAI.USEioNLY

out the fundamental questions in the organizational development of the Red Army
rear. He established the necessity of strict centralization and the unification of
all supply questions under single leadership and showed the incompatibility of the
existence of separate Red Army supply bodies in the fraternal republics with the de-
fense interests.62 V. I. Lenin frequently himself investigated many particular
questions in the organization of troop supply. In the course of revolutionary cre-
ativity, new forms of logistical support were elaborated and these conformed to the
nation's economic opportunities, to the nature of the war, to the situational re-
quirements and to the local conditions which were marked by great diversity.

Due to the unceasing efforts by the party and the people under unbelievably diffi-
cult conditions, a powerful military economy was created ensuring the formation and
equipping of the multimillion-strong Red Army. while in 1916, in the Tsarist Army
for every 1,000 bayonettes there were 3-4 guns and 8-10 machine guns, in the Red
Army in 1920, the figure was 5.5-7 guns and 30-37.5 machine guns.63 This result was
achieved on the basis of an economy devastated by the imperialist war and under con-
ditions of a Civil War and foreign intervention. This shows the exceptionally
great efficiency and the social advantages of the new type of military economy.

The second period in the development of the Soviet military economy occurred under
peacetime conditions and reflected the major achievements and strengthening of the
nation's economic might in the course of socialist construction. In being guided
by Lenin's instructions on the existence of a permanent threat from the imperialist
predators and the necessity "of preparing over a long period of time and seriously.
starting with the economic upsurge of the nation"5“ for defending socialism, the
party steadfastly carried out Lenin's plan for the construction of socialism. This
made it possible to quickly turn the nation into a powerful socialist industrial-
kolkhoz power and, in developing rapidly. as early as 1937, to move from fifth to
second place in the world in terms of the volume of industrial production.

The party directed the growth of the nation's economic might considering the need
to successfully carry out defense tasks. The directives for compiling the First
Five-Year Plan pointed out: "Considering the possibility of a military attack by
the capitalist states on the first proletarian state in history, it is essential,
in working out the five-year plan, to pay maximum attention to the very rapid de-
velopment of those national economic sectors and industry in particular which have
been assigned the main role in ensuring the nation's defense and economic stability
in wartime."65 This policy was also characteristic for the subsequent five-year
plans. As a result important changes occurred in the economy's sectorial structure
and placement and these brought about a significant rise in the nation's military
economic potential. Among the other economic sectors, industry developed most
rapidly. particularly heavy industry, the share of which increased from 35.1 per-
cent in 1913 up to 61.2 percent in 1960. Machine building and metalworking products
during this time rose by 29.6-fold. In 1960, the USSR generated 68.3 billion kilo-
watt hours of electric power and produced 66,200 tractors (in 15-hp units), 165,400
motor vehicles and 58,600 metal cutting machines. Some 31.1 million tons of oil
were produced and 18.3 million tons of steel were cast.66

Soviet military theory proceeded from the view that in a future war the necessity _
might arise of fighting on two fronts and that a war could be waged until the com-

plete defeat of the aggressor. This would necessitate the mobilizing of all forces
and would assume an extended nature as the enemy's possessed great material and

26

FKNlCMﬂWCIAl.USE(NQLY
FON:0FFKJAI.USE‘0NLY

human resources and were able to quickly replenish the losses. In accord with
this. in the economic preparations for a war, along with increasing the military
economic potential, the required attention was given to creating sufficiently large
military production, to carrying out preparatory measures for the wartime reorgan-
ization of the national economy and for increasing its stability.

Socialist industrialization made it possible to create a modern defense industry
which was capable of rearming the Red Army and Navy, to meet their current needs

and make the necessary supplies of military—end articles. During the Second Five-
Year Plan, the defense industry products increased by 2.8-fold, including by 5.5—
fold for aviation.67 However. in considering the approach of the war, the party
critically viewed the achieved results in terms of the volume of military produc-
tion, the quality of the produced weapons and the location of the military industry.
The 18th Party Congress and the 18th All-Union Party Conference devoted great at-
tention to the questions of strengthening the nation‘s defense capability. The
party adopted the required measures to further develop the military economy. Allo-
cations for the development of the defense industry increased from 57 billion rubles
in the Second Five-Year Plan to 118.2 billion rubles during the 3 years of the Third
Five-Year Plan. In 1940. military outlays were 56.9 billion rubles.68 The leader-
ship of the defense industry was strengthened and differentiated and more attention
began to be paid to developing and putting into production new types of weapons and
military equipment.

Due to the adopted measures, by the end of 1960, the number of aviation industry
enterprises had increased by three-quarters by comparison with 1937 and its produc-
tion capacity surpassed the capacity of the German Air Plants by almost 1.5-fold.
The aviation industry was preparing to put new combat aircraft into series produc-
tion. Production capacity for tank building by the summer of 1951 exceeded the
capacity of the German tank industry by 1.5-fold. The artillery industry and the
production of firearms and ammunition had undergone significant development. Naval
shipbuilding was developing rapidly. Prior to 22 June 1961, 533 fighting ships
were laid down of which 312 had been commissioned. As a whole the growth of de-
fense industry products had significantly outstripped the growth of all industry.
In 1938, the increase in industrial product as a whole was 11.8 percent, including
36.b percent for defense; in 1939. the figures, respectively, were 16 and 66.5 per—
cent while in 1960, the volume of defense industry product had risen by more than
one-third.69

For the purposes of increasing the invulnerability of the military economy, work
was started up to rapidly create a second military-industrial base which would be
beyond the reach of air strikes by aggressors both from the west and from the east;
this was to be in the regions of the Volga, Urals and Siberia. Moreover, a military
industrial base was developed in the Far East. In 19b0, the eastern regions pro-
duced 35.9 percent of the coal, 28.3 percent of the iron ore, it cast 31.6 percent
of the steel and produced 27.1 percent of the tractors and 7.1 percent of the metal-
cutting machines. By the summer of 1941, one-fifth of all the nation's military
plants was located in the eastern regions.7°

The necessary measures were also carried out for the mobilization preparations of

the national economy. In building new plants provision was made for the opportun-
ity to convert them to producing military products. a number of civilian enterprises

had military product shops and large enterprises had military mobilisation plans.

27

FOR OFFHJAI.IEIE(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The state reserves and mobilization supplies were increased for meeting the needs
of industry and the Armed Forces for the period of the wartime conversion of the
economy. By the time Germany attacked, the value of these reserves and stocks
reached 7.6 billion rubles.7 In terms of the actual annual average consumption
during the war, the created stockpiles were: from 36 to 294 percent for ammuni-
tion, 280 percent for rifle cartridges, around one-half for gasoline and diesel
fuel, and from 90 to 150 percent for clothing and uniforms.7 of important sig-
nificance in preparing the economy to convert to a wartime footing were the mess-

ures to convert to an 8-hour workday and a 7-day work week and to strengthen labor
discipline and organization.

0n the basis of the technical reconstruction of the Red Army, the scale of military
consumption increased, its structure became more complex and the intensity rose.
Soviet military theory correctly foresaw that combat operations in a future war
Hauld be carried out simultaneously by all branches of troops in close cooperation
and that their spatial scope and pace would rise sharply. All of this necessitated
a further improvement in the rear services of the Armed Forces, their motorizazion,
a rise in technical equipping, a wider basing system and the training of skilled
administrative military personnel. The appropriate measures were carried out as
the nation's military economic capabilities were increased. By the start of the
war the Army and Navy had significant supplies of weapons and other military-end
articles and the rear services of the Armed Forces possessed the necessary number
of depots, dumps, transport, repair, medical and other units and facilities. how-
ever, the central rear services and a significant portion of the operational rear
were still stationary while the troop rear services were cmbersome. Some 62 per-

cent of the troop trains required for the transporting of a rifle division were
occupied by the rear units and subunits.73

Thus, in the interwar period, on the basis of the advances in building socialism
and the growth in the nation's economic might, the tasks were actively carried out
of raising military economic potential, creating and developing military production,
preparing the economy to convert to a wartime footing as well as for developing the
rear of the Armed Forces. In seeing the approaching danger of war, the Communist
Party and the Soviet government undertook the necessary measures to strengthen the
nation's defense capability. '

Measures were started in the area of the mobilization deployment of the Army and
Navy. From 1 September 1939 through 21 June 1941, the size of the Armed Forces
grew by more than 2.8-fold. The technical reequipping of the troops was continued
at an accelerated pace. The plans for protecting the state frontier were adjusted.
Fortified areas were built and the theaters of the forthcoming military operations
were prepared. 0n the basis of the considerations of the General Staff which were
examined by the VKP(b) [All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik)] Central Committee and
the Soviet government, a Mobilization Plan (organizational and material questions)
or HP-él was worked out and approved in February 1961. In accord with this the mil-
itary districts incorporated the necessary additions and clarifications in their
plans. Colossal work was to he done in the area of reorganizing the Soviet Armed
Forces. strengthening the frontiers and raising the nation's defense potential by
the summer of 1942. However events were to change this time table.7“

28

FIHRCNWHCJAI.USE(NVLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Great Patriotic Her was a thorough testing of the Soviet military economy.

with its outbreak the party reorganized its own ranks and the work of the state
bodies and public organizations to a nilitary footing. All state power was concen-
trated in the hands of the State Defense Co-ittee [are]. the rights of the »
people's canissars were significantly broadened and a nuiaer of laws were promul-
gated for the purposes of mobilizing the labor resources, for increasing the work-
ing time budget, raising discipline, organisation and a min- effort by all the
people. In order to restrict and strictly regulate personal const-ption. a ration-
ing card system was introduced. In converting social relations to a wartime foot-
ing and i-obilising all society's resources, the party and government on a planned
basis directed then to satisfying the war's requirements.

0n the very second day of the war, a mobilisation plan was put into effect to pro-
duce a-aunition and a week later (30 June) a general mobilisation national economic
plan was approved for the third quarter of 194).. The Soviet military economy began
to rapidly increase in strength. However, the course of events on the front forced
an emergency curtailment of the basic military industrial basis which was located
in the western regions of the country in order to evacuate it to the east and there
reorganize military production capable of meeting the needs of the front. 0n

«‘0 July 1951, the 0K0 instructed a co-ission headed by the chairman of the USSR
Gosplan, N. A. Voznesenskiy, "to elaborate a military economic plan for the support
of nationaldefenae bearing in mind the utilization of resources and enterprises
existing on the Volga, in Western Siberia and the Urals as well as the resources
and enterprises which have been evacuated to the designated .areas."75

The military economic plan approved on 16 August by the USSR 8N! [Council of Peo-
ple's Commissars] and the VI(P(b) Central Co-ittee on 16 August provided for the
evacuation of enterprises belonging to the military and other people's co-issari-
ats to the eastern regions, and envisaged an extensive progran for the production
of weapons, ammunition. aircraft, tanks and fighting ships. the development of heavy
industry, rail transport and other economic sectors and the concentration of re-
sources7|63n the shock construction sites and on reestablishing the evacuated enter-
prises.

The program for establishing a well-coordinated nilitary economy which surpassed
the enemy's military economy required a certain anomt of time. Hhile a signifi-
cant portion of industry was in the stage of disassembly. trans-shipment to the
east and reconstruction, the total production volt-e dropped. Gross industrial
product declined by 2.1-fold from June through November. including by 3.1-fcld for
ferrous metals in December in comparison with June, by 00-fold for rolled ferrous
metals and by 21-fold for bearings.77 A decline in military production followed.
In November 3.6-fold fewer aircraft were produced than in September. The tank out-
put plan in the second half of the year was fulfilled by Just 61.7 percent.78 The
last months of 1941 were particularly difficult for our nation. But under the

. leadership of the Comunist Party the Soviet people overcame the difficulties of
this period.

In a short period of time (July-Novmaber 1961), our nation carried out a great move-
sent of the productive forces to the east. Sons 10 million persons and 1.5 million
railroad csrloads of freight were moved and 1,523 industrial enterprises, including
1,360 large military ones, were noved. By the end of 1961, many of them had begun

29

FOROFFIC‘IALUSEONLY
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to produce products. From March 1962, a rise began in the total value of indus-
trial product and this created a dependable basis for the development of military
production. In July 19‘2, the enterprises under the air industry people's commis-
sariats produced 1.3-fold more product than in June 1961, for the tank industry the
figure was 3.85 for armament 1.z-and for ammunition 1.7-fo1d note. The East became

the main foundry of weapons and military equipment. The proportional amount of the
military industry enterprises located here reached 76 percent in June 1942.79

Thus, a year after the start of the war, the reorganization of industry was basic-

ally completed, a large portion of the military enterprises which had been moved to
the east were back in operation and in the second half of 1942 the process of set-

ting up a smoothly functioning nilitary economy was completed (Thble 2).

Table 2

Gross Product of All Industry and
the Product of the Military People's Commissariats in the
war Years (in X of 1940)*

 
  
   

Gross industrial product
Including product of military commissariats

 

* "Istoriya Velikoy 0techestvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 1941-1965" [History
of the Great Patriotic war of the Soviet Union of 1961-1965], Vol 6. Moscow,
1965, p 65.

From the given table it is apparent that while in 1901-1962, the growth of the
military industry occurred with a decline in the total volume of industrial produc-
tion, in 1943, the significant growth of military production (by 20 percent) was
achieved with a simultaneous increase (by 17 percent) in total industrial produc-
tion. An analogous picture can be observed in 1964 while in 1965 there was an ex-
tensive reorganization of the military economy to a peacetime footing. In other
words, from 1963 the growth of the organized military economy occurred not by a
further redistribution of the material and labor resources but basically by the
growth of labor productivity and the efficient use of production capital.

As a total during the war the USSR produced 136,000 airplanes, 103,000 tanks and
SAU (self-propelled artillery mount], and over 825,000 guns and mortars. Here are
the corresponding data for Germany: around 79,000 aircraft, $6,000 tanks and SAD
and 170,000 guns and nortars. The deliveries of weapons and military equip-ant to
the Soviet Union under Lend Lease were: around 13 percent of total production in -
the USSR for aircraft, 7 percent for tanks and 2 percent for antiaircraft guns.‘0
The total amount of Lend Lease deliveries to the Soviet Union was 9.8 billion dol-

lars while the nations of the British Empire (basically Great Britain) received
. 30.269 billion dollars.“

30

FOR OFIICJAI.lﬂﬂB(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, the task of supplying the Armed Forces with weapons and military equipment
was in fact carried out by our nation independently and there are no actual grounds
to extol the role of Allied aid.

The rear services of the Soviet Armed Forces were an important element in realizing
the military economic capabilities of our nation. The war made substantial adjust-
ments in its organizational development. The surprise attack and the deep drives
by the Nazi troops prevented the planned deployment of the rear in the border mili-
tary districts. The mobilization supplies in these districts were partially cap-
tured by the enemy and partially destroyed by our troops in the retreat. Very di-
ficult conditions arise for forming and equipping the new rear units and facilities.
On 28 July 1941, the 0K0 adopted a decision to set up independent control bodies for
the rear of the Red Army. The new organization of control and command made it pos-
sible to more effectively solve all the questions, to improve troop supply and make
more efficient use of the rear's resources. Urgent measures were also carried out
to improve the technical equipping and transport capabilities of the rear forma-
tions. Subsequently, on a basis of a rise in the nation's military economic might,
their technical equipping, the degree of motorization, productivity and maneuver-
ability increased rapidly.

In the course of the war, the tasks of the Armed Forces rear grew and became more
complicated. Thus, the seizing of strategic initiative and the going over to de-
cisive offensive operations, the increased depth and pace of the operations the
longer lines of communications and the greater amount of military consumption de-
mended an increase in the capacity and a greater role for the central rear services
an increase in the number of railroad troops and motor transport units and the cre-
ation of large reserves. The strength of the front rear services also increased
sharply in line with the greater equipping of the troops and the increased scale
and complexity of the tasks carried out by the fronts. As an example, the first
Belorussian Front during the Vistula Oder Operation had 2,500 operating aircraft,
6,000 tanks and SAD, 70,000 motor vehicles and 3,000 tractors. For every linear
meter taken from the enemy, 250 tons of aammnition and 333 tons of fuel were con-
sumed and each day around 5,000 tons of food and fodder were used. The rear serv-
ices of the front included 1,500 units and facilities (not counting the divisional
level) and all its elements down to the company level made up around 20 percent of
the number of troops.82

During the war years the rear of the Soviet Armed Forces developed into a powerful
military economic organism capable of receiving from military production, process-
ing. allocating, promptly deliVering and ensuring the safekeeping of an enormous
amount of all sorts of military-end articles. The scale of its work increased
rapidly. If the average daily consumption of ammunition and fuel in the battle on
the Volga is taken as 100 percent, then in the battle at Kursk this was. respec-
tively, 306 and 475 percent, in the Vistula-Oder Operation 498 and 607 percent, and
in the Berlin Operation 668 and 800 percent.83

There is no single indicator by which it would be possible to express the amount of
work carried out by the Armed Forces rear during the war years and for this reason
this must be judged from numerous particular indicators. Among them particularly
impressive is information on weapons deliveries. During the war the rear of the
Soviet Armed Forces received and allocated 108,000 combat aircraft, 95,000 tanks

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAL.USEIDNLY

and SAU, around 445,700 field guns of 76-mm and larger caliber and mortars, 954,500
machine guns, 12 million rifles and carbines and 6.1 million submachine guns.“
Truly colossal was the amount of ammmnition deliveries: 627 million shells for
field guns and mortars, around 21.0 billion cartridges, more than 168.3 million
grenades, 60,000 mines and torpedoes and 163,100 depth charges. During the war the
Soviet Army and Navy consumed over 16 million tons of fuel. Finally, the army
millions strong had to be clothed, shod and provided with food and other types of
services. The total food and fodder consumption was 40 million tons and the Armed
Forces received more than 38 million overcoats, 73 million field shirts, 70 million
cotton cloth and around 20 million padded trousers and over 11 million pairs of
felt boots.as

The rear bodies of the Armed Forces delivered all this enormous amount of military-
end articles to the troops and issued it to each subunit, crew and soldier, often
operating under difficult conditions and under enemy fire. Just the transporting
of the military-end articles and troops by rail required 19.? million cars, motor
transport carried over 100 million tons of freight and water transport 22 million
tons of various cargo. Here 170,000 km of main, secondary and station track,

14,000 bridges and thousands of other rail installations and about 100,000 km of
motor roads were rebuilt and built and a large amount of military equipment was
repaired.86

Thus, we have sketched in the process of the development of the Soviet military
economy from the moment of its rise up to the victory in the Great Patriotic Her.

It shows that a socialist military economy is a specific part of society's economy
which encompasses the production, distribution, exchange and consumption of military-
end articles, in materially supporting the functioning of the Armed Forces and the

maintaining of the state's defense capability and under wartime conditions the wag-
ing of war. '

The Great Patriotic War required a reorganization of the entire economy to a war-
time footing and to wartime work. In such a war only the nation would win which
possessed not accidental or temporary but rather permanent and essential advantages
internally inherent to the social system as a whole and its component elements. It
has been extremely important to theoretically analyze the acquired experience in the
economic support for the defense of the socialist fatherland and to draw the neces-
sary practical conclusions from this, since the past, as L. I. Brezhnev said, must
be perceived "as material for reflection and for critical analysis of one's own de-

cisionsagnd actions. From the past we draw inspiration for present and future
deeds."

First of all it is important to emphasize the most essential difference of the
Soviet military economy and the capitalist military economy. This is that they de-
velop on fundamentally different socioeconomic bases and have a different class es-
sence and political purpose. Because of this their nature and the functioning and
developmental laws are fundamentally different. This is apparent at every step.

For example, let us take the reorganization of the entire national economy for mil-
itary aims. In the capitalist nations this was carried out by military-state

monopolistic regulation leading to a sharp intensification of worker exploitation
and to the redistribution of profits in favor of the financial oligarchy. Here it

32

FIII(Mﬂﬁ(1Al.USEi0NlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

must be pointed out that for the sake of obtaining maximum wartime profits, a nar-
row group of monopolists and military in every possible way accelerated the peace-
time eilitarisation of the economy and when war broke out, its individual represen-
tatives impeded the carrying out of an economic mobilisation, gaining better condi-
tions for the reorganization of production. For these reasons the large French
Schneider-Creusot Trust refused to participate in the government-organised associa-
tion of the military industry; in England due to resistance by firms to governmental

In contrast to this, the Soviet economy demonstrated a mobility unattainable for the
imperialist nations during the years of the Great Patriotic Her. The socialist
society was turned into a single military camp which was closely united around the
Communist Party. Relying on the public ownership of the means of production and the
monolithic unity of the people, the socialist state on a planned basis redistributed
the available resources and altered the basic proportions in the aim of creating a
well-coordinated military economy.

coordinated development of all its elements based upon the objective economic law
of socialism.-that is, the planned development of socialist production. In con-
trast to this the maintaining of effective ratios between the basic elements of the
capitalist military economy was naturally difficult, since the profit motive was
operating here along with military considerations. This contradiction between the
military purpose and economic incentive motives objectively and inevitably gave

rise to a fatal dualism in the organisation and control of the German military econ-
omy. Regardless of numerous reforms this was not overcome during the entire war.
Researchers of the military economy have noted an analogous situation in the other
capitalist countries.89

basically predetermined by the objective properties of the specific method of pro-
duction. Due to this the socialist military economy possesses permanent advantages
over the capitalist one. One of its most essential features is that it is based on
a national economy which develops without crises, on a planned basis and at a rapid
pace. During the period between the two world wars, the industry of the capitalist
countries experienced a very profound economic crisis in 1929-1933. This put the
economy far back. without yet escaping from this, the economy had begun to slide
into a new crisis the development of which was interrupted by Hbrld Ber II. On the
eve of the war, the volume of industrial production in the main capitalist nations
was only a little more than the 1913 level. As for the Soviet Union. its industrial
production in 1940 surpasses the 1913 level by 7.7-fold. The rapid growth of our
motherland's economic might created a sound material basis for its defense.

Another indisputable advantage of the socialist military economy is that with an
equal economic development level the socialist state possesses relatively more mili-
tary economic potential than the capitalist one. Each component part of national
income, aggregate social product and national wealth in a socialist society can be
most fully subordinated to the interests of achieving victory. Let us take the con-
sumption fund. Having eliminated the parasitic consumption of the bourgeoisie, a

33

FIN!(HﬂWC1AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialist society. in comparison with a capitalist one, can channel more resources
into military needs, at least by the amount of consumption by exploiting classes
and their servants. A unity of fundamental interests among the workers and their
readiness to make sacrifices and endure hardship for the sake of defending social-
ism additionally broadened the military economic potential of the socialist state at
the expense of personal consumption and accumulation. Being the owner of the fixed
capital of society, the socialist state when necessary can channel a significant
portion of its national wealth (including also the replacement fund) to military
ends. The enormous military economic potential of socialism was apparent even dur-
ing the years of the Civil Hat and foreign military intervention. This was one of
the main sources of the victory of the USSR in the Great Patriotic War. Some 57-58

percent of national income and 65-68 percent of industrial product went for the
needs of the front.9°

A most important achievement of the socialist military economy is that it makes it

possible to have significantly more efficient utilization of the military economic

resources than capitalism does. This can be specifically judged from the ratio of

indicators describing the total production volume and the military production vol-

ume. If one compares the corresponding data for the USSR (from 1 July 1961 through
1 July 1965) and Germany together with the nations occupied by it (l9bl-l946). then
we will obtain the following picture (Table 3).

Table 3

Production Ratio of the Most Important Types of Products
in the USSR and Germanyﬁ

‘

USSR in Relation to Germany, I

   

Name of Product

  

    

Iron . . . . . . . .
Steel . . . . . . . .
Coal . . . . . . . .
Electric power . . .
Tanks and SAU . . . .
Combat aircraft . . . . . .
Medium- and large-caliber guns
Mortars . . . . . . . . . . . .

eesee
eeese
ease.
assess
eeseoe
eeeeeese
aoosoese

eoeeemeo

 

* Calculated from data in the book ”50 let Vooruzhennykh Sil SSSR" [Fifty
Years of the USSR Armed Forces]. p 657.

As is seen from the table, the USSR, in having 3-5-fold less iron, coal, steel and
electric power than Germany and the occupied nations, produced 1.6 more aircraft,
1.8 more tanks. SAU and medium- and large-caliber guns and 5-fold more mortars. A
comparison with the other capitalist nations provides an analogous result. The USSR
not only more fully subordinated its economic resources to the interests of military
production than did the capitalist nations but also utilized them more efficiently
for producing weapons and military equipment.

34

FOR‘OFFKJALlEiIONlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efficiency of a military economy is expressed in the optimum ratio of military
and civilian production. in the harmonious development of all elements in the aili-
tary economy and in the high productivity of each individual element. One of the

generalizing indicators for the comparative military economic effectiveness of the

belligerents is the dynamics of the size and equipping of the operational armed
forces (Table 4).

Table 4

Dynamics of Ratio (in Z) of “tuber of Troops and Weapons of USSR and
Germany in 1941-1945 (USSR level taken as 1001)*

   

Ratio of Indicators on Designated Date

Jun
1944

 
 

Indicators of Military Strength

  

Personnel of operational fronts
and fleets

Guns and mortars (without 50m
mortars and rockets)

Tanks and SM] (assault guns)

Combat aircraft

* Calculated from data in the book "Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo
Soyuaa 1941-1945. Kratkaya istoriya" [The Great Patriotic War of the USSR.
1941-1945. A Concise History]. Moscow, 1970, p 579.

On the day of the treacherous attack on the USSR, the enemy had, as is seen from the
given table. a significant superiority in the size of the operational army and in
the number of guns, mortars. tanks. SAU and combat aircraft. By the end of 1942,
the forces were basically equal, and subsequently the Soviet military economy began

to increase its superiority, providing a rapid growth in the technical equipping of
the Soviet Armed Forces and a rise in their combat might.

Many bourgeois authors have been forced to recognize the exceptional efficiency of
the Soviet military econaay. Thus, the American military economist K. Moore, in

cowaring the Soviet military economy with the American. has written: "There is no
doubt that the Soviet Union was able to put a much larger share of its steel (and

in all probability other materials) to serving the military industry in comparison
with the United States." He gave data showing that the USSR in 1942-1944 produced
6-fold more tanks, armored vehicles and SAU per thousand tons of steel than the
United States. 13-fold more artillery pieces and 3.5-fold more aircraft.91

A socialist military economy is characterized by a high level of organization, mo-
' bility and survivability. These properties are inseparably linked to the very

35

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR 0F1ﬂCJAL.USEIMNLY

essence of socialism and to the just nature of the wars in its defense. In analys-
ing the experience of the Civil Hat. V. I. Lenin drew attention to the surprising
fact that in its flames "a strong inner strengthening was created along with the
development of revolutionary enthusiasm," and that the "peasants and workers, re-
gardless of the hunger and cold. were united, they grew stronger and responded to
each heavy blow by a greater unity of forces and economic strength...."92 These
advantages of socialism were manifested with new strength during the years of the
Great Patriotic War. In describing them, L. I. Brezhnev said: "The front and rear
clenched into a single powerful fist. The nation became a single military camp.

It was difficult for everyone. People did not have enough to eat and were tired.
Women worked in the shops along with the men and children grew up in front of
machines in the place of their fathers. The industrial heart of the motherland did
not skip a beat. Our plants provided the Soviet Army with weapons which crushed

the military machine of German fascism which relied on the industrial might of al-
most all Europe."93 ‘

The realization of the advantages of socialism in the area of economic support for
defense does not occur automatically but rather presupposes active, purposeful ac-
tivities by all society in accord with the recognized objective laws. With good
reason V. I. Lenin said that "war is a testing of all the economic and organiza-
tional forces of each nation."9“ During the war years, the directing role of the
Communist Party was strongly evident and victory was prepared for an achieved under
its leadership. In being constantly guided by Harxist-Leniniat teachings, the Com-
munist Party spelled out a scientifically sound military economic policy and con-
sistently and steadily carried it out. The party mobilized all the people's energy
and achieved its most effective use in the interests of achieving victory.

situation. As for the military economic capabilities of a nation these develop
with the development of socialism. With the building of a developed socialist
society in our nation, the advantages inherent to the new social system are fully
apparent. Its strong economic base, the improvement of social organization, the
unprecedented moral and political unity and solidarity with the Communist Party
make it possible to successfully carry out the most difficult tasks of communist
construction and the strengthening of defense.

4. The Scientific-Technical Revolution and Economic Support of a Her

In the postwar period, substantial changes have occurred in the economic support of
war and these have involved all elements of the military economy and its relations
with the national economy. These have occurred both in the capitalist and socialist
countries. These changes have both a common basis, the scientific and technical
revolution. as well as different social causes arising solely out of one.or another

system. Thus, in the capitalist world. under the conditions of the scientific and
technical revolution, there has been a deepening of the general crisis of capital-

ism. In the socialist world there has been a further unfolding of the advantages
of the new system and a rise in its maturity and development. These opposite

social processes have a different impact on the capitalist and socialist military
economy. This is why it is essential to consider the influence of both the
technical-economic and socioeconomic factors.

36

FtﬂltﬂﬂﬂCJAl.US£13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

system as well as military science and art. Fundamentally new weapons. nuclear mis-
siles. have appeared. 0n the basis of modern scientific and technical achievenents,

lion names.95 There has been a particularly rapid increase in the demand for weapon- -
ry, military equipment, fuel, amunition and controls. The proportional amount of
this group of military-end articles continues to grow while the personal consulp-
tion articles of the servicemen are declining (with a simultaneous absolute growth
in the scale and broader assortment of personal consumption articles). The share

of the former group on the eve of World war II was 40-45 percent of the total volme
of military constnption while at present it is almost two-thirds. This structural
shift has been related to qualitative changes in the weaponry which is becoling
evermore complex. The design complexity of a modern gun can be judged from the

fact that the nulber of parts in individual types reaches hundreds of. thousands of

tures on ailitary scientific research and experimental designing. In 1960, all
American expenditures on military-scientific research comprised 26 million dollars,
during world War II this rose to 513 million dollars a year96 (not counting the
atomic program). that is, it increased by almost 20-fold. In the 1970's, this
reached 8-12 billion dollars a year, that is, exceeded the expenditure level .1 the
world War II years by 20-fold.9 The share of expenditures on scientific research

matically rearming the troops. Uhile it took note than a century to save to fire-
arms, and one or two decades for the establishing of tanks and aircraft, it has
been even shorter for the introduction of atomic and nuclear weapons. While at the
beginning of the present century it took 20-30 years to develop a note advanced

weapon and supply it to the armies, at present this process has been accelerated
by 2-3-fold in the armies of the najor states.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Production expenditures grow with the improving of weapons and with an increase in
their power and diversity. Military production requires special equipment, scarce
strategic materials and highly-skilled manpower. According to official American
estimates, the development and deployment of a complex of 3-36 strategic bombers
cost the United States 2 billion dollars while the next generation, the 3-52, cost
almost 9 billion dollars and it is to be replaced by the even more expensive sys-
tem of the 8-1.99 A submarine from world war days cost 4.7 million dollars, a 1968
model cost 200 million dollars while the newest American submarine of the "Trident"
class costs over a billion dollars.100 The increased cost of the weapons and mili-
tary equipment has been one of the reasons that expenditures on their acquisition
are steadily and rapidly rising.

Also very costly are the storage. maintenance and operation of modern weapons as
these require a large amount of electric power, fuel and other materiel as well as
the live labor of highly-skilled specialists. In one combat sortie a P-4 aircraft
consumes 7,900 liters of fuel. For the support of 1 flying hour by an P-lll air-
craft, 30—35 man-hours of maintenance are required.101 As an average in the 1960's.
the initial equipping of a 0.8. infantry division cost 111 million dollars and its

support for 5 years ran to 582 million dollars, that is, much more than the initial
equipping.1°2

Along with the increased cost of weapons and expenditure on their operation, expend-
itures on personnel have also increased. With the greater complexity of weapons and
military equipment, the share of skilled specialists in the troops has increased and
the training of each specialist costs constantly more. Thus, 372,000 dollars were
spent on training the captain of a KC-l35 aircraft, 689,000 on a 3-67 and 1.19 mil-
lion for a 3-52. 03 The proportional amount of officer personnel has increased in
the troops. A number of nations are converting to the manning of armed forces on
the basis of volunteering. As a result expenditures on personnel have increased and
at times this retards the tendency toward a decline in the share of these expendi-
tures in_the total volume of military consumption and sometimes even leads to a rise
in this share.

The changes which have occurred in the means of armed combat and in the structure of
military needs are directly related to a further increase in the intensity of mili-
tary economic processes. Very indicative in this regard are the data on the direct
average annual military outlays per servicemau. In the United States, by the end of
World Her I these were something more than 3,000 dollars. By the end of World war
II they had doubled. and by the end of the 1960's, they had risen almost to 12,000
dollars. that is, again doubled (data in comparable 1926 prices).1°“ The cost of
the October war in 1973 for Israel was the equivalent of this nation's annual aggre-
gate product.”s Hence the intensity of military economic processes at present is
significantly higher than it was during the years of the past world wars. This is
one of the most dependable growth factors for military expenditures as well as in
complicating the economic support of the armed forces.

On a basis of all these changes in structure, the intensity and scale of military

production and consumption, the relationships of the civilian and military economy
have become more complex while the conditions for realizing military economic capa-

bilities and carrying out economic mobilization have altered. These changes are
now felt in the scale and internal structure of the military economy itself and in
the ratio and interaction of its component elements.

IWJR 0F11(1Al.USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If one examines military economic theories and practical activities in the imperial-
ist countries, one is struck by their contradictoriness. Obviously this cannot be
explained solely by subjective aspects although they play an important role. The
main thing is in the rapid development of the methods of economic support for were
and in the contradictory nature of this development and the objective contradictori-
ness of modern reality.

In actuality. although there is no fatal inevitability at the present stage that a
new world war will break out, the factors giving rise to it do exist. As for local
wars and military conflicts, during the postwar years these have broken out in Korea
and Vietnam, in the Near East and the Indian Subcontinent, in Latin America and
even in Europe. Due to high vigilance, the strong defense capability and to the in-
f luence of the peace-loving foreign policy of the USSR and the other socialist na-
tions it has been possible so far to localize the military conflicts and divert them
to the path of a political settlement. But the possibility cannot be excluded of
the widening and even the development of similar conflicts into a world war. This
very necessity of being ready for any type of war gives rise to a whole series of
contradictions, for a world nuclear missile war and local were using just conven-
tional weapons differ both in their nature, in the scale of material needs and the
content of preparatory measures.

A number of contradictions in theory and practice have been caused by the military-
technical revolution itself. Bearing in mind the inconsistency in the policy of
the heads of certain bourgeois states, 1.. I. Brezhnev has consented that each new
type of weapon is "an equation with several unknowns, and not only on the level of
military-technical or strategic consequences, but also political ones. The casting
from one type of weapon to another based, evidently, on a naive hope to maintain a
monopoly of them, merely intensifies the arms race, deepens mutual mistrust and im-
pedes the implementing of disarmament Iaeasures."l°6

The contradictory nature of the impact of the scientific and technical revolution on
the economic support of a war has also been reflected in the evolution of the mili-
tary economic concepts of states by which one understands a system of more or less
established views underlying practical activities in the economic preparations for
a war. The military economic concepts of a state are determined primarily by the
nation's economic capabilities and by the demands of the assmed (or prepared for)
war on the economy. They reflect the nature of the given state, the political line
and military doctrine. The historical experience of the given country also influ-
ences the shaping of the military economic concepts. Under the impact of all these
factors, the impulses arising out of the scientific and technical revolution are re-
fracted differently in the military economic concepts and in the practice of the
capitalist and socialist countries.

The military doctrines of the imperialist states are elaborated within the aggres-
sive military blocs in terms of the overall class aims of the struggle against
socialisn and national liberation revolutions and for saving the capitalist system.
But since interimperialist contradictions survive and are growing more acute, each
nation which is a member of a military alliance endeavors to impose its an inter-
ests on the others as the cannon interests. For this reason the bloc's military
doctrine reflects, on the one hand, the anticomunist intent of its participants and,
on the other. their contradictions and the existing balance of forces. The stronger

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the given national group of imperialists the more its influence. NATO military doc-
trine at the moment this aggressive bloc was created was dictated by American imper-
ialism. The presently-occurring shifts in the balance of forces and the forming of
new centers of interimperialist rivalry have brought about an altering of various
aspects in this doctrine, but as before the United States controls policy in NATOg

tionally distort them for class apologetic purposes, to seek cut the most effective
ways of military economic preparation and at the same time the most profitable paths
of "legitimized embezzlement of state property," and to ensure the over-all class
interest of the imperialists and above all the selfish interests of the various spe-
cific groups of monopolies. In comparing these statements with the entire aggregate
of measures carried out to prepare for a war, it is possible to discover contradic-
tions not only in the concepts but also between them and practice and in practice
itself. These contradictions reflect in one way or another. in the first place, the
real processes involved in the development of science, technology, the economy,
politics and military affairs, and, secondly, the influence of sociopolitical fac-
tors which determine the direction of military economic preparations and their in-

terpretation in military economic concepts. The course of the duel between the two
systems is one of the important factors.

During the period of the predominance of the doctrine of “massive nuclear retalia-
tion," the center of gravity in the economic preparations for war resided in ensur-
ing a devastating nuclear strike which would destroy the enemy's economy before it
could carry out mobilization measures. But when the advances of the USSR in streng
strengthening defense capability buried this doctrine, in the 1960's, the doctrine
of a "flexible response" was proclaimed. This required simultaneous preparations
for an all-out nuclear war and the conducting of "two and a half wars" by non-
nuclear forces. The scale and complexity of measures relating to the economic prep-
arations for war grew sharply. But, as is known, the plans to achieve superiority
over the USSR in strategic nuclear forces did not come about. The concept of "two
and a half wars" also failed for the war in Vietnam which was viewed by this strate-

gy as just a half war was exceptionally extended, severe and was lost by American
imperialism.

The then-proclaimed doctrine of a "realistic deterrent" as before was oriented at
the preparations for both a universal nuclear war and conventional wars in envisag-
ing a greater contribution by allies to carrying out the aggressive imperialist
policy aimed primarily against the nations of the socialist commonwealth. New bil-
lions of dollars both in the United States and in the other imperialist nations were
thrown into the mew of militarism. new hardships were put on the peoples and new
contradictions irritated imperialism. But a new presidential directive D-59 ap-
peared and this "legitimized" the possibility of a nuclear war and the pace of the
arms race again increased. Naturally, the conclusion emerges that with the exist-
ing balance of forces the reactionary and aggressive aims of imperialism are unat-
tainable and for this reason it is unable to find a "true" military economic con-
cept. Any of them is merely a criminal adventure capable of causing only inconceiv-
able hardships for mankind and an inevitable death for imperialism. Nevertheless

#0

FOR¢0FFKJAL.USE(NVLY
INJR OFIWCJAL USEZCNVLY

preparations for war are underway and the aggressive forces of imperialism are en-
deavoring to intensify the arms race. This is the essence of the influence of
sociopolitical factors in imperialism on the military-economic concepts of the
bourgeois states.

The sociopolitical relations of socialism give rise to other impulses and militarism
is alien to them. Ever-broader masses of people throughout the world realize that
it is not the scientific and technical revolution by itself but rather capitalism
which gives rise to the colossal military economic needs. It is capitalism which
will bring incalculable calamities to mankind as it subordinates the enormous oppor-
tunities opened up by the scientific and technical revolution to military aims, in
squandering national wealth and creating a threat to the very existence of mankind.
Socialism endeavors to free mankind from this threat and from the excessive burden
of military expenditures. But until this task has been carried out and as long as
there is an objective, externally imposed necessity for economic support of military
strength and for dependable defense capability, the socialist state in its military
economic concepts cannot help but consider, in the first place, the objective de-
mands of the scientific and technical revolution on the economic support of defense
and, secondly, the specific military economic preparations of the probable enemies.

what are the basic directions of economic preparations for war by the aggressive
forces of the modern world? The most important of them is the increased military
economic potential. This is characteristic both for individual imperialist nations
as well as for their reactionary aggressive alliances. The socialist countries can-
not help but consider this in their economic policy. They are carefully studying
the objective conditions for strengthening military economic potential at the pres-
ent stage and are taking the necessary measures.

In order that economic development conform most to the growth of military economic
potential, under present-day conditions it is essential first of all to widely intro-
duce the achievements of the scientific and technical revolution into production and
to improve the sectorial economic structure on a basis of the predominant develop-
ment of the progressive sectors which at the same time are of crucial significance
for the production of modern weapons and military equipment. Also of exceptionally
important significance is a better placement of the productive forces which combines
greater economic effectiveness and the interests of increasing its survival under
wartime conditions. There are also other ways to strengthen military economic poten-
tial and these will be taken up in the following chapters.

For creating and maintaining military might it is important not only to have the re-
quired military economic potential but also to realise this. The importance of this
problem has also been recognised in previous wars. It has assumed even-greater im-
portance at the present stage, as the contradictoriness of the demands of modern war-
fare on the economy complicates the conditions for realizing military economic poten-
tial.

Two methods are known for satisfying military needs: from previously acquired sup-
plies and from current military production with the subordination of the entire
economy to the interests of the var. At the present stage it is possible to observe
the elements of either method as well as a completely new element, namely the ”enor-
mous constantly-operating armament industry"1° which exists permanently in peace-
time. This has actually been achieved by all major imperialist states and cannot

bl

IND! 051W€1Al.!ﬂil(ﬂil¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At present, in order to ensure dependable defense capability, we must not limit our-
selves :0 just strengthening military economic potential. It is essential to con-
stantly naintain the necessary military economic might, that is, to have a military

economy corresponding to the international situation and to the nation's capabili-
ties.

A peacetime military economy should supply the armed forces with everything neces-
sary, and particularly modern weapons. It must constantly improve and replace the
means of armed combat, preventing military and technical superiority by the enemy.
Finally, it should maintain sufficient reserves and supplies of military equipment,
special equipment, strategic materials and food and be capable of an immediate and
significant increase in its scale within the required amounts. Here lies the second

area of activities for the economic support of defense for the socialist fatherland
under present-day conditions. .

In the military economic preparations of the various imperialist states. along with
maintaining a permanent military industry, important significance is given to a
third area, that is, to early preparations for a military changeover of the entire
economy. It is considered that mobilization preparations in the economy under
present-day conditions are significantly more complicated both because the scale
has increased many times and the relationships of the national economy and military
economy have become more complex as well as because the increased role of the time
factor places more rigid demands on it. of course, a socialist stats, in being
concerned with a strengthening of defense capability, considers these aspects as
well as the fact that a question is far from exhausted by preparations for the
military conversion of the national economy. The greater possibilities for a wasp-
onry impact on the economy by the enemy has moved to the forefront the task of in-
creasing the economy's (military and civilian) stability and the capacity to quickly
restore or compensate for destroyed elements. This requires the carrying out of
measures to rationally locate the economy as well as to create civil defense.

In the economic preparations by the imperialist countries for war, great attention
is given to developing those elements of the military econoly which ensure the de-
livery, distribution and consumption of military-end products. These are: mili-
tary economic preparations of possible theaters of war, the creation of an exten-
sive network of bases, storage facilities and lines of communications and the
strengthening of the armed forces rear.

The improving of the rear services is an important area in military economic prep-
arations and it largely determines the converting of economic strength into military
strength. As a result of the changes which have occurred in the economy and mili-
tary affairs, the amount of work carried out by the armed forces rear as well as the
importance and complexity of the tasks carried out by it have significantly in-
creased. This has necessitated qualitative changes in its technical equipping,
organizational forms and methods of activities. The rear units, facilities and sub-
units are equipped with highly-productive technology, automated systems have been
introduced and continue to be introduced in many elements of rear control and the
rear is fully motorized. Technical, engineer and special formations comprise an
important place in its fighting strength. The naval fleets have received effective

62

FOR<OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
systems of mobile basing. Thus, there have been the further development and in-
creased role of those elements in the military economy which in organisational
terms are part of the armed forces structure and in the formation of which it is
particularly important to correctly combine the contradictory economic and mili-
tary requirements. Ensuring the coordinated development of all component parts of
the military economy and the opportunities for expanding them under wartime condi-
tions are one of the basic areas in military economic preparations which largely
deternines the effectiveness of the military economy.

Economic preparations for a possible war also bear the imprint of the fact that in
the event international imperialism starts such a war it inevitably will assume a

coalition nature. The bloc strategy of the imperialist states impels the develop—
ment of integration processes in the sphere of the military economy. A clear ex-

ample of this is the economic preparations for war by the aggressive NATO bloc.

Naturally the socialist states are forced to draw the proper conclusions from this.

These are the basic traits which characterize the contents of military economic
preparations under present-day conditions. In the given instance it has been a
question of those which stem directly from the occurring scientific and technical
revolution under the condition of subordinating its achievements to military ends.
These are dictated by the technical and economic features of the relationship be-
tween the war and the economy with the present level of their development and they
manifest the general laws for the economic support of a modern war.

At the same time it is essential to bear in mind constantly that the presence of a
number of similar elements in the econonic preparations for war by the aggressive
imperialist forces and the responses by the socialist states in the area of economic
support for defense does not mean an identicalness of the specific military economic
forms and methods employed by the various nations and coalitions. These forms and
methods are determined by the entire aggregate of socioeconomic conditions and laws
and they, as was already pointed out, differ fundamentally under capitalism and
socialise. Precisely because of this two different types of military economy cor—
respond to the two simultaneously existing but fundamentally opposite world systems,

socialist and capitalist.
POOTNOTBS

1 Quoted from the book by H. Delbruck, "Istoriye voyennogo iskusatva v ramkakh
politichiskoy istorii" [The History of Military Art Hithin Political History],
Vol 4, Moscow, 1938, p 102.

2 Ibid., p 256.

3 K. Marx and F. Engels, “Soch.,“ Vol 21, p 160.

“ Ibid.. Vol 20, p 164.

5 v. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 26, p 353.

‘3

INDR €IﬂﬂK1Al.lﬂ5li€HVlY
10

11

12

13

1k

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

2“

25

FOR 0F1ﬂ¢1Al.lEﬂi(HVLY

See: Ibid., V01 17, p 187.
Ibid., V01 30, p 94.
Ibid., p 35.

Ibid., Vol 27, pp 617-618.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leuinskin kureon" [ﬂy a Leniniat Course], speeches and

articles, V01 6, Moscow, 1978, pp 168-169.
K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," V01 5, p 645.

"Progranna KPSS" [The CPSU Progran], Moscow, 1976, p 58.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin kuraon," Vol 5, Moscow, 1976, p ‘75.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 9, pp 156, 155.

Ibid., Vol 34, p 196.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 20, p 171.
v. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 32, p 80.

Ibid., V01 35, pp 345-346.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 20, p 176.
See: V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 9, p 154.

See: Ibid., V01 31, p 6‘9.

Ibid., Vol 36, p 173.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," V01 20, p 170.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 aa, p 205.

In Athens at the end of the 5th Century B.C., the couch shops employed 20
slaves each, the arms shops had 32 and the shops to manufacture shields had

120 slaves each (see 5. Lilly, "Lyudi, neshiny i istoriya" [Men, Machines and
History], Moscow, 1970, p 66).

See: K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 29, p 156.

Ibid., V01 3, p 23.

"Russkoye 0ruzhiye XI-XIX vv." [Russian Heapona of the 11th-19th Centuries],
Moscow, 1953, p 10.

INDR 0i!ﬂ(1Al.lEli(HVLY
29

30

31

32

33

3h

35

36

37

38

39

'00

'01

'42

103

MO

‘45

#6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See: M. R. ‘l‘ukhachevskiy, "Ishrannyye proisvedeniye" [Selected works], Vol 2,
Moscow, 1964, p 127.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," V01 20, p 171.

Quoted from: F. Mehring, "Ocherki po istorii voyny i voyennogo iskuestva”
[Essays on the History of War and Military Art], Moscow, 1938, p 126.

Clauseqitz, "O voyne" [On Her], Vol 1, Moscow, 1936, p 602.

"Dokmenty Soveshchaniya predstaviteley koI-unisticheskikh i rabochikh partly.
Moakva, noyabr' 1960 gods" [Doomente of a Conference of Representatives tron
Comnist and Worker Parties. Moscow, Nov-her 1960], Moscow, 1960, p 23.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," V01 20, p 177.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 36, p 396.

See: Yu. Ye. Vlas'yevich, "Vo chto obkhodyatsya naroda- inperialiaticheskiye
voyny”, [What the Inperislist Bars Cost the People], Moscow, 1971, pp 61, 64.

See: A. N. Lagovskiy, "Strategiya i ekonoaika" [Strategy and Economics], Moa-
cow, 1961, p 8.

See: M. I. Burlskov, "Voyennoye potrebleniye 1 kapitalisticheskoye vosporisvod-
stvo" [Military Consuaption and Capitalist Reproduction], Moscow, 1969, pp 256,
268. .

Calculated iron the book: "Militarizn. Razoruzheniye" [Militarism Disam-
nent], Moscow, 1963, pp 17, 18.

Calculated fro: the book: M. I. Burlakov, op. cit., pp 253-255, 265-266.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 32, pp 318-319.

Ibid., Vol 23, p 176.

The first attenuate to organize the sass production of. firearms on the basis of
the interchangeability of parts was aade in France in 1717 and 1785. In 1800,
Eli Hhitney (United States) organized the sass production of Iusketa. In
England, in 1853, the British l'irearns C-isaion adopted a decision to intro-
duce this systea. Soon lass factory production was extended to all basic types
of military products and to the civilian sectors (see: 8. Lilly, op. cit.,

p 196).

V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 23, p 176.

Schlieffen, "Kenny" [Cannee], Moscow, 1938, p 356.

See: 3. N. Prokopovich, "Vayna i narodnoye khozyaystvo" [Her and the National
Economy], Moscow, 1918, pp 6, 13, 19.

105

FOR 0W USE ONLY
'07

58

59

50

51

52

.53

5'0

55

56

57

58

S9

60

61

62

63

6h

65

66

FOR¢0FFRJAI.US£<DNLY

See: "Militarizn. Rezoruzheniye," pp 14, l7, 18.
See: V. I. Lenin, 985, Vol 36, p 396.

See: "Miroveya voynn v tsifrskh" [The Horld no: in Figures], Moscow-Leningrad,
1936, p 55.

K. Marx and P. Engels, ”Soch.," Vol 66, Part 1, p 67.
See: V. I. Lenin, 953, Vol 6, p 260.

See: "Promyshlennost' Gerunnii v period voyny 1939-1965 33.“ [German Industry
During the Period of the 1939-1945 Her], Moscow, 1956, p 182.

See: M. I. Burlakov, op. cit., p 204.

V. I. Lenin, P58, V01 36, p 191.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 7, p 509.
V. I. Lenin, PSS, V01 46, p 324.

See: "Istoriya grszhdanskoy voyny v 8383" [History of the Civil War in the
USSR], Vol 3, Moscow, 1957, pp 306, 307.

Quoted from the book: ”lstoriya sotsielisticheskoy ekononiki SSS: v 7 tonekh"

[History of the Socialist Econoly of the USSR in Seven Volunes], Vol 1,
"Sovetsksye ekononikn v 1917-1920 33.” [The Soviet Boone-y in 1917-1920],

Moscow, 1976, p 243.

See: "lstoriya grazhdanskoy voyny...," Vol 3, p 388.

See: D. A. Kovalenko, "Oboronnaya prouyshlennost' Sovetskoy Rossii v 1918-
1920 33." [The Defense Industry of Soviet Russia in 1918-1920], Moscow, 1970,
pp 383, 393.

See: "Istoriyo grszhdsnskoy voyny...," Vol 6, Moscow, 1959, pp 88, 90, 387;
Vol 5, Moscow, 1960, pp 85, 293.

See: V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 38, pp 600-601.

See: M. N. Tukhachevskiy, "lzbrannyye proizvedeniye,“ Vol 2, p 26.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 35, p 395.

"KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yesdov, konferentsiy i plenunov 20K"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Central
Committee Plenuns], Vol 3, Moscow, 1970, p 507.

See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR 1922-1972 33. Yubileynyy statisticheskiy

yezhegodnik" [The USSR National Economy in 1922-1972. Jubilee Statistical
Annual], Moscow, 1972, pp 130, 132, 136-160.

46

FIIIIHHWCIAI.USEGHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

57 See: "Istoriya Velikoy Otecheatvcnnoy voyny Sovetakogo Soyuza ”bl-1965"
[history of the Great Patriotic Her in the Soviet Union of 1941-1965], Vol 1,
Moscow, 1960, p 65.

5° See: 6. s. Kravchenko, "Bkononike sssn v gody Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyny”
[The USSR Economy During the Years of the Greet Patriotic Her], Moecow, 1970,
pp 73, 86.

59 See: "Istoriye xrss" [History of the cvsu], Vol 5, Book 1. Moscow, 1970,
pp 119-120.

7° See: "Nerodnoye khozyeyetvo 8388 1922-1972,” pp 162-165; "Ietoriya KPSS,"
V01 5, Book 1, p 120.

71 See: "Istoriya KPSS," Vol 5, Book 1, p 121.

72 See: "Tyl Sovetekikh Vooruzhennykh Sil v Velikoy Otecheotvennoy voyny 19141-1965
33." [The Rear of the Soviet Armed Porcee During the Great Patriotic Bar of
1961-1965], Moscow, 1977, p 1486.

73 See: Ibid., p 490.

7" See: "Ietoriya vtoroy lirovoy voyny 1939-19145" [History of World Her II of

1939-19145], Vol 3, Moscow, 1971., pp 635, 661, 6102.

75 "Reaheniya partii i previtel'atve po khozyayetvennyl voproeen" [Party and

Govermental Decisions on Economic Queetione], Vol 3. Moscow, 1968, p 142.

75 See: Ibid., pp 44-48.

77 See: N. Vozneeenekiy, "Voyennaye ekonollike SSSR v period Otecheetvennoy voyny"
[The Military Econoey of the USSR During the Period of the Patriotic Her],
Moscow, 1968, pp 62-43.

78 See: "Iatoriya V-alikoy 0techeatvennoy...," Vol 2, Moscow, 1963, p 161.

79 See: Ibid., pp 148, 500.

3° See: ”Partiya 1 arniya" [The Party and Army], edited by A. A. Yepiahev, za
supple-outed edition. Moscow, 1980, pp 213-2144.

81 See: "Bol'ehaya Sovetekaye Bntoiklopediye" [The Great Soviet Encyclopedia],
Vol 16, Moscow, 1973, p 292.

32 See: N. A. Antipenko, "Na glance naprevlenii" [0n the Main Sector], Moscow,
1967, pp 203. 213, 217 and 29s.

33 See: "Tyl Sovetokikh Vooruzhennykh...," pp 510-511.
8" See: "Ve1ikaya Otecheetvennaya voyne Sovetekogo Soyute 1961-19145. lratkeya

Istoriya" [The Great Petriotic Her of the Soviet Union of 1941-1965. A Concise
History], Moscow, 1970, p 571.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
85

86

87

89

90

91

92

93

9‘0

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

See: "Tyl Sovetakikh Vooruzhennykh...," pp 692, 693.

See: "50 let Vooruzhennykh 811 8888," [Fifty Years of the USSR Arnsd Forces],
Moscow, 1968, p 666.

1.. l. Brezhnev, "1.eninskin kurson," Vol 6, p 3105.

See: 1.. Gatovskiy, "Bkononicheakays pobeds Sovetakoso Soyuza v Velikoy
Otechestvennoy voyne" [The Bcononic Victory of the Soviet Union in the Great
Patriotic Her], Moscow, 1949, pp 67, 72-76.

See: "Pronyshlennost' Gemnii v period voyny 1939-1945 33.," Moscow, 1956;

B. Bccles, ”Rol' tyla v voyue" [The Role of the Rear in a Her], Moscow, 1963;
L. Ya. Eventov, 'Woyennays ekononiks Anslii" [The Military Bconony of England],
Moscou, 1946; D. B. Koyen, "Voysnneya ekononika Ysponii" [The Military Boone-y
of Japan], Moscow, 1951.

See: PLANOVOYE mozumswo, No 1, 1971, p 52.

See: K. Knorr, "Voyennyy potentaial sosudarstv" [The Military Potential of
States], Moscow, 1960, p 261.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 39, p 321.
L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninakin kurson," Vol 2, Moscow, 1970, p 90.
v. I. Lenin, Pss, Vol 39, p 321.

See: A. O. Snukul and A. s. Pedurin, ”n1 voyanno-norakikh oil" [The Naval
Rear], Moscow, 1973, p 266.

See: D. Tompkins, "Oruzhiye tret'ey eirovoy voyny" [weapons of World War III],
Moscow, 1969, p 187.

See: R. A. Psrmzyan, "Razoruzheniye i ekononika" [Diana-eat and the Econo-
my], Moscow, 1978, p 89.

See: 6. I. Kuz'nin, "Voyenno—rouyehlennyye kontaerny" [Military Industrial
Concerns], Moscow, 1971., p 87.

See: 1.. M. Gronov and R. A. Paranazyen, "Voyennaya ekononika sovrsnennogo
kapitalim" [The Military Econosy of Modern Capitalism], Moscow, 1976, p 76.

See: PROBLM MIRA l SOTSIALImA, No 5, 1976, p 91.
See: L. M. Grouov and R. A. Paransryen, op. cit., p 81.
"ERR UND HIRTSCHAPT, Mo 2, 1966, p 108.

See: R. A. Paramzyan, "SShA: militarism i ekononika" [The United States:
Militarion and the Economy], p 118.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1°“ See: 11:14.. p 315-316.
105 Sec: rum, 4 March 1975.
10‘ See: 1.. I. Brezhnev, "1.0mm kurnoo,“ Vol 6. p 596.

107 "Soyun mocha 1 dollars" [Alliance of award and Dollar], macaw, 1973, p 48.

b9

MWMONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER II. THE STATE'S BCONO‘IC MIGHT
l. The State's Bcononic Potential and Economic ﬂight

The categories "econonic potential" and "economic night" describe the econony from
different viewpoints and in different aspects. They are interrelated like cats-
gories of possibility and reality. At the same tine, in a nuﬁer of instances
'they are employed as synonyms. This is justifiable only when the given difference
is not of substantial significance in the designated regard. But at present at
almost every step there is a need to drew a clear line between economic potential
and econonic night. This is essential, for exaqzle, in comparing the econony of
socialist and capitalist nations. The given distinction is quite essential in
carrying out current and long-range economic tasks, that is, for satisfying the
nost urgent needs of the day the attained econonic night is important but when it
is a question of the larger and more distant tasks, it is inportant to know eco-
nomic potential and the possibilities of increasing economic night. The differ-
ence between economic night and economic potential is particularly sharp when one
poses the problen of the efficiency of social production. One of its main upsets
is to ascertain the reserves for a growth in production by comparing the existing
production at a given nonent with the existing production possibilities. It is no
surprise that with the moving of the effectiveness problem to the forefront, the
question of the balance of economic potential and economic night has seemed par-
ticular pertinence and has been thoroughly annined in a number of party docuents.
"The USSR presently possesses enormous econonic potential" stated the 26th Party
Congress, "and the effectiveness of our econoq to an ever-greater degree depends
upon how this potential is utilized and above all the operating proddctive capital."l
At the 25th Party Congress and at the plenuns of the 0980 Central Co-ittee of re-
cent years particularly great attention was given to the questions of disclosing
and more fully realizing econonic possibilities. ‘

Economic potential describes an economy from the viewpoint of the existing objective
opportunities for producing material goods. These possibilities ultinately cone
down to the personal and naterial production factors, that is, to the labor force
and means of production which are the initial structural elements in economic
potential. Each of these has a qualitative and quantitative definiteness and can
be calculated and shown over tine, it can be forecast and in a socialist society
undergo planned development. Our motherland is increasing its economic potential
at a rapid pace. To the econonic potential which has been created over alnost a

half century has been added an equal amount created in just 10 years, as was pointed
out at the 25th CPSU Congress. Capital investnants into the national economy are
systematically increasing. During the Tenth Five-Year Plan over'the first 6 years

50

l-‘OROFI’ICIALLSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as much noney was invested into the national economy as over the entire Ninth Five-

Year Plan. This has made it possible to renew and increase the find productive
capital.

Data on the size of the population and its structure, the production capacity,
energy sources, the reserves and output of fuel, raw products and material make it
possible to form a certain understanding of a nation's economic possibilities.
however, neither the size of the population, the existing production capacity or
any other structural elements in an economy can be adopted as the direct criteria_
for economic potential, particularly if the potentials of different nations are
being compared. As an example, take the size of a population. According to this
indicator, Japan is almost twice the size of the no, but in terms of the volume of
industrial production only recently achieved and somewhat surpassed the West German
level. At the sane time in terms of the coal and iron ore reserves, Japan is tens
of times behind the PRC, but has surpassed it by double in terms of iron and steel
casting. Similar discrepancies are encountered at every step. Hence economic po-
tential must not be judged merely from various particular characteristics of indi-

vidual elements. as their role and weight change in various combinations with other
elements of potential.

Economic potential must not be determined either in the form of a list of the most
important properties of its elements as it is not a mechanical total of these ele-
ments but rather an optimum model of social production. Economic potential, in
providing a notion of what social production could be, is determined by the entire
aggregate of conditions which influence the realization of personal and material
production factors, such as: the nature of the social division of labor, the
placement, specialization and cooperation of production, external economic ties and
other aspects determining the involvement of all the existing possibilities in the
real production process and their use.

For describing econosic potential, the scientific development level and the link be-
bween science and production are assuming ever-increasing importance. "If the pro-
duction process is becoming the application of science, then science, on the con-
trary, is becoming a factor. so to speak, a function of the production process,"2
wrote K. Marx. This Marxist thesis is particularly pertinent at present. Under
present-day conditions, when science more and more is being turned into a direct
productive force. it is very important to consider its influence on the economic
possibilities of a state.

The economic system is of particular significance for describing economic poten-
tial. As is known, production is inconceivable without the combining of a labor
force and the means of production, and the method of this combining as determined
by the form of ownership of the means of production lass crucial influence on the
nature of production and on the degree of realizing its personal and material fac-
tors. Historical experience shows that social revolutions, without changing such
indicators of potential as population size, available natural resources and produc-
tive capital, have led to an immediate and substantial increase in a nation's eco-
nomic possibilities precisely as a consequence of the change in the socioeconomic
system.

Under the conditions of the historic conflict between the two opposing social sys-
tems, capitalism and socialism, it is particularly important in determining and de-
fining economic potentials to consider the role of the economic system.

51
FOR omau. [8E ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, economic potential is the available possibilities which a nation (coalition)
possesses to produce material goods. This is determined by the quantity and qual-
ity of personal and material production factors as well as by the method of their
bringing together, that is, by the nature of the economic system. In a most gen-
eral form. economic potential can be imagined as an optimum national economic model
and its quantitative expression as the maximum possible production volume.

While economic potential represents an ideal picture. economic might is actually
existing production. Its amount and dynamics can be judged from the achieved pro-
duction scale and from its absolute and relative increases. Thus, in characteriz-
ing the enormous might created in our nation as a result of building developed
socialism, the General Secretary of the CPS!) Central Conittee, Comrade L. I. Brezh-
nev, at the 26th CPSU Congress. said that the Soviet economy "in 1 day produces al-
most 2 billion rubles of social product, that is 10-fold more than was produced
daily by the end of the 1930's." In the given instance. a nation's economic might
and the dynamics of this might can be expressed in the indicators for the social
production volume per unit of time. In speaking about economic might, one has in
mind not only the volume, weight and value of the numerous types of produced prod-
uct but also those social requirements which this might satisfies as well as the
possible degree of satisfying these requirements.

In bringing out the essence of economic might, it is important to draw attention to
two aspects of this category. In the first place, it describes the efficiency of
social production from the viewpoint of realizing potential opportunities. The
more fully the potential opportunities are realized the higher the economic night.
In turn, the growth of economic might is related to broadening the boundaries of
economic potential and to increasing it.

A comparison of economic potential and economic might makes it possible to estab-
lish the degree to which the present economic possibilities have been realized and
helps to elucidate the unutilized reserves and the ways and methods for increasing
the efficiency of social production. These questions are assuming ever-greater
urgency. They have been systematically discussed at the party congresses, the plen-
ums of the CPSU Central Comittee and the sessions of the USSR Supreme Soviet. the
Union republic supreme soviets and the local soviets. This has ends it possible to
promptly disclose the existing reserves and determine the possibilities and ways
for increasing the efficiency of social production and raising economic might in
the current five-year plan and over the long run. To put it briefly, these paths
come down to the fuller utilization of each of the elements in economic potential
and to raising the efficient use of the labor forces, fixed capital (a rise in the
output-capital ratio) and material resources (a decline in the materials-output
ratio).

In concretizing each of these ways in terms of modern conditions, the party has
moved to the forefront accelerating the pace of scientific and technical progress
and increasing the efficient use of scientific potential. At present the social

aspect of efficiency has assumed particular significance and this is caused by the
need to fully utilize the advantages of developed socialism. These are: a con-
stant improvement in national economic management. planning, management methods and
economic incentives, and the organizational structure of management. Ultimately
this will make it possible to solve the problem of organically combining the
achievements of the scientific and technical revolution with the advantages of

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developed socialism. This is why the carrying out of the measures outlined by the
party to improve the economic mechanism is a major economic and political task.

The relationship with economic potential brings out only one aspect of economic
night. Another aspect is seen through the relation with those aims to which pro-
duction is objectively subordinate and which determine its structure and essence.
The economic strategy of the party starts precisely by determining fundamental
goals and the growth of economic night acts as a means of achieving these goals.
There are a dialectical relationship and a reciprocal causality in quantitative and
qualitative terms between the goal and the scans of attaining it. Surplus value.

as the goal of capitalist production. presupposes the exploitation of labor by
capital and a rise in the rate of surplus value is nothing more than an increased
degree of exploitation. Ensuring the well-being and all-round development of the
workers, in being the objective goal of socialist production, presupposes the elim-
ination of exploitation and universal, jointly planned and organized labor by all
members of society. This labor is based on modern scientific and technical achieve-
ments. Here the growth of economic sight broadens the range of satisfied needs and
increases the degree of their satisfaction. In our nation a qualitatively new
stage of economic night has been achieved with the building of developed socialism.
This now makes it possible to carry out simultaneously such complicated tasks es en-
suring the necessary conditions for the further grwth and improvement of produc-
tion. increasing the prosperity and well-rounded development of the workers and
strengthening national defense.

Since economic night serves certain goals, it can be described not only by the over-
all scale but also by the structure of production and its conformity to those goals
to which production is objectively subordinate.

With the shifting of aphasia to efficiency and quality, the end results of produc-
tion, the volume and composition of products destined for directly satisfying social
and personal needs move ever-ore decisively to the forefront. The efficiency of
socialist production on this level is characterised by the constant growth of worker
prosperity. The ever-fuller satisfying of the material and cultural needs of the
workers and the ensuring of their all-round development are the highest goal in the
party's economic policy. At the same time. this is a most important prerequisite
for a growth in production and for increasing its efficiency for both the deve10p-
nent of the modern recess of production on the basis of scientific and technical
progress as well as an improved quality of production presuppose a further improve-
ment in the main productive force. the workers.

Thus. the economic night of a socialist state is characterised by the scale and
structure of social production and by the ability to create everything necessary to
satisfy the needs of society and for the all-round development of the workers.

Harrist-Leninist political economy has elaborated a series of criteria for economic
night. The most important of the: is aggregate social product, that is, the entire
mass of material goods produced in society over a certain period.

A cost indicator of aggregate social product makes it possible to represent over

time the economic might of a given state as well as to compare different countries
and determine their share in the world total. For example, Soviet gross social

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0310FFKJAL.USE(NVLV

product in 1978 in current prices was 992.1 billion rubles. that is. it surpassed
the 1913 level by 65-fold, the 1940 level by almost 13-fold and the 1970 level by
1.56-fold.“ These data show the high and steady dynamicness of our motherland's

economic night.

Along with aggregate social product, it is possible to employ the indicator of the
volume of industrial production for describing economic might. and for comparisons,
an indicator for the share of different countries in world industrial production.
This makes it possible to express the relationship of their economic night in rela-
tive amounts (Table 5).

Table 5

Share of Individual Countries in Industrial Production of Capitalist Hbrld (Z)*

       

   
 

Total capitalist world 711,887.5 100.0

 
    
 
   
 

United States 269,500.0 37.3
Japan 67,738.7 9.6
PRC 71,871.6 8.9
Great Britain 38,373.1 6.4
France 45,977.7 6.2

  

* "Economic Status of Capitalist and Developing Countries," Appendix to the
Journal MIROVAYA EKONOHIKA I HEZHDUNABDDNYYB OTNOSHENIYA, No 8, 1977, p 13;
No 8, 1979, p 21.

The data given in the table make it possible to judge the ratio of industrial night
in various countries during different stages. The data show that in the postwar
years there has been a process of a relative weakening in the positions of the

United States and Great Britain and a strengthening of the positions of Japan and
the PRC. From them it can be concluded that, regardless of the relative weakening

of 0.5. industrial might. its scale significantly surpasses the aggregate might of
the major capitalist countries.

National income is frequently used as an indicator of economic night. This de-
scribes the objective possibilities which a society possesses for consumption and
accumulation. In 1979. Soviet national income exceeded 438.3 billion rubles.
Around three-quarters of national income was used for consumption.5 The volume of
national income in various nations can be expressed in a single currency and this
is convenient for comparisons (Table 6).

54

INMICHWWCIAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table6

National Income of the USSR and Foreign Countries (eetimateﬁ

    
 

——

Absolute Amount of National Income: ‘
(by methodology adopted in Soviet
statistics, billion dollars)

  
  

Country

 

  

According to official
exchange rate

In terms of price
ratio

   

USSR
United States
FRG

France
Great Brita in

Japan

* “Narodnoye khoayaystvo 3883 v 1978 g." [The Soviet National Economy in 1978],
p 56. '

The indicator of national wealth can also be used to describe economic might. The
wealth acquired by society and its members under certain conditions can become an

important source for covering suddenly end sharply increasing social needs (harvest
failure, war and so forth). USSR national wealth exceeds 2.5 trillion rubles.‘

Along with the synthetic value indicators. an iQortsnt role is played by physical
indicators for the production of the major product types. In a number of instances
these indicators help in more specifically showing the actual possibilities of a
state to satisfy various needs. The following figures describe economic might very
expressively. In 1979, the USSR mined 719 million tons of coal and produced 586
million tons of oil (including gas condensate). it cast 14.9 million tons of steel,
produced 94.5 million tons of mineral fertilisers. 123 million tons of cement, it
manufactured 557,000 tractors and harvested 9.6 million tons of cotton.7 For all

of these and a number of other product types the Soviet Union holds first. place in
the world.

Various sttapts are known to find a universal criterion of economic strength. For
example. Nazi Germany used an indicator for the volume of steel casting. This was
caused by the particular importance of ferrous metals for weapons production. But
it turned out that during the war years 1 .ton of cast steel produced several-fold

more weapons and nilitary equipment of different types than in Germany, England or
the United States. ' -

The West German economist; Herold. has stunted to express economic night by ab-
stract figures.a He has multiplied three indicators together: the sire of the
employed population (in million persons). the proportional amount of industry and

the service sphere in gross domestic product (in percent) and the value of the pro-
duced gross national product per capite (in 1.000 dollars). The product of these
55

MOFHCIALUSEONLY
POI OFFICMI. USE ONLY

three multipliers has been taken as the indicator of economic night. For the United
States it equaled 23,000, for the F36 3.790, for Great Britain 3,720, for France
3,160 and for Japan 2,880. To a certain degree these abstract figures reflect the
ratio of the economic strength of various countries for they are based on the volume
of social production but here also the actual ratio is distorted. As for the absoe
lute amounts they are completely devoid of any definite content.

One cannot help but point out that inherent to bourgeois scientists, particularly

if this is done for propaganda purposes, is a one-sided quantitative approach to the
characteristics of economic might and an intentional ignoring or underestimating of
the qualitative aspect determined by the production method. This is necessitated
by class interest. The problem is that scientific analysis of the qualitative as-
pect of economic night inevitably leads to a disclosure of the organic failings of
the capitalist economic system.

In estimating economic might one must see the limited nature of any quantitative in-
dicator. They must be used with particular care in comparing the economic might of
nations with different socioeconomic systems. The economic system influences not
only the degree of realizing the potentials of current production but also deter-
mines the nature, patterns, the mechanism of economic functioning and the possibil-
ity of mobilizing and effectively utilizing a society's resources for achieving a
certain goal. Economic stability, the economy's ability to endure all sorts of dif-
ficulties and hardships also depend upon a state's economic system. All these
properties cannot be expressed in quantitative indicators. Thus, the nature of the
socioeconomic and political system determines the nature of vars and the attitude
toward them among different social groups. In a nation conducting an unjust, ag-
gressive war, with an increase in military hardships, all class contradictions are
exacerbated, the process of disintegration is intensified and economic might is
weakened. Just, liberation were or vars in defense of revolutionary victories, on
the contrary, strengthen the solidarity of the people and evoke mass heroism. This
increases the sources of strength. If this is not considered and one is guided
solely by the indicators of the prewar production volume, an erroneous notion may
develop on the ratio of economic night in different countries. The same ratio of
production indicators can conceal a different ability to satisfy social needs de-
pending upon a change in the content of these needs and the economic functioning
conditions.

Thus, the quantitative indicators for economic potential and economic night do not
provide a full description of then. Being more or less dependable guides under some
conditions, they become completely insufficient in others. However, it vould be
profoundly wrong to deny the importance of quantitative analysis because of this.
The extensive use of modern computer technology and mathematical economics modeling
has made it possible to obtain evermore dependable quantitative characteristics for
the economic capabilities of nations and coalitions under different situations.

The quantitative and qualitative aspects of economic might must be viewed in their
unity and reciprocal causality. V. I. Lenin, in demanding a serious attitude to-
ward national defense, explained: "To have a serious attitude toward national de-
fense means to prepare thoroughly and to strictly consider the balance of forces."9
In emphasizing that socialism possesses qualitative advantages over capitalism, it
must not be forgotten that the advantages of a social system are not realized auto-
matically but rather through the organisational activities of the party, the state
and the social organizations and by the active participation of all society's mem-
bers in the economic and political life of the nation.

56

FOR OFFICIAL.USE(MVLY
Economic potential and economic might are characteriud not only by the scale but
also by their structure. An improvement in the structure of an ecomy is a most
inortant indicator of its maturity and efficiency.

The isolating of basic structural elements. the analysis of their relationships.
state and dyn-ics and an elucidation of the degree to which the structure of eco-
nomic potential and economic might conforms 'to the structure of social needs-shad
vivid light on many questions of economic strategy. For exaqle, they help to dis-

production. to determine the directions for the development of the international
division of labor and increased efficiency of foreign economic ties and so forth;

An economy is a complex and many-sided phenomenon which can be studied by many
sciences. Political economy pays great attention to studying the organic s ructure
of production. The specific economic sciences investigate sectorial and regional
structures. All aspects of the economic structure are important for understanding
and estimating economic potential and economic might, but it is important to empha-
sise that whatever aspect is used to examine the structure of economic potential or
economic might, it must be presented in the form of a systemstised and strictly
subordinated systee of elements which in their aggregate produce a single whole.

The Ratio of Human and Physical Structural Elements

Structural analysis presupposes an examination of economic potential and scenic
might primarily as a unity of the human and physical production factors, and if
it is a question of potential, the optimum variation of this unity is elucidated
but if economic night is being studied, than the actually existing production as a
specific embodiment of this unity is analysed. Each of the elements in economic
potential and economic might (the labor force and the means of production) is char-
acteriaed by its own particular properties which do not make it possible to reduce
them to one another. None of them individually provides production. Only as a re-
sult of uniting then do the "molecules" of production arise and the social type or
nature of production depends upon the method of this unification and upon the form
of ownership of the means of production.

If it is a question of an individual enterprise, a production association, an eco-
nomic sector or region, than all of these are economic units which are quantitative-
ly and qualitatively defined, that is, this is. in the first place. production as a

unity of its human and physical factors; secondly. this is socially defined produc-
tion (capitalist or socialist); and thirdly this is one or another part of social
production, its structural element (an enterprise. sector or territorial unit).
Because of this a study of an economy. as a unity of human and physical production
factors and an elucidation of their relationship and dynamics are the starting
point methodologicslly investigating the structure of a state's economic potential
and economic might.

The human factor is the chief element in the productive forces. People create all
goods by their labor. "The first productive force of all mankind.” wrote V. I.
Lenin, "is the worker or toilet.“ People are also the main force in armed combat.

57

FOR Oﬂ'laAl. ISE ONLY
FOIIOFFKJAL.USE(MVLY

The economic and military capabilities of states and coalitions are found primarily
in the human resources.

Human resources are characterized by number, by the age-sex structure, by the state
of health, professional composition and by educational and cultural level. The
political-moral state and labor activeness are of particular importance for describ-
ing them and these are determined by the entire way of life inherent to a given
society.

In terms of population size, the USSR is one of the largest states in the world.

On 9 August 1973, the USSR had reached the 250-mdllion mark in population size.
Socialism has created previously unknown conditions for the most complete and ra-
tional utilization of the labor potential. The elimination of the exploitation of
man by man, parasitism and idleness, the universal right to labor and the universal
obligation to work, equal pay for equal work and the elimination of any discrimina-
tion in pay have caused the high level of labor activsness among the population.

According to UN data, the economically active population in 1970 was 50.8 percent
of the total Soviet population, and the world figure was an average of 61.3 per-
cent.11 On the basis of the constant rise in labor productivity there has been an
increased share in the persons employed in the nonproduction sectors. In contrast
to capitalism, where an analogous process has been forced by the swelling of the
state apparatus, by the growth of parasitism and various forms of irrational con-
sumption, in the socialist countries the increased number of persons employed in
the nonproduction sphere has been related to a broadening of the sectors which pro-
vide a further improvement in health, the development of physical and mental capa-
bilities, improved worker skills and better domestic services for the workers. The
number of persons employed in science has been growing particularly rapidly.

Among our nation's labor resources a significant and rapidly increasing share is
made up of highly skilled specialists. The Soviet state has shown constant concern
for developing the system of higher and specialized secondary education. The aver-
age annual number of persons employed in the Soviet national economy has increased
from 33.9 million persons in 1960 up to 110.6 million persons in 1979. In the total
number of workers there has been a particularly rapid increase in the share of spe-
cialists with a higher and specialized secondary education. 0n 1 January 1961,
there were 2,601,000 of them, and at the beginning of 1979, 26.6 million. At pres-
ent the annual number of specialists graduating with a higher and specialized
secondary education exceeds 2 million persons. Thus, in 1979, 1,253,700 specialists
were graduated with a specialized secondary education and 790,000 with a higher edu-
cation. The number of scientific workers which in 1913 was just 11,600 has in-

creased up to 1,340,300 in 1979. This is one-quarter of all the scientific workers
in the world.12

In characterizing human resources it is particularly important to consider their
sociopolitical and moral qualities and these are determined by the way of life in-
herent to a given state. In this regard the socialist countries possess permanent
advantages over the capitalist ones. Modern capitalist society is a society de-
void of a future and it is living through a general crisis which affects the econo-
my, political life, ideology and morality. Characteristic of it are periodic eco-
nomic crises, chronic mass unemployment, cruel exploitation of the workers and the
absurd squandering of the results of labor. The intensifying ideological and "

58

FOR OFFKJAI.1EHE(HVLY
FINICHWNCIAL USESCHULV

political crisis has affected the institutions of power, it has led to a decline in
spiritual culture. and has shattered the elementary moral standards in fostering
corruption, violence and crime. All of this deprecates and suppresses the human in-
dividual, it gives rise to a feeling of futility and diminishes social activeness.

In contrast to a capitalist society, a socialist one is a society of a crisis-free,
continuously growing economy which develops along the path to the bright future of
all mankind, col-unism. A different way of life is characteristic of it. "An at-
mosphere of true collectivism and comradeship, solidarity, a friendship of all the
nations and peoples in the country, in growing stronger day by day, and a moral
health which makes us strong and steadfast-these are the bright aspects of our way
of life and these are the great victories of socialism embodied in the flesh and
blood of our reality."13 The socialist way of life forms particular qualities in
our people. The Soviet man is not only a highly cultured person, a person of di-
verse knowledge, physically strong and professionally trained. In him these quali-
ties are combined with invincible ideological conviction, high social sctivemess,
an ardent love for the motherland and consistent internationalism. Hence the enor-
mous vital energy, the capacity to endure hardships and deprivation and mass hero-
ism--qualitiea which multiply the strength of a socialist society.

However enormous the role of the human factor, production is impossible without the
means of production. Among them an important role is played by the mechanical
means of labor the aggregate of which was termed by K. Marx the skeletal and muscu-
lar system of production. These characterise the degree to which man is armed in
the struggle against nature and are the measure for the development of the labor
force. "Economic ages differ not in what is produced but rather how this is pro-
duced, with which means of labor."1“

The socioeconomic essence of the means of production, like the labor force, is de-
termined by the ownership of the means of production. Hith private capitalist own-
ership, the means of production are turned into capital and into an implement for

exploiting the workers.

with socialist ownership, the social essence of the means of production changes
fundamentally. They act in the form of productive capital and express the rela-
tionships of exploitation-free workers who, being the joint owners of the means of
production, utilize them in a coordinated and planned manner in the production proc-
ess. Here production is subordinate to satisfying needs and to the all-round de-
velopment of the workers while the means of production serve to facilitate labor it-
self and to increase its efficiency.

Productive capital in the process of its functioning physically wears out and be-
comes obsolete. The worn out capital is replaced by new. But this is not the sim-
ple replacement of one example by another. As a result of scientific and technical
progress there is the continuous reequipping of production with evermore advanced
technology. This process is occurring particularly actively under the conditions
of the present-day scientific and technical revolution which is causing fundamental,
qualitative shifts in the physical elements of the productive forces. The possi-
bilities of introducing its achievements into production and the social consequences
from scientific and technical progress depend upon the method of production.
"...0nly under socialist conditions does the scientific and technical revolution
assume a true direction which conforms to the interests of man and society. In

59

IN]! 051NCIAI.[E§E(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

turn, only on a basis of the accelerated development of science and technology can
the end tasks of a social revolution be carried out. that is, a conmunist society
constructed."ls Public ownership of the means of production turns technical
progress from a means of increasing worker exploitation and of raising the rate of
surplus value into a means of making labor easier. for increasing its productiVity
and for the all-round developeent of production workers. Because of this the atti-
tude of the workers to it is changed. They actively introduce the achievements of
scientific and technical progress into production and develop rationalization and
inventions .

Characteristic of a socialist society are high growth rates and a qualitative im-
provement of the productive capital. The total volume of fixed productive capital
by the end of 1979 reached 1.07 trillion rubles (in 1973 prices) and this was 39-
fold higher than the 1913 level.16 But this has also not been merely quantitative
growth. At the sane time there have been qualitative changes in the capital. For
example, the capacity of the largest steal turbine produced in prewar years was
100,000 kilowatts, in the Seventh Five-Year Plan it was 300,000 and in the Eighth
and Ninth five-year plans, 800,000 kilowatts.17 In 1976-1979. l5,100 new types of
machines, equipment, devices and instruments were developed and of this masher
10,800 types were put into production and series output started. During these years
7,300 types of obsolete machines, equipment, devices. instruments and articles were
taken out of production.la

Since quantitative and qualitative changes in the labor force and the means of pro-
duction are occurring in the process of developing the productive forces. their
ratio does not renain fixed. The ratio between the mass of the means of production
and the mass of the labor force operating them is called the production structure.
If both factors are taken in a physical form, their ratio is termed the technical
structure and is expressed in such indicators as the energy-output ratio, the
available production area, the machine tool-output ratio and the Iaterials-output
ratio. But if both factors are taken in cost terns (the cost of the employed means
of production to the cost of the live means going for the reproduction and develop-
ment of the labor force) then one speaks of a cost structure which can be expressed
in such a form as: 2:1, 3:1 and so forth.

The development of the productive forces and a rise in labor productivity, K. Marx
wrote, ”are manifested in a reduction in the less of labor in relation to the mass
of the means of production operated by this labor or in a reduction in the amount
of the subjective factor in the labor process in conparison with its objective fac-
tors."ls This change in the technical structure of production is also expressed

in the cost structure but less noticeably so. for with an increase in labor produc-
tivity not only is there a greater volume of the means of production consumed by it
but also their cost is reduced. At the same tine with a rise in worker well-being,
the quantity of vital means consumed by each worker is broadened. In order to ex-
press the interdependence of the technical and cost structure. K. Marx introduced
the concept of an organic structure by which he meant a structure in terms of cost,
since the latter "is determined by its technical structure and reflects changes in
the technical structure...."20

The question of the development of the objective and subjective production factors
and of the production structure is most closely linked with the question of increas-
ing the productivity of social labor and econoeic efficiency. A study of the

60

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(H§LY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particular features of these relations at each specific stage in the-developesnt of
the productive forces is of exceptionally inortant significance for the elaboration
of the party's econoeic strategy and, in particular. for elucidating the possibili-
ties of extensive and intensive ways and for choosing the optimn econonic develop-
nent variations.

As a whole, a growth in the anount of technology available to labor increases labor

productivity, but this relationship is not as sinple as night sec at first glance.
For an illustration let us take a specific era-ple of the dynanica of the capital-
output ratio and labor productivity in certain industrial sectors ('Deble 7).

ran}?

Ratio of Growth Rates of Capital-Output Ratio and Labor Productivity
in Soviet Industry in 1978 in Conparison with 1970 (X)*

 
 
 
 

  
   

Growth of
Labor
Productivity

 
     
 

Growth of
Capital-Output
Ratio

Industry and Its Sectors

    

All industry
Ferrous netallurgy
Machine building and netalworking

  
 

138
186

* Compiled from the book: "harodnoye khosyaystvo 8883 v 1978 g." [The 08811
National Beonony in 1978], Hoscow, 1979. pp 127, 131.

Fron the given table it can be seen that over the period fro. 1970 through 1978,

the capital-output ratio in Soviet industry rose by 1.71-fold while labor produc-
tivity increased by 1.69-fold. However. in the various sectors the ratio of the
growth of labor productivity and the growth of the capital-output ratio was far fro-
the ease. Thus, in ferrous eetellurgy, with very significant growth in the capital-
output ratio, labor productivity increased to a lesser degree than for industry as

a whole. In eachine building a sore favorable process was observed. Labor produc-
tivity rose nore rapidly than the capital-output ratio. It is ilportant,to society
at what price a growth of labor productivity is achieved. It is interested in
achieving a nest favorable ratio between the growth of the capital-output ratio and
labor productivity. For this it is inportant to nake full use of the available pro-
duction capabilities.

Under present-day conditions there are great prospects for. increasing econonic
night through the fuller utilization of each of the elements of econoeic potential.
As for the physical elenents, these possibilities are related to a rise in the out-
output-capital ratio and a decline in the eateriala-output ratio. A 1 percent in-
crease in the output-capital ratio for the existing productive capital would pro-
vide additional national incoee over the years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan in a
total sufficient for building housing for 2-2.5 million families. ‘l'here are also
significant reserves in the area of reducing the naterials-output ratio. A rise in
the output-capital ratio and a decline in the eateriale-output ratio are lost

61

FOR omcw. [Bl ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

important tasks in the unified technical policy at the present stage. Characteristic
of it are: in the production of the implements of labor, a rise in unit capacity and
a changeover to the development and introduction of systma of machines which encom-
pass the entire production process; in the area of improving production processes.
the develop-eat of methods involving fev operations end production methods which save
raw products, materials and fuel, and in the production of materials, an increase in
the output of high-quality steels and broadening the assortment of rolled products
and producing synthetics with preset properties.

There are also many opportunities for improving the utilization of labor resources.

These are related primarily to the replacing of manual labor by mechanized and auto-
mated labor and unskilled labor by skilled labor. Of important significance are the
ubiquitous introduction of the scientific organization of labor. the elimination of

working tine losses. the strengthening of labor discipline and the development of e

comunist attitude toward labor.

A socialist society has enormous advantages over a capitalist one both in increasing
the elements of economic potential as well as in utilising potential-opportunities.
But these advantages are not realized automatically or spontaneously. For their
fuller utilization it is essential to constantly inprove econonic management and the
economic mechanism. The party has urged the Soviet workers to precisely calculate
and effectively utilize each ruble, each hour of labor and each ton of product and
to conpletely eliminate mismanagenent and elipshod work. '

National economic planning has been constantly improved on the basis of an ever-
deeper understanding of the system of economic laws in developed socialism. At the
present stage inportant significance has been aseued by the problems of the more
skillful combination of sectorial and territorial. long-range and current planning,
ensuring the balancing of the plans and their focus on achieving the end national
econonic results. Here ever-wider use is being trade of mathematical economics plan-
ning methods and the forecasting of scientific-technical progress and its socioeco-
nomic consequences.

An important role is played by inproving the management and economic incentive
methods. The growing unity of fundamental economic interests anong all members of ‘
a socialist society creates the nest fsvorabla opportunities for reciprocally co-
ordinating the system of economic incentives and levers and for strengthening the
effect of cost accounting, prices. profit. finances and credit on increasing pro-

duction efficiency.
The Sectorial Structure

The sectorial structure of econonic potential and economic might is of very impor-
tant significance for carrying out many econonic, political and military tasks. In
this regard economic potential operates as the aggregate of the industrial. agricul-
tural, transport, power and other particular potentials, each of vhich character-
izes the production capabilities of the corresponding sectorial complex or individu-
al sector. The sectorial structure of economic might makes it possible to judge the
possibilities for satisfying specific needs while its comparison with the structure
of economic potential discloses reserves for economic growth and variations for the
possible directions of national economic development. Under the conditions of the

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OMGAL USE ONLY

scientific and technical revolution, a rise in the efficiency of social production
presupposes a constant improvement also in its sectorial structure on the basis of
the accelerated development of progressive sectors.

In the process of developing the productive forces, the division of labor, special-
ization and production cooperation becone deeper and as a result of this the sector»
ial national econonic structure becoses more complex. The najor sectors of material
production (industry. agriculture and transportation), in turn, are divided into a
number of sect-«rs, subsectors and individual types of production. Certain sectors
develop more rapidly and assume ever-greater importance while the role of others de-

clines. Under the conditi-wns of a planned economy there are an opportunity and nec-
essity of effectively influencing the sectorial structure.

The national economic and nilitary economic importance of each sector is determined,
in the first place, by what product it produces, and secondly, by what is its quan-
titative contribution to the state's econonic might.. A notion of the role of the
various sectors in creating aggregate social product is provided by Table 8.

Table 8

Cross Social Product for the National Economic Sectors
(in current prices. billion rubles/2)it

   

Gross Social Product

 
  
   
    
  

 

  

National Economic Sectors Year

        

  
  
  
   

  
  
      
 

National economy as a whole 303.8/100 663.5/100 992.1/100
Including:
Industry lB9.S/62.b 609.0/63.6 633.1/63.8
Agriculture 49.3/16.2 103.8/16.1 167.0/14.8
Transportation and coununicstions 12.9/6.2 25.7/4.0 63.7/4Jo
Construction 31.9/10.5 67.6/10.5 99.2/10.0
Trade, procuresent, naterial-
technical supply and others 20.2/6.7 37.lo/5.8 69.1/7.0

     

 

* Compiled and calculated from the book: "Narodnoye Ithozyaystvo 8888v 1965 g."
[The Soviet National Economy in 1965], Hoscov. 1966, p 63; "Narodnoye
lthozyaystvo SSSR v 1978 g.," p 41.

Almost two-thirds of the nation's total gross social product is produced by indus-
try. In industry heavy industry holds the sein place and its is responsible for

three-quarters of all industrial product.
Heavy industry is the foundation of the econoey and the development of all other
economic sectors depend on it. For this reason the party has always given enomous

significance to ensuring its predominant growth. As a result, the share of heavy
industry in the total volume of industrial product has risen from 35.1 percent in

63

FOROFI'ICIALLSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1913 up to 74 percent at present.21 The rapid development of heavy industry has
made it possible to ensure the nation's economic independence, to securely defend
the victories of the revolution and to build a developed socialist society which
rests on enormous economic might.

At the present stage the role of heavy industry has not been reduced. It must cre-
ate the most advanced types of products, machines and equipment, supply them to
all economic sectors and to the service sphere, raise economic efficiency and en-
sure the building of the material and technical base of co-unism. Heavy industry
must also carry out important tasks in the interests of economic support for the
nation's dependable defense capability and for constantly maintaining a high scien-
tific and technical level in the defense industry. Because of all of this one of
the key questions in the party's economic strategy is ensuring stable and balanced
growth of heavy industry.

The party's decisions have pointed out that for heavy industry's development of
ever-greater significance are the elaboration of major comprehensive programs de-
signed for two or three 5-year periods and a further improvement in the ratio of
the most important sectorial complexes (fuel-energy, raw material and machine
building) as well as the individual sectors within each complex.

The Fuel-Energy Complex

The fuel energy and power comprise the fuel and energy base of the economy. In the
world of today, there is an accelerating growth of fuel and energy consumption. The
demand for oil and gas has been increasing particularly rapidly and their share in
the world balance of energy resources at the beginning of the 20th century was 3.2
percent. 17.6 percent in 191.0 and 59.7 percent in 1970. According to certain fore-
casts, during the current decade the world will consume 31 billion tons of oil,

that is, as much as over the previous 110 years.’2

The Soviet Union is the world's only major industrial state which bases its economic
development on its own fuel and energy resources. This creates favorable conditions
for independent development and for stable economic growth and is of important
military-economic significance. The products of this complex are essential for pro-
ducing various types of fuel, explosives, synthetic rubber and plastics. Our
nation's rich natural resources are being evermore fully utilized to strengthen its
economic might.

The USSR has a developed fuel and energy complex which encompasses over 20 sectors
and types of production, oil and gas fields, coal mines and all types of power
plants. Its development is characterised by the following data (Table 9).

Among the sectors of this complex, the oil and gas ones are developing most rapidly,
and in power production, the nuclear sector. In 1978, in comparison with 1960, oil
output (including gas condensate) has increased by more than 18-fold, for gas by
loo-fold, and their share in the produced fuel (calculated in terms of conditional
fuel units) has risen from 20.5 percent up to 70.3 percent.”

However great our natural reserves of energy, they are not infinite and their use
must be approached carefully, economically and thriftily. The 25th CPSU Congress

66

FOROFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 9

Growth in Output of Most Important Product Mes of Fuel and Energy Gompler*

     
 

Production Velma

 

 
  

Product Type

   

Electric power, billion kilowatt hours

Oil, including gas condensate, Iillion tons 586
Gas. billion m3 407
Coal, million tons 719

* Compiled from the book: "SSS! v tsifrakh v 1979 godu" [The USSR in Figures in
1979]; p 107.

drew particular attention to this. Its decisions established the bases so that the
further growth of energy potential would be carried out predominantly from hydro-
power, nuclear fuel and cheap coal. The increase in oil and gas output will to an
ever-greater degree be channeled into production needs. In being concerned about
future energy, the party has outlined extensive construction of nuclear power plants
with fast neutron reactors and the developing of work on a controlled theraonuclear
synthesis, the production 0" synthetic liquid fuel and the use of solar and geo-
thermal energy.

The Raw Material Complex

The extracting industry, ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, the chemical industry,
the building materials industry and others are of great national econonic and de-

fense significance. The production of weapons and military equipment requires high
quality ferrous and nonferrous metals and materials vith preset properties includ-
ing extra-strong, super-pure, heat resistant and so forth. Cement, reinforced con-

crete and other building materials are ueded for the construction of military in-
stallations. All of this is produced by the numerous sectors of the raw material
complex. Here are certain data on the development of the most important of them

(Table 10).

At the present stage there is to be the nost rapid growth in the production of eco-
nomic types of metal products and quality steels. The assortment of rolled prod-
ucts is to be broadened, the share of aluminum, titanius and polymers in the total
output of structural saterisls is to be increased, and the production of synthetics
with preset properties is to rise.

Machine Building

Machine buildim is the heart of: heavy industry. It conprises the basis for the
technical reequipping of all the national economic sectors and for improving their
quality indicators, including for the defense industry.

65

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 10

Production Growth of Most Important Product 1ypes of the Raw Material ComplexIt

 
 

Production Volume

 
 
 
 

   

 

Product Type

   

Steel , million tons

Mineral fertilizers, million tons 94.5
Synthetic and plastic resins, thousand tons 3,677
Cement, million tons 123

* Compiled from the book: "8888 v tsifrakh v 1979 godu," pp 107-111.

In all stages machine building in our nation has developed rapidly, in outstripping
the growth of other economic sectors. Pith a 20-fold growth of material production
from 1960 through 1979, the output of machine building and metal-working products
has increased by 68-fold.“ "The linking of science and production and the effect
of progressive ideas on it in practical terms occur through machines and production
methods. Hence the incomparable role of machine building in national economic de-
velopment and in raising labor productivity,“6 col-sated L. I. Brezhnev.

In 1979, our machine building produced 231,000 units of metal-cutting machines,
55,200 forging-stamping machines and an enormous quantity of all sorts of instru-
ments and automation equipment. Over the lo years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, 30

percent of the fined productive capital was renewed in industry and 61 percent in
agriculture.“

Machine building has been confronted with particularly crucial tasks with the shift-
ing of emphasis to efficiency. In practice this notion has meant the need to achieve
profomd qualitative shifts in the structure and technical level of the national
econony and a fundamental change in its very appearance. This has required, in the
first place, increased capacity and a higher total volume of machine building
products and, secondly, an improvement in its structure and the making of this
structure more flexible and accessible to technical innovation. For this reason a
rapid increase in the output of the implements of labor has been planned with a
more rapid pace for the development of nuclear, metallurgical and chemical machine
building, machine tool building, instrmnent building as well as the electrical en-
gineering and radio electronics industry. The output of instruments and automation
as well as computer technology is to increase at particularly rapid rates.

The unified technical policy in the area of the production of the implements of labor
envisages a further increased in the unit capacity of machinery and units, the intro-
duction of machine systems as well as the mechanization and automation of labor in-
tensive production processes. For this purpose, in power machine building series

production is being organised for thermal reactors and turbine units for then with
a unit capacity of at least 1 million kilowatts. Complete equipment is being de-
veloped for nuclear power units with a capacity up to 1.5 million kilowatts while

66

FOROFHCIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the electrical engineering industry is developing the production of turbogenerators
with a capacity of 1-1.2 million kilowatts for nuclear and thernal power plants.

In heavy and transport machine building, there will be the output of large-capacity
excavators and dump cars with a capacity up to 170 tons. The notor vehicle industry
will increase the output of dup trucks and dwing tanden rigs with a capacity of
75, 120 tons and nore. For sectors with large-series and ease production, the na-
chine tool building industry is presently producing conplete automatic lines which

can be quickly adapted to various part sizes and this will significantly increase
the economy's mobility.

The machine building complex is developing significantly more rapidly than the fuel
and energy and raw material ones and this helps to increase economic efficiency.
0n the basis of more advanced equipment and production nethods it is possible to
achieve the nore complete processing of raw materials, to reduce wastes, to lower
the materials-output ratio and improve product quality. This will make it possible
"even with the current production level to much better satisfy the needs of the
nation for metal, fuel, building materials and consumer goods."27

These are the most important complexes ‘f the heavy industry sectors which are the
econony's foundation. Its stable and balanced growth ensures an expansion and
fundamental renewal of productive capital as well as a further rise in the nation's
econoeic night.

Along with heavy industry, the other economic sectors also are of important signifi-
cance. As is known, the need for food, clothing and footwear among other material
needs are the most primary and essential. Food and clothing are also required for
the support of the armed forces. V. I. Lenin pointed out that "for defense we need
a strong and steadfast any, a strong rear and for a strong and steadfast any a
strong organization for the food question is of prise inportance.”8 All of this
shows the great economic and defense significance of the sectors which produce vital
necessities and the initial raw naterials for than.

Light and Food Industry. Agriculture

The food industry holds the basic place in the production structure of constner
goods. This industry produces around 495 percent of the total bulk of consuser goods,
28 percent of the product is produced by light industry and 21 percent is nade up of
heavy industry products used for nonproduction purposes.29 As for agriculture, more
than one-half (52.6 percent) of its products goes for industrial processing, one-
fourth is consumed and approximately one-fifth is used in agricultural production
itself.

With the building of developed socialism in our nation and with the achieving of a
high level of economic might, the necessary conditions have developed for a rapid
rise in agriculture and the industrial sectors producing consular goods. The
nation's general economic potential is now being nore widely used for these pur-
poses. ‘l‘hus. of the total capital investments (320 billion rubles) which agricul-
ture has received during the years of Soviet power (up to 1975). 213 billion mines.
that is, two-thirds, were invested in 1966-1975. These funds have gone for the
mechanization, reclamation and introduction of chunistry into agriculture. Over
the designated 10 years the energy-output ratio in agriculture has doubled and the

67

NR OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of fertilizers has risen by 2.8-fold. Agriculture has taken a major step along
the path of becoming a highly developed economic sector. The average annual volume
of gross agricultural product in 1971-1977 was 116 billion rubles in comparison with
81.4 billion rubles during the years preceding the March (1965) Plenum of the CPS"
Central Committee.

In relying on the achieved successes, the July (1978) Plenum of the CPSU Central
Committee set new goals: to provide an annual gross grain harvest of 238-243 mil-
lion tons in the 11th Five-Year Plan and by 1990 to produce 1 ton of grain per per-
son as a national average. By the end of the 11th Five-Year Plan meat production
should rise to 19.5 million tons.31 In order to create a sound basis to achieve
such results, it is essential to ensure the greatest possible strengthening and
further development of agriculture's material and technical base, bearing in mind
the conversion of this sector to an industrial footing. It is a question of increas-
ing the capital investments into this sector. and of accelerated development for
agricultural machine building, the production of mineral fertilisers and plant pro-
tection agents, the processing industry and other sectors of the agroindustrial com-
plex. For this reason the Central Committee plenum emphasized that "the intensifi-
cation of agricultural production, on the basis of its greatest possible mechaniza-
tion and electrification, the introduction of chemistry and land reclamation, re-
mains the basic direction of the party's agrarian policy at the present stage."32

Along with a rapid rise in agriculture, the party has worked constantly for the ac-
celerated development of the industrial sectors which produce consumer goods as
well as the service sphere. Life shows that agricultural production cannot be
viewed in isolation from the system of procurement, transport, storage, processing
and trade of food products. All of this is a single food complex. As L. I. Brezh-
nev said, it should also be planned as a single whole. "The allocation of capital
investments and other resources must be subordinated to the and goal of improving
the food supply for the population. It must also be managed as a single complex,
ensuring the uninterrupted and rapid movement of the products from production to .
the shelves."33

Construction

One of the most important national economic sectors which largely determines the
development of all other sectors as well as the strengthening of defense is con-
struction. It employs more than 10 percent of the workers and white collar person-
nel and creates over 10 percent of the gross social product.3“ The large scale of
capital construction ensures a constant rise in the production potential. Our na-
tion is a gigantic construction site and this site is growing broader and broader
as we advance toward communism.

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan over 500 billion rubles were channeled into capital
construction and as a result of this around 63 percent of the national economy's
productive capital was replaced and its total volume rose by 1.5-fold. In the
Tenth Five-Year Plan the scale of capital construction will be even more grandiose
with 630 billion rubles invested. In line with this the problem of improving
capital investment effectiveness has assumed even greater significance, and partic-

ularly so for the problem of accelerating construction. concentrating assets on
nearly completed projects and reducing proportional capital investments per increase
in product.

68

F0ﬂ.0FFﬂJAl.llﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICJAI.USIZ(MNLY

For the normal functioning of the material production sectors and for creating gen-
eral conditions for the reproduction of the labor force, it is essential also to
have a so-called infrastructure, both a production one which is formed by all sorts
of transportation, communications and the material supply system, as well as a
social one which includes housing and public buildings, schools, hospitals, trade,
public dining and consuner service enterprises and so forth. The development of

the infrastructure, on the one hand, is the result and, on the other, the condition
for highly efficient social production which is assming evermore important signifi-

Transportation

Of all the infrastructure sectors, the role of transportation is particularly great
and this includes, in the first place, the railroad network with its freight, pas-
senger and marshaling stations, terminals, ports, depots, corresponding equip-ent
and support; secondly, the means of transport including railway cars, vessels, motor
vehicles, locomotives, aircraft and so forth; and thirdly, the repair yards and

sponsible for 13.6 percent of all the fixed capital and more than 10 percent of the
persons employed in the national economy.35 The work of the entire economy depends
largely upon the operation of transport. It links together all the enterprises of
a sector, the regions, all spheres and phases of production, and the production
process is continued and completed in it. "After the transporting of the products
from the production area to a different place there must also be the transporting

the carrying out of nilitary operations but also for supplying the Red Army with
combat equipment, clothing and food.”32 The demands of modern warfare on transpor-
tation have increased sharply in all regards. The increased volume of military
needs has increased the scale of work to transport military-end articles to the
troops. The highly fluid nature of a war, if the imperialist start it, requires
high speed and intensive operations by transportation to concentrate, disperse and

In many nations rail transport is presently the basic type of transport. The high
proportional amount of peacetime shipments, the great transport capacity and speed
determine its great significance under wartime conditions for supplying the civil-
ian and military econoaies and for carrying out large troop move-eats.

In the USSR, rail transport is highly developed. In terms of the value of freight
turnover by all types of transport the USSR surpasses the United States by 1.31-
fold and by 2.65-fold for rail transport. The operational length of the railroads
in the USSR in 1978 was 160,400 km, including 41,100 in that were electrified.38
The further development of rail transport envisages the equipping of it with more
powerful loconotives, an increase in the number and capacity of railroad cars, the
construction of double tracks on the sections with the heaviest traffic and the
laying of new rail lines. The naykal—Amur Mainline [BAH] which is being built at

a rapid pace is the construction project of the century.

69

Fill(lﬂﬂ(1A1.USEIDNlY
I!)R¢0FIW(1A1.I£NE(HVLY

Characteristic of maritime transport, on the one hand, is the great capacity (the
displacement of a modern tanker is several hundred thousand tons) and low cost, and
on the other, comparatively slow speed and high vulnerability (in world War II more
than one-half of the prewar world's tonnage was sunk). In the USSR, maritime
transport is developing rapidly and its share in the cargo turnover of all types of
transport has been increasing. In 1978 it was responsible for 827.7 billion ton-kn
out of the 5,947,900,000,000 ton-km of cargo turnover for all types of transport.39
Because of the aver-greater broadening of USSR foreign economic ties, the role of
the maritime fleet is growing. The port systea is being expanded, the fleet is re-

ceiving large-tonnage and specialized vessels and the ship repair industry is de-
veloping.

River transport holds an important place in carrying out nonurgent supply and
national econonic shipments and makes it possible to relieve certain railroads.
Significant development of river transport is foreseen in Siberia, the Far East and
the Far North. New ports are being built, the capacity of the existing ones is be-

ing increased and the river fleet is receiving large-capacity sectional units and
combined "river--aea" vessels.

Horor transport is marked by high maneuverability. high speed and the possibility
of rapid recovery and the creation of new routes with comparatively small outlays.
In the world there has been a marked rise in the role of motor transport. This is
also characteristic for the USSR. The length of hard-surfaced roads has increased
from 133,600 km in 1940 up to 761,600 km in 1978 and over this time the freight
turnover of motor transport has increased by 46-fold and by 106-fold for passenger
turnover.“° There has been a process of the accelerated introduction of motor ve-
hicles on the basis of a sharp increase in vehicle output.

Air transport possesses high speed and non-stop range but the demand for a large
number of aircraft and high shipping cost limit the possibilities of its use for
the regular transporting of bulk freight. This type of transport is irreplacabls
in carrying out such tasks as delivering cargo and passengers to inaccessible areas.
In the USSR the length of the airlines has increased from 148,000 km in l9h0 up to
908,000 km in 1978. 1 During the Tenth Five-Year Plan, an extensive program is to
be carried out to equip the air routes with the new generation modern aircraft such
as the IL-76 (airbus), the Yak-42 and the 11-76 cargo aircraft. Onboard and ground
systems are to be widely introduced which will automate air traffic control, the
take-off and landing of aircraft. New airports are to be built and there will be
further mechanization of the servicing processes.

Pipeline transport is a specialized type of transport. It is marked by cheapness,
large capacity, continuous operation, reduced vulnerability to enemy attack and the
possibility of rapid rebuilding. Pipeline transport is developing rapidly through-
out the world. The USSR surpasses the developed capitalist nations in terms of the
growth rate of the pipeline network and its product turnover. The length of the
large-diameter pipelines has increased from 6,100 km in 1960 up to 63,700 km in
1978; the figures for gaslines are from 2,300 km in 1950 up to 117,600 km in 1978.

The product turnover of pipeline transport has increased by 276-fold over the period
from 1940 through 1978.“

As is seen from what we have reviewed, in order to most fully and rationally satisfy
national economic and military needs, there must be the planned and coordinated de-
velopment of all types of transport as component parts of a unified system.

70

FIH!(Hﬂﬂ(1Al.USEGDNLY
FINICHHHCJAL.USEIMNLY

In a description of economic potential and economic might, of important signifi-
cance is the nonproduction sphere or social infrastructure. In the total amount of
fixed capital in the USSR which in 1978 was estimated at 1.56 trillion rubles. the
nonproductive capital was 536 billion rubles, or 36.7 percent. In the total number
of persons employed in the national economy, the nonproductive sectors are respons-
ible for 25.6 percent (in 1965, 20.2 percent and in 1960,.ll.7 percent)."3 The non-
productive sphere does not take a directive part in the creation of material goods
but it largely influences the efficiency of social production and the possibilities
of its intensification. This influence is primarily manifested through the main
productive force, the worker. The development level of science, culture, the edu-
cational system, public health and the consumer service system tells directly on
the physical and moral state of people, on their general educatio , cultural and
professional level and creative activeness. Technical progress causes not only the
obsolescence of equipment and its replacement with new but also the necessity of
constant personnel retraining, a rise in their skills and the constant renewal and
adding to of knowledge. For this it is essential to more rationally organize non-
working time. Leisure, the satisfying of physical and spiritual needs and the all-
round development of each man in this light operate not only as a goal which society
directs its economic might to achieve but also as the necessary prerequisites for
the intensification of production, for raising its efficiency and for realizing the
achievements of scientific and technical progress. Also completely apparent is the
enormous military economic significance of the social infrastructure.

The Territorial Structure

For carrying out a whole series of important tasks, of primary significance are a
study of the territorial national economic structure and an examination of economic
potential as an aggregate of the potentials of individual regions and territorial-
production complexes. This aspect of structural analysis is exceptionally inpor-
tant, for example, in solving such problems as improving the placement of the pro-
ductive forces, determining the ways to increase economic potential, raise economic
efficiency, economic mobility and a number of others. For successfully solving such
problems there must be a comprehensive approach and long-term programs. "Such pro-
grams," commented Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "should, naturally, consider on-going
progress in Soviet and world science and technology and the possibility of economic
cooperation with other states. These programs should also provide for a more ef-
fective placement of the productive forces within the nation and consider the needs
for developing new areas, particularly those rich in raw materials and fuel."““

As is known, the Soviet state inherited an extremely irrational placement of the
productive forces. Along with the industrially developed, central regions there
were also the economically backward national borderlands which had a status of colo-
nice and semicolonies. As was pointed out by the Tenth CPSU Congress, the primary
task was the "planned implanting of industry in the borderlands by shifting the
factories closer to the raw material sources....""5 The aid to the national border-
lands assumed the form of a consistent and ell-round course in national economic
policy and as a result of carrying this out by the 50th anniversary of the USSR the
volume of industrial product in Kazakhstan had risen by 600-fold, in Tajikistan by
more than SOD-fold, in Kirghizia by more than boo-fold, in Uzbekistan by almost
Zho-fold and in Turkmenia by more than l30-fold. The gross cotton harvest in-
creased by lZO—fold in "abekistsn and by 90-fold in Turkmenia. Kazakhstan produced
30-fold more grain than in 1922.“6 At a price of intense labor by all the Soviet

71

FOR¢OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY

time there was a process of merging the separate territorial-economic units into a

single whole as a result of which the Soviet economy became a single economic organ-
ism.

With the carrying out of the task of equalizing the economic development levels in
the national republics an opportunity appeared to more fully focus efforts on the
questions of raising national economic effectiveness. This was related to a further
improvement in the territorial placement of the productive forces, the accelerated
tapping of natural resources and increasing the economic potential of the European
North, Siberia, the Far East, Kazakhstan and Central Asia. 0n the basis of major
comprehensive programs designed for two or three decades, ever~new industrial areas
and centers of national significance are being formed here. Among these programs
is the one for the development of the Eastern Siberian Territorial-Industrial Com-
plex. As a result of the Tenth Five-Year Plan, oil output here reached 150 million
tons and for gas 38 billion m’. Over the long run this region can produce around
one-half of the oil and natural gas for the nation's general balance-as well as a
significant portion of the synthetic rubber and plastics. In 1980. 300-310 million
tons of oil will be produced here as well as 125-155 billion m’ of gas.

There is to he a fundamentally new stage in the development of Eastern Siberia.

Here an entire system of Angora-Yenisey complexes is being created. 0n the basis
of the power from the world's largest Sayano-shushenskaya 688, the Seyan Territoruﬂr
Production Complex is being organized and this will include a number of industrial
centers specialized for metallurgy and machine building. In a little time, said

L. I. Brezhnev in speaking to the construction workers of the DAM during his trip
through the regions of Siberia and the Far East, in these areas human labor will
create new industrial complexes. "The BAH will help in more fully utilizing the
very rich mineral wealth of this area and in a new way will solve the question of
developing the productive forces. This is a program of great state significance.“7

The construction of the RAM will provide a powerful impetus to the economic develop-
ment and to the tapping of the natural riches in a vast area from Lake Beykal to the
Pacific Ocean. It will make it possible to put into economic circulation new de-
posits of coal, oil and gas, iron ores, copper, asbestos, nickle, molybdenum,
tungsten, mercury and other minerals. A second rail outlet to the Pacific Ocean
will be opened. Here a number of complexes will be created including the very large
Chul'nan-Aldan with mineral raw material centers for many industrial sectors. As a
whole the eastern regions will be responsible for the entire increase planned for
the Tenth Five-Year Plan for the output of oil and gas and for the production of
aluminum; these areas will be responsible for more than 90 percent of the increase
in coal mining, approximately 80 percent of the increase in copper production, 65
percent of the increase in the output of pulp and around 60 percent of the increase
in cardboard production.

Such major programs as the agricultural development program for the Nonchernozem
Zone of the RSFSR, the industrial-agrarian zone of the Knrsk Magnetic Anomaly, the

Southern Tajik territorial-production and other complexes are of important signifi-
cance for improving the territorial structure of the economy.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The comprehensive programs consider both the necessity of the effective placement
of productive forces within the nation as a whole as well as the particular features
of the corresponding regions. In the areas of Siberia and the Far East there will
be rapid development of the energy-intensive types of production, the fuel industry,
agriculture and the entire social infrastructure complex. As for the European por-
tion of the nation and the Urals, here industrial development will he carried out
basically by the technical reequipping and reconstruction of existing enterprises.
The power base of these regions is to be strengthened by building nuclear and
thermal power plants. In regions with a favorable labor resource balance, labor
intensive types of production are to be developed. There is to be a further re-
stricting of the growth of large cities and the development of economically promis-
ing small- and medium-sized cities with the locating of small enterprises, affili-
ates and specialised shops of existing associations in them.

An improvement in the territorial national economic structure means the greatest
possible development of each territorial-production complex together with the other
complexes viewed as elements of the single economic organism. For this reason this
includes rational economic transport ties. The development of the major transport
arteries plays an important role as was mentioned above. But equally important is
the work of creating a unified power system for the nation by unifying the United
Power System of the European USSR with the power systems of Siberia, Kazakhstan and
Central Asia. For this super-powerful long-distance power transmission lines are
being built. The creation of a unified national oil and gas supply system serves
the same aims. Pipelines are being built for heavy flows of oil and gas from the
northwestern regions of Siberia and Central Asia into the European USSR as well as
oil pipelines from the northwestern regions of Sibcria to the oil refineries in the
eastern regions of the country. All of this is important elements in the all-
round development of the national economy and its territorial structure.

The USSR presently has a mature, technically well-equipped economic system which is
characterized by the presence of a complete and constantly developing sectorial
structure, the solving basically of the task of equalizing the economic development
levels of the national republics and the further improvement of the location of pro-
ductive forces over the nation's territory. The constructing of a developed social-
ist society has created even better conditions for uniting the achievements of the
scientific and technical revolution with the advantages of socialism. for shifting
emphasis onto the intensive economic manage-eat methods and for seriously increas-
ing economic efficiency. All of this has been reflected in the party's economic
strategy.

3. The Constant Growth of Economic Hight-The Backbone of the Party's Economic
Strategy

All states endeavor to increase their economic might although he motivating forces
and the reasons for these desires are extremely diverse. The growth of economic
might presupposes an increase in economic potential but the intensive growth of eco-
nomic potential and economic might can differ substantially in terms of their di-
verse structural elements. For example, the dynamics of the hunsn factor is influ-
enced by the "demographic waves" related to past wars. The strength of their effect
on various nations is far from uniform, for their participation‘dn the wars has
differed. As for the physical elements of economic potential. for example. fuel,

73

Ft”!(lﬂﬁ(1hl.USE(ﬂVLY
FORIOFFKJAI.USE(MVLY

energy and raw materials, their abundance or scarcity depends upon the ratio of such
contradictory processes as, on the one hand, the depletion of the explored natural
reserves and, on the other, the creation of new energy and material sources on the

basis of achieve-eats in scientific and technical progress. Because of this during

different periods various problems of increasing economic possibilities and the
ways of realizing then can move to the forefront.

Characteristic of the USSR and the other socialist countries has been a rapid and
continuous growth of economic night. This has occurred on an exceptionally solid
basis. The USSR possesses colossal human resources, in holding third place in the
world (after China and India) in terms of the size of the population. Soviet terri-
tory is 22,402,000 kmz. Our motherland is rich in mineral reserves. It holds first
place in the world in terms of hydropower resources and forested area with total
lumber reserves of 80 billion m'. Our nation has 176 million hectares of highly
fertile chernozem and meadowbchernosem soil, 60 million hectares of dark chestnut
and chestnut soil and around 60 million hectares of grey forest soil.

But it is not merely a question of rich natural resources. The main engine of eco-

nomic growth resides in the nature of socialist production. The higher the achieved
maturity of socialism the more vividly its advantages over capitalism are manifested
in all regards, including in mastering the achievements of scientific and technical

progress and ensuring on-going growth of economic might.

The high growth rates of Soviet economic might can be seen from the following data
(Table 11).

Table 11

Growth Rates of Basic Indicators for Soviet National Economic
Development in the 1917-1977 Period*

     
 

Gross social product
Produced national income
Total industrial product
Gross agricultural product

Freight turnover of all types of
transport

* Compiled from the books: "Narodnoye khozyayetvo SSSR ca 60 let" [The USSR
National Economy in 60 Years], p 9; "8883 v teifrakh v 1971 g.“ [The USSR in
Figures in 1977]. p 41.

Our national economy which in the prewar years made a gigantic leap from backward-
ness to progress has achieved even more important advances in the postwar period.

Thus, in terms of the volume of industrial production in 1978, the 1940 level was
surpassed by 19.7-fold. Consequently, conpletely new scales are characteristic

for the present development stage of the Soviet economy.

76

FORTOI1HCIAI.UBE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The growth of our nation's economic might is clearly apparent not only from a coi-
parison of the indicators for the various periods of its history but also from a
comparison with the corresponding indicators of the capitalist nations. Such a
comparison clearly demonstrates the basic long-term trend in the change of the bal-
ance of forces on the world scene in favor of the USSR as brought about by the ad-
vantages of the socialist method of production (Table 12).

The Soviet Union, in terns of the production volume of the basic product types,

has long since outstripped the Iain capitalist countries with the exception of the
United States. As for the ratios of indicators for the Soviet and American econo-
mies, as the given data show, for a majority of then the USSR is approaching and
for some has equaled or already surpassed the United States. Here the growth rates
of the Soviet economy have remained stable and higher than in the capitalist na-
tions. In 1551-1979, the average annual increase rates of industrial product in

the USSR were 8.9 percent, and in the developed capitalist nations 4.8 percent, in-
cluding 4.3 percent in the United States."8

The heart of the party's economic strategy which permeates the current plans and
the long run is a further rise in the nation's economic might, an expansion and
fundamental renewal of productive capital and the ensuring of stable, balanced
growth for heavy industry which is the economy's foundation. In 1976-1990, our
nation will possess approximately double the anount of material and financial re-
sources than in the current 15-year period. A clear notion of the on-going growth
and enormous scale of our nation's economic might can be gained by cosparing the
production scale per day during different years (Table 13).

In 1979, our nation in one day produced as much electric power as would have re-
quired 1.5 year to produce in the prerevolutionary period while for oil (including
gas condensate) the figure would be 57 days, 36 days for steel, 3 years for mineral
fertilizers and 60 days for cement.

As is known, there are two methods for increasing economic might: extensive, that
is, by increasing the production scale as a result of introducing additional man-
power and means of production into it, and intensive, that is, by increasing pro-
duction efficiency on the basis of qualitative changes in the productive forces,
their better organization and fuller use. Proceeding from the specific conditions,
the Communist Party in its economic policy will endeavor to harmoniously combine
the possibilities of both ways, achieving an optimum result. At the present stage,
as was esphasized in the party decisions, in order to successfully carry out the
diverse economic and social tasks confronting the nation, there is no other way ex-
cept a rapid growth of labor productivity and a sharp rise in the efficiency of all
social production.

A shifting of emphasis to production efficiency is internally inherent to developed
socialism. The urgency of this party course is intensified by the fact that the
increase in labor resources during the 1980's will decline as well as by the fact
that with a comparative insignificant rise in human resources an ever-larger part
of the labor force must be directed into developing the infrastructure, that is,
transportation, communications, material supply as well as science, public health
and other sectors of the nonproductive sphere. It is quite understandable that a
decline in the increase of the size of the labor force can be compensated for only
by improving its quality and by raising social labor productivity on the basis of
the full mechanization and automation of labor.

75

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USB(NVLY
Economic Indicator

National incone

Industrial product:

011 output (including gas

condensate)

Steel caating

Cement production

Agricultural product

Grain production

Cotton fiber production

Freight turnover of all types
of transport

FOI‘OFFNJA1.USE‘ONLY

1950
1970
1979

1913
1950
1970

1979

1913

1950
1970
1979

1913
1950
1970
1979

1913

1950
1970
1979

1909-1913
(annual average)
1971-1975
(annual average)
1976-1979
(annual average)

1909-1913
(annual average)
1971-1975
(annual average)
1976-1979
(annual average)

1909-1913
(annual average)
1971-1975
(annual average)
1976-1979
(annual average)

1913
1950
1970
1979

[continued on £011

76

FOR<DFFKJAI.USE(HNLY

 

Table 12
Ratio of Basic Economic Development Indicators of the USSR and United Statea*

USSR in Z of USA

31
over 65
67

12.5
under 30
over 75
over 80

27
14
76

139

15
30
95
117

13
26
161
158

65
approx. 85

approx. 85

73
78
77

99.7
99

19
31
102'
130

owing page]
FIN!(NHH(JAI.USE1MVLY

[Table 12 continued]

 

Economic Indicator . Year 0 USSR in 2 of USA

    

Capital investment volume 1950 approx. 30
1970 , approx. 100
1979 approx. 100

* See: ”SSSR v tsifrakh v 1979 godu," pp 66-66.

Table 13

One Day of the Nation*

   
   
 
   

Production of Major Industrial Product Types
(Average) Per Day

Electric power, million kilowatt hours

Oil (including gas condensate), thousand tons 1.604
Natural gas, million .3 1,116
Steel. thousand tons 608
Motor vehicles, units 5,953
Mineral fertilizers (in standard units), thousand tons 259
Cement, thousand tons 337

* "sssn v cum» v 1979 godu," p 45.

As for the physical elements of economic potential, particularly those such as raw
products, materials, fuel and energy, at the present stage there is an objective
need for their more economic and efficient use. The problem is that the scale of
their consumption is increasing rapidly while output and production are becoming
ever-ore expensive. It is economically better to work for the more complete proc-
easing of raw materials and for reducing the materials-output ratio than it is to
increase their output and production. At the same time a whole series of natural
resources must be reproduced. The more intensively they are consumed the more
money which must be spent on their reproduction. The problem of environmental
conservation is growing more acute and the solving of it also requires evermore
significant resources. These can be obtained only on the basis of increasing effi-

ciency in social production.

Thus, economic potential and economic might are dialectically interrelated. A rise
in the use factor of economic potential means a rise in economic might while the
growth of economic might in turn necessitates a rise in economic potential. The
increasing efficiency of social production is the main element in this relationship.

The intensive path of economic development and production efficiency are expressed
in a generalized manner in the growth of social labor productivity and in the '

77

IIHICINNCJAI.IEHI(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONlY

increased role of this factor in bringing about the growth of the nation's economic
night. The following data are indicative in this regard. Labor productivity in
industry during the Seventh Five-Year Plan rose by 29 percent and in the Eighth
Five-Year Plan by 37 percent; due to this, correspondingly, 62 and 73 percent of the
increase in industrial product were obtained. During the Ninth Five-Year Plan the
growth of labor productivity was 36 percent and this provided 84 percent of the in-
crease in industrial product. Over the 0 years of the Tenth Five-Year Plan (1976-
1979), three-quarters of the increase in national income was obtained from greater
social labor productivity. The increase in labor productivity provided a savings
equivalent to the labor of 12.5 million persons. The material intensiveness of
social product was reduced and as a result of this the savings of raw products,
materials, fuel, energy and other subjects of labor were around 10 billion rubles.“9

These are the gigantic steps taken by the economy of a developed socialist society.
They clearly demonstrate the growing possibilities for successfully solving those
difficult problems which our society is encountering in its directed development
along the path toward coaunnism.

FOOTNOTES

I "Materialy XXIV s"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 2bth CPSU Congress], Moscow, 1971,
p 62.

2 K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 47, p 553.
3 L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom," Vol 3, Moscow, 1972, p 235.

“ See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo 5883 v 1978 g." [The Soviet National Economy in
1978], Moscow, 1979, pp 31, 33, 36.

5 See: "SSSR v tsifrakh v 1979 godu" [The USSR in Figures in 1979]. Moscow, 1980,
p 179.

5 See: Ibid., p 69.
7 Ibid., pp 107, 110, 111, 116.

8 D. Herold. "Industrie--Hirtschaits--und Machtpotentiale in Internationalen
Vergleich," HEHRUISSENSCHAPTLICHE aunoscunu, No 5, 1970. pp 251-263.

9 v. I. Lenin, pss, Vol 36, p 292.
Io Ibid., Vol 38, p 359.

11 See: "Narodonaseleniye stran mire" [The Population of-the Uorld's Nations],
Moscow, 1978, p 296.

12 See: "SSSR v tsifrakh v 1979 godu," pp 87, 167, 175, 216, 216.

13 L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kurson," Vol 5, p 548.

78

FOR OFTHC1A1.USEGMNLY
1'0

15

16

17

18

I9

20

21

22

23

2:.

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

3b

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 23, p 191.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninekim kursou," Vol 5, p 501.
See: "SSSR v tsifrekh v 1979 godu," p 1.0.

See: "Nerodnoye khozyaystvo SSSR v 1978 3.," p 99.
See: “SSSR v tsifrakh v 1979 godu," p 88.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Sc-ch.," Vol 23, p 636.
Ibid., p 626.

See: "Narodnoye khozyeystvo 8881?. v 1978 3.," p 117.

See: 5. H. Lisichkin, "Energeticheskiye resursy 1 neftegazovaya proryehlennost'

mire" [world Energy Resources and 011 and Gas Industry], Moscow, 197‘, pp 9,
600.

Calculated from the book: "Nerodnoye khozyeystvo 8883 v 1978 3.," p 146.
See: "SSSR v tsifrakh v 1979 godu," p 101.

1.. I. Brezhnev, "Speech at the October (1980) Plenum of the CPS" Central Con-
mittee," PRAVDA, 22 October 1980.

See: "S.”SR v tsit’rslth v 1979 godu," pp 49, 108, 109.

1.. I. Brezhnev, "Lenlnekim kureou," Vol 7, Moscow, 1979, p 619.
V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 36, p 342.

See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo 8833 v 1978 3.,” pp 118, 119.

See: "Nerodnoye Ithoryaystvo 8833 v 1973 a." [The Soviet National Beonouy in
1973], Moscow, 1974, p 116.

See: PRAVDA, lo July 1978.

PRAVDA, 5 July 1978.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Rech' no plenune tsentrel'nogo Konitets KPSS. .7 noyabrya
1979 gods. Postanovleniye plenuu Is! ”88" [Speech at the Plum of the CPSU
Central Comittee. 27 November 1979. Decree of the Plenun of the 6280 Central
Committee], Moscow, 1979, p 19.

Calculated frnm the book: "Nerodnoye khozyeyetvo SSSR v 1978 3.," pp 61, 366.

See: [bid .

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35 K. Han: and F. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 26, p 170.
37 v. I. Lenin, pss, Vol 38, p 400.

38 See: "Narodnoye khozyaystvo 8888. v 1978 3.." pp 50, 299.
39 See: Ibid., p 297.

“° Ibid., pp 297, 298, 311.

“1 See: Ibid., p 323.
"2 See: Ibid., p 310.
“3 See: Ibid., pp 101, 366.

M‘ L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin Inn-son," V01 5, p 696.

“5 "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh...," Vol 2. p 253.

"6 See: 1.. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskin turnout," Vol ’0, Moscow, 1976, p 53.
“7 1b1d., V01 7, p 256.

“8 See: "sssn v taifrakh v 1979 godu," pp 62, 67.

“9 See: Ibid.. pp 30, 39.

FOR OFFICI' 15! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTHI III. HILITARY-BCOWIC POTENTIAL MID ITS REALIZA‘IION

Economic might is the basis for satisfying all society's needs.. Due to the fact
that economic night has certain limits in each specific stage. there is the problem
of its advisable use. In terms of defense requirements, this operates in two form:
in the first place, as the problem of strengthening a nation's defense capability
and maintaining the necessary level of combat readiness of the armed forces in
peacetime; secondly, as the problem of the maximum possible military-economic effort
in the interests of meeting the vet's requirements. These are the problems of
military-economic might and military-economic potential.

At the present stage the conditions for realizing military-economic potential have
become exceedingly complex and at the same time the time factor has assumed excep-
tionally great significance. As a consequence of this an objective necessity has
arisen of drawing a sharp distinction betveen military-economic potential and
military-economic night. It is also essential to carefully examine the mechanisn
for realizing military-economic potential.

1. Essence of Military-Economic Potential and Rays of Reinforcing It

In order that economic night is turned into military strength, it is essential, as
was explained, to ensure the production of weapons, military equipment and other
military-end articles, to have the correct allocation and prompt delivery of them
to the troops and to create all the conditions for their effective utilisation. A
separate social organise exists to carry out these aims and this is the military
economy. The scale and effectiveness of the military economy characterize a state's
military-economic night, that is, its actual ability to economically supply its
armed forces and to maintain the nation's essential defense capability.

Hilitary-econonic night for a socialist state is not an end in itself , it does not
automatically follow a growth of economic might but rather conforms to society's
actual needs for armed force. The exacerbation of the international situation has
forced the socialist state to increase military production and consuption vhile a
lessening of tension makes it possible to reduce these and to more fully utilize
economic might for increasing worker prosperity and developing the national economy.
Here it is essential not to per-it, on the one hand, a reduction in military eco-
nomic might for in this instance the nation's defense capability would be jeopar-
dized and, on the other, an excessive increase in this as ultimately this could re-
tard the development of the very basis of economic might, the economy, and thereby
cause irreparable harm to defense capability. "If a war is lost because of the

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

overstraining of a nation's economic might," wrote 3. M. Shaposhnikov, "then such
a loss may occur even before the start of a war with a high military budget the
burden of which does not conform to the population's solvent demand and the mili-
tary budget does not keep pace with the state's economic development."1

Under certain conditions a society's interests can require s maximum effort and the
subordinating of all forces to military ends and for this reason it is important to
know the limit up to which a state's military-economic might can rise. The military-
economic potential is this limit and this characterizes the objective possibilities
of a county (coalition) which can be used for strengthening defense might and wag-
ing a war.

Military-economic potential (VB?) and nilitsry~economic night (VD!) express differ-
ent aspects of the problem of utilizing economic resources for military purposes,
that is, the maximum possible and the actual. At the same time the VB? is a part
of economic potential (3?) while VB! is a part of economic night (814). Proceeding
from this it is possible to bring out certain links between the VB? and the at.

If one accepts the maximum possible level of the V!!! as the amount of the VBP, then
such an assumption in a whole number of instances in theoretical terms is complete-
ly explainable and is practically advisable and in quantitative terms it can be de-
fined as the portion of economic might minus the unconditionally essential minimum
of civilian consumption. And if we know the amount of economic might, then for
calculating military-economic potential it is merely the question of establishing
the minimum of civilian needs.

Let us point out that it is not easy to do this, for these requirements in terms
of volume and cosposition are not strictly determined and constant. In setting the
minimum of civilian requirements it is essential to consider not only the material
factors and reproduction conditions but also the socioeconomic and political ones.
the nature of the social system and the nature of a possible war. The latter de-
termine the attitude of a people to a war and their readiness to make certain sac-
rifices and endure hardship for the sake of achieving victory. The just nature of
a war makes it possible to broaden the limits of military-economic potential while
an unjust war. even with a relatively low level of effort, in a bourgeois society
causes crisis situations since the contradictory influence of these factors is
particularly difficult to consider.

New aspects of the linkage are disclosed in posing the problems of strengthening
and realizing the VHF. Proceeding from the simplest notion of the VEP, the prob-
lem of strengthening it comes down to increasing overall economic might, for if
one portion of the whole is given (the necessary minimum of civilian consumption)
and cannot be reduced, an increase in the other part (the military-economic poten-
tial) is possible only as a result of increasing the whole.

However in reality the question of the essence of military-economic potential. its

quantitative certainty and wavs of strengthening is significantly more complex than
may seem in the first, abstract approach to it. In actuality it is not difficult

to realize that for satisfying military needs there must be not merely a "portion"
of economic might but rather this portion must be turned into the essential
military-end articles. Consequently it is not only the total volume of that share

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FORIOFFKJA1.US£GJNLY

of economic might which a nation can allocate for military ends that is important
but also the economy's sectorial structure. If it is assumed that one-half of
aggregate social product is efficient for satisfying the necessary civilian needs,
then this still does not mean that the second half can be fully employed for mili-
tary purposes. This portion of aggregate product can be turned into elements of
military night only in the instance that the economy's sectorial structure makes it
possible to product the night in the form of the specific military-end articles and
in the required assortment. of course. theoretically it can be assumed that the
articles which do not correspond to military needs are converted into foreign ea-
change with which the lacking military-end articles can be purchased abroad. But
the fine words that three things are needed for war, that is, money, money and more
morcy, are valid only in the figurative sense.

hence the essence of nilitary-economic potential does not come down to the simple
difference between economic might and the minimum civilian consumption, rather it
is more profound and more complex and includes as a characteristic feature also a
notion of the specific purpose and structure in the corresponding part of economic
might. A new problem arises, the problem of the conformity or the adequacy of an
economy to the needs of a war. The more fully the economic structure meets these
needs the higher the military-economic potential of a state with other conditions
being equal. Hence for increasing military-economic potential there must be not
only the growth of economic might but also a definite focus to economic development
is required. Even M. V. Prunes wrote that "with every new undertaking, be it eco-
nomic, cultural and so forth. the question must always be asked: to what degree
do the results of this undertaking conform to the cause of ensuring national de-
fense? Is it not possible, without harm to peacetime needs, to achieve definite
military aims here?"3 The question is, consequently, to have an optimum combina-
tion of both the civilian and defense interests of a society in economic policy and
strategy. An improvement in the economy's structure considering the demands of a
war under present-day conditions is one of the most important ways for strengthen-
ing military-economic potential.

In the course of preparations for world Bar II great attention was given to the
problem of the economy's adequacy. In order to compensate for the shortage of
various types of products needed for military needs, some states conducted a policy
of autarky (particularly characteristic for Germany and Japan) while others fol-
lowed a policy of stronger defense of external lines of communications (England)
which provided the delivery of raw products. fuel and so forth. The choice of
either path was determined by many circumstances. Its economic aspect was in com-
paring the effect and the expenditures related to one or another policy, the politi-
cal aspect was to determine the probability of maintaining friendly relations with
trade partners while the military aspect was the dependability of the chosen policy
and the balance of forces at sea and in the air. In previous world wars the ex-
ternal transport links were a very vulnerable economic element while the enterprises
located deep in the rear were virtually untouchable for the enemy's weapons. For
this reason, from the military viewpoint. autarky was a more dependable policy. But
nuclear missile weapons capable of destroying industrial centers deep in the rear
have nullified this advantage. This is one of the reasons for the resumed interest
in various forms of neocolonialisn and the speeding up of imperialist integration

as means making it possible to increase the survival factor of a military economy.

83

FCHIC“WNC1AI,US£4MNL¥
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the conditions of the further development of the international division of
labor and integration processes, foreign economic ties have begun to have an ever-
more substantial impact on military-economic potential of states. These are felt
in the economic development rates, in the economic structure, its efficiency, mo—
bility and survivability. For this reason they must be considered in assessing
military-economic possibilities.

In all the stages of our state's development the party's economic policy has con—
sidered the interests of strengthening the nation's defense capability. Hith the
building of developed socialism and the achieving of the present scale of economic
might, better conditions have developed for harmoniously reconciling the interests
of increasing national prosperity, further developing the national economy and
strengthening the nation's military-economic potential. An organic unification of
the achievements of the scientific and technical revolution with the advantages of
developed socialism and greater efficiency of social production the state's
military-economic possibilities both as a consequence of increased economic might
as well as because the production of modern weapons and military equipment can be
ensured precisely by an economy based upon the most recent scientific and techni-
cal achievements .

In speaking about adequacy, one must not assume that there is any ideal economic
structure which would fully cover the given problem. Under present-day conditions,
when the catalogs of military-end articles run into several million names, when a
new generation of weapons comes every 5-7 years and when armed combat has assumed
an exceptionally dynamic and intense nature, under these conditions the volume and
composition of military requirements change frequently and substantially. If one
considers in addition the contradictory nature of the requirements of modern war-
fare, then one cannot help but note that the problem of the adequacy of an economy
is inseparably linked with the problem of its mobility and with the ability to
rapidly adapt in terms of the changing needs of war, since the greater the mobility
of an economy the more rapidly it can adapt and the more fully it can subordinate
the nation's economic might to military interests. Thus, a rise in economic mobil-
ity is also one of the ways of increasing militarybeconomic potential.

The mobility of an economy depends upon the development level of the productive
forces and the production relations. While the technical level of production in

our nation and the developed capitalist countries is approximately the same, social-
ist ownership, the unity of the fundamental economic interests of classes and social
groups and the planned nature of production development give rise to permanent ad-
vantages for socialism in terms of economic mobility. These were clearly apparent
during the years of the Great Patriotic "at. In relying on the high mobility of

the socialist economy, the USSR evacaated industry to the East and created a well-
organized military economy which ensured our victory. These advantages were sig-
nificantly increased as a result of the building of a developed socialist society.
In the course of communist construction, there has been the further development of
the productive forces and socialist production relations have been continuously im-
proved. This has been apparent in the increased level of the sczialization of pro-
duction, in the development and strengthening of the economic and social role of
nationalized property, in the further strengthening of cooperative and kolkhoz
ownership and in the bringing of it closer to the nationalized as well as in other
phenomena. At the same time there have been a higher degree of understanding the
economic laws and their conscious use by society, planning, nanagement methods and

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI:OFFNJAI.USE(MNLY

Under present-day conditions, in determining military-economic potential, it is es-
sential to consider the time factor as well. It is important in a dual sense. In
the first place, from the viewpoint of the time over which a maximum subordination
of economic might to military ends can be achieved. Secondly, from the viewpoint

of the length of that period during which one or another degree of military-economic
effort can be maintained. Certainly the length of this period (month, year or
decade) largely determines what portion of its economic might a society can subord-
inate to military ends. In particular, if a war starts as a surprise and ends quick-
quickly. then military-economic potential actually comes down to that level of

nomic might which the given nation had the moment the war started.

These are the most important factors which determine what part of economic might can
be used for military purposes, that is, can be viewed as military-economic potential
or as the maximum limit for the growth of military-economic might. Since military-
economic potential and military-economic might are derivative from economic might
and are a part of it, all the provisions relating to a description of the structure
and quantitative criteria of economic might apply to it. However, the structure of
military-economic potential is not merely a smaller cepy of economic might's struc-

military-economic potential. It is important, consequently, to understand the par-
ticular features of a military economy's structure in comparison with the structure
of the civilian economy and the ways for carrying out a military reorganisation of
the national economy.

It must be said that the question of the role of military-economic potential and the
ways of realizing it has been a matter of sharp debate from t.e end of world Her 1.
Prior to world War II. there was a struggle between the concepts of armaments "in
breadth" and "in depth." This struggle assumed particular sharpness after the war
in line with the military technical revolution and the changes in the balance of
forces on the world scene. In the United States, one group of theoreticians contin-
ued to emphasize the crucial significance of economic might and military-economic
potential for the outcome of a war,“ while the other one asserted that "we should
build our military might on the basis of a view completely opposite to the idea of
the importance of industrial potential. He must create armed forces which are
ready to fight with all their might on the very day that a war breaks out."5 The
supporters of this view have continued the notion of armaments "in breadth" charac-
teristic of the most extremist representatives of the military-industrial complex.
Certain theoreticians and practical workers, without denying the role of military-
economic potential fully, emphasize its realization. The significance of military-
economic potential under present-day conditions has been reduced, say c. Bitch and
R. McKean, for with the aid of nuclear missile weapons the enemy's economy can be
destroyed even before the carrying out of mobilization measures. "The superior
military-economic potential of the United States will be able to play its important
role only in the instance that it is effectively used in the interests of ensuring
national security even before the start of a war,"6 they write.

85

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the United States, the second group is very influential. It has powerful support
from the military-industrial complex which reaps colossal profits from the arms
race. it preaches unrestrained expansion based on the view that the United States
is the economically most powerful state in the capitalist world and for this reason
the problems of realizing economic might for the American imperialists are more
keenly felt than the problems of increasing it. There is a different situation in
the PRC, Japan and England which are significantly inferior to the United States in
terms of economic strength and this has fostered concepts of strengthening economic
might and military-economic potential. However in these nations the voices of the
most arch extremists are heard calling for an arms race.

In the PEG, during the first postwar years, there were widespread views emphasising
the importance of economic might. these contributed to the rehabilitation of the
German military (the war supposedly was lost not by the military but rather by the
economy) and at the same time expressed the revanchist spirit of the "economic
miracle." Thus, the well-known West German economist and politician K. Schiller

in his work "Constant Economic Growth as an Economic and Political Task" proved that
the ensuring of constant economic growth will make it possible to successfully

carry out structural shifts in the national economy as dictated by the scientific
and technical revolution, to raise the competitiveness of the west German industry,
to further foreign economic expansion, to rearm Heat Germany and bear the expendi-
tures related to solving the "German Question." As Heat Germany has increased its
economic might, squeezing out France and England, the questions of creating a mili-
tary economy and preparing to mobilize the entire economy have become more fashion-
able. L. Erhard even in the middle of the 1950's was concerned with the establish-
ing of "correct, systematic and safe ways" of rearming and in the following decade
F. Strauss, U. de Hesier, a. Duren, F. Zimmerman and others began to intensely work
out the theoretical and practical questions related to realizing economic possibili-

ties to increase military strength.

In England at one time official recognition was given to the theory of a "war with

a broken back," according to which the enemies after the exchange of nuclear strikes
would continue the war with all available means, in relying upon the surviving part
of economic potential. For this reason, supposedly, it was essential to increase
economic potential and carry out measures to raise the survival of the economy. In
sharply criticizing this theory, the co—worker at the American Rand Corporation,
Prof B. Brodie, among the arguments against it gave the following: it was iapos-
sible to plan such a war and "there was not enough either data or imagination to
create such a plan." For this reason the militant professor found it much easier

to imagine that the enemy would be consumed in the flames of nuclear explosions
without causing any losses to the aggressor. He would point out that at the end of
his book, Brodie, in referring to historical experience. concluded that the pre-

war calculations of both the victors and the losers were ordinarily profoundly wrong
and that wars were the cemetery of the predictions which had been made prior to
their start.7 One might ask: what is the value of the predictions of the present
supporters of a new war? Life has buried one military doctrine of imperialism after
another. There is every justification (even without having too great an imagination)
to conclude that a future war. if the imperialists succeed in starting it, will be-
come the cemetery not only of their prewar plans but also of capitalism itself.

If we move from theory to practice, one cannot help but note that in the capitalist
nations very great significance is given to increasing military-economic potential.

86

FOR‘OFTIC‘AI.USE¢MVLY
FOR 0FT1C1AL USEIDNLY

This is apparent in the subordinating of the achievements of scientific and techni-
cal progress to military interests, in the growing pressure of the monopolies and
the state on the standard of living of the workers, in those structural shifts which
are occurring in the economy, in neocolonisliam fanned by the desire for sources of
strategic raw materials. in imperialist integration which is encouraged by a desire
to overcome bottlenecks in the military economy and in many other phenomena.

Under the influence of the aggressive imperialist forces at the end of the 1970's
and the beginning of the 1980's, the international situation took a noticeable turn
for the worse. The leading circles of the United States and certain other NATO
countries set out on a policy hostile to detente and leading to a greater military
danger. One of the manifestations of the influence of the most reactionary and ag-
gressive groups is the unceasing increase in the military outlays of the imperial-
ist nations. Consequently, the question has not been restricted to increasing
military-economic potential but also there is a process underway of raising
military-economic night.

The designated differences in the military-economic concepts are differences within
one essence, differences in the question on the choice of ways and means to imple-
ment the reactionary functions of imperialist militarism in an age of the deepening
general crisis of capitalism. The various justifications of military-economic prep-
arations are of the same value. They all are a reactionary apology for militarism
and aggression, regardless of whether one or another concept is clothed in the worn
out but recently intensely revived garb of the utility of military outlays as an
anticrisis means or shamelessly shouts about the supposed Soviet threat. In this
regard it is not difficult to understand the reactionary essence of the demagogic
assertions by Maoist propaganda on the inevitability of a new world war. In under-
taking feverish attempts to block detente, to prevent disarmament and to provoke a
world war, Beijing is hoping to benefit from this and to achieve its own great power
goals.

Along with unmasking the bourgeois and Maoist apologies for material preparations of
a war, an important task for Soviet military-economic science is research on the ob-
jective laws of economic support for the defense capability of our nation and the
entire socialist conmonwealth and along with other sciences the elaboration of the
most effective solutions to the urgent theoretical problems and practical military-
economic tasks. Among them is the task of strengthening ailitary-economic potential
and maintaining it on a level sufficient for maintaining a lasting peace and for en-
suring constant combat readiness which would guarantee an immediate rebuff of an
aggressor. '

2. Military Production and Realization of Military-Economic Potential

The turning of potential military-economic possibilities into real mdlitary might
occurs on a basis of the functioning of the military economy which produces the

military-end articles and ensures their prompt delivery to the troops and their cor-
rect allocation and utilization. The military economy should correspond, on the one

hand, to the nation's economic possibilities and, on the other, to the nature and
requirements of modern warfare. It must support constant high combat readiness of
the armed forces and be capable of rapidly increasing its might up to a level needed
for thwarting aggression and defeating an aggressor. The problems of realizing
military-economic potential can be reduced to two main ones: a) the degree of

87

ROR¢0FHMJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOR‘0FFKJA1.USE(MVLY

utilizing military-economic opportunities, b) the effective use of the allocated
resources. The former presupposes an elucidation of the relationships between
military and civilian production, the essence and mechanism of economic mobilization
while the latter involves the patterns in the functioning of the military economy
itself under socialist conditions.

Military Production and Economic Mobilization

In beginning to examine the given problem, it is essential first of all to clearly
establish the limits of military production. In the ordinary understanding this is
the production of nuclear missiles, military aircraft, tanks, cannons, rifles, em-
munition and other similar products the military purpose of which is apparent. But
fuel and other means are required in order for the tanks to move and the aircraft
and missiles to fly. The men must be fed, provided with housing and various serv-
ices. Finally, for producing military-end articles there must be the corresponding
materials, equipment, energy and *ther means of production as well as the people
producing military products. Thus, in line with the supplying of the military
forces, a complex network of economic relations is formed within which the bound-
aries of military and civilian production are not very clearly marked.

How can military production be isolated in the system of the social division of
labor and how can its limits be drawn in? Obviously this cannot be done on the basis
basis of the departmental affiliation of enterprises as military orders, particular-
ly in wartime, are carried out not only by defense but also civilian enterprises and
many defense enterprises in peacetime produce not only military but also civilian
products. In terms of the physical form of the produced product it is also not al-
ways possible to classify it with complete certainty in the military or civilian
category. Only its actual use provides a clear answer. This also serves as the
criterion for isolating military production.

But, regardless of the unity of opinions on the given question, the range of mili-
tary needs and, consequently, the limits of military production have been defined
differently by various authors. Some restrict military production to just the pro-
duction of the "means of destruction"° while others include in it also the produc-
tion of personal consumption goods of the servicemen,9 while still others also would
include the means of production in producing military products.10 We would point out
that each of the given viewpoints makes certain sense. The problem is that the
process of a transition from a civilian-end product to a military product is many-
staged and contains a number of intermediate elements. Just where the distinction
should be drawn is the essence of the different views. But if military production
is viewed in the broad sociopoliticrl sense, than it is essential to consider the
entire system of needs caused by the creation and functioning of military might, as
direct military needs, for soldiers and weapons, and as indirect ones, for workers
and the means of production to create the articles which satisfy the immediate
military needs. In accord with this military production includes: 1) the produc-
tion of end military products, 2) the production of the means of production for
military produ' :ion, 3) the production of consuer goods for the workers in military

production.

Now the question arises of in what manner this broken down structure of military
production can be included in the classic scheme of the reproduction process in

FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(MULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

order to view the latter considering the new relationships caused by the existence
of military production. Here it is wise to recall how the founders of Marxism-

Leninisn approached the question of dividing social production into its component
parts.

"All social production, and consequently all production of a society, can be broken
down into two major subdivisions:

"I. The means of production, that is, goods having a form in which they should en-
ter or, at least, could enter production consumption.

"11. Consumer goods, that is, goods having a form in which they go into individual
use by the class of capitalists and the working class."“ K. Marx viewed each of
these subdivisions as a large sector producing either the means of production or
consumer goods. The value of all annual product produced in each of the subdivi-
sions is broken dan, like the value of an individual good, into three parts:
c+v+m. Let us investigate the approach to the problem of dividing social product
from the viewpoint of searching for a correct solution to the question confronting
us. when the task was to investigate in what manner social production compensates
for the two parts of the product, that is, the one which goes to satisfy the indi-
vidual needs of the workers and capitalists and that which serves to fore the
material elements of productive capital, it would be necessary to consider the
dividing of all social product by purpose and material composition into two parts.
It is essential to do this, wrote V. I. Lenin, "because that portion of the product

which consists of elements of capital cannot servs for personal consumption and
vice versa."12

Now the task has become more complex becaune we must investigate in what manner
social production compensat.s not only for the two designated parts of the product
but also that portion of which serves to satisfy military needs. Certainly the
military-end articles utilized for this purpose are constantly being consumed and
hence should be constantly reproduced in their physical form. Consequently, here
the question comes up of compensating not only for the value but also for the phy-
sicsl form of the product, but in this instance, as V. I. Lenin ponted out, "it is
' unconditionally necessary to distinguish the products which play a completely dif-
ferent role in the process of the social economy."13 In following the logic of
this argument, it can be said that the part of the product consisting of weapons
and military equipment plays a completely different role in comparison with the
means of production and the consumer goods. Certainly this part cannot be included
either in individual or productive consumption and, on the other hand, in terms of
physical form it cannot be compensated for either by the means of production or by
personal consumption goods.

Only one conclusion can be drawn from what has been said. If the task has been
posed of analyzing the reproduction process considering military production, than
in this instance the end military product must not be confused with the other com-
ponent parts of aggregate military product. To the degree that the end military
product is earmarked and used for military purposes, the personal constnption goods
are used to satisfy personal needs and the means of production go for production
needs, we must distinguish these different purpose products.

89

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(HVLY
FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY

Then the question arises of be; this step can be taken in moving from the abstract
to the concrete, that is, how to detail the reproduction scheme in terms of the set
task. The method of the approach to solving this question has been given by K. Marx
and V. I. Lenin. They did not limit themselves to dividing social production into

two subdivisions. Depending upon the specific aims of the research, they isolated .
in the subdivisions the more detailed parts which differed in purpose.

For example, K. Marx established two warts of the product of subdivision II and
these differed in terms of their purpose: a) the necessary vital essentials and
b) luxury goods. Such a separation of product in subdivision II wee important for

elucidating the opposition of class interests between the workers and exploiters and
K. Marx introduced this division.’“ Under the new historical conditions, for re—

the destiny of capitalism in Russia, it was essential to examine the nature and
particular features of the expansion of the market in the process of expanded
capitalist reproduction. For this V. I. Lenin broke down the structure of sub-
division I of social production. establishing in it: a) the means of production
for the means of production and b) the means of production for consumer goods.15
An elucidation of the ratio of the corresponding parts of social production made it
possible to unmask the ideological opponents, to discover the law of the predomi-
nantgrowth of the production of the leans of production in comparison with the pro-
duction of consumer goods and to analyze its action.

In the works of K. Marx there are indications that social labor can be embodied also
in such a form or in suzh a product "which is neither part of individual or produc~
tive consumption." for example gold and silver which function as acney. Here social
labor is fixed "in a form where it serves only as a machine for circulation," and
consequently this portion of social wealth must be ”sacrificed to the process of
circulation."16 There are also grounds for a similar dividing of social labor fixed

tive consumption, it serves the functioning of the military machine and is sacri-
ficed to the social evil of militarism.

Aggregate social production includes two sectors-the civilian and military, each
of which is broken down into its functional parts (see the Diagram). As a result,
five sectors are obtained. The first two sectors (Ig and Iv) produce the means of
production. These can be viewed as a single subdivision which includes two sec-
tions: Ig--the means of production for civilian production and Iv-the means of
production for military production (in a similar manner as V. I. Lenin established
in subdivision I the means of production for the means of production and the means
of production for consumer goods). The following two sectors (Ilg and IIv) produce
consumer goods. These also can be viewed as one subdivision with two functional
sections: IIg--consumer goods for civilian production and IIv-consuler goods for

military production (in much the same manner as K Marx established the necessary
vital essentials and consumer goods in subdivision II). Finally, in the diagram a

fifth sector has been established, the RV? which creates the and military product.
It holds a special place. In terms of the role in the reproduction process, it
cannot be included either in subdivision I or in II, but at the same time it is not

FOR10FFKJAI.US£(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

and II. The product of this sector is constantly removed from the reproduction

[—Civilisn -I litary j
I Sector I I Sector I

r... __.. __ . __.. __ ..__ ..+.. ._.. __.. f. .I—. . __ . —_ I‘W

I. Hes f 0d t1
. “3:13;“? on, I 6' ”VH1 I I v. c+v+a I .

L._._._._.__.._L._.._.L..l_.._._LJ
r...__.._._._._.+._._.I_.!_._._l._l

ll. Consumer oods
includiﬁg: ' I G. C+v+m I I V. c+v+m I .

L._._._._._..L._._.__I_.l_._._.l._l
._.____ I

I_._._.__.__._._l.

m. and military product I 1
I V.c+v+m '

L._._._._._._'J

L———u.

c

Diagram. Logical Scheme of Reproduction:

G--Civilian ,roduct; V-Hilitary product; c-Cost of means of production;
v-Cost of vital necessities; m-Value of surplus product.

The given diagram clearly illustrates Lenin's well-known thesis that the economy for
war is an economy directly or indirectly linked to military deliveries.la According

those parts of the war-oriented economy which are indirectly related to military de-
liveries. The diagram makes it possible to show the basic relationships between
military and civilian production. those within the two as well as the nature and
direction of those structural shifts which occur as a result of the increase or re-
duction in military production. Consequently. the diagram can be used as the basis
of a mathematical economic model for the economic mobilisation process.

For example, in order to increase the production of end military product (KVP), it
is essential first of all to increase the scale of Iv and llv. This can be achiev-
ed by various ways: by a corresponding reduction in the sectors of 1g and llg. by
mobilizing reserves. by redistributing the accumulation fund in favor of Iv or llv
and so forth. Each of the possible ways will produce a different effect and will
tell differently on national economic development. The different variations can
be "played through" in a mathematical economics model. Here it is possible to em-
ploy the actusl data of previous were or hypothetical data making it possible to
trace possible situations. An elucidation of the corresponding relationships is
important to determine military-economic potential and its dynamics, for solving
specific questions related to preparations for converting the economy for military
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different variations of the military-economic preparations and the carrying out of
economic mobilization. Thus, Nazi Germany reorganized its economy ahead of time for
the interests of war and for a number of years increased its military-economic night,
using not only its own potential but also the potential of a number of states and
occupied territories. France was unable to any significant degree to realize its
military-economic capabilities and surrendered at the very outset of the war. The
United States and England created a powerful military econony in the course of the
war, spending several years on conversion. The differences in the method and degree
of economic mobilization were caused by an unique combination of economic, political,
military, geographic and other objective and subjective factors. But behind the
diversity of specific forms one can note certain cannon features and patterns in
economic mobilization and the functioning of the military economy. Previously data
were given (see Table l) on the dynamics of total industrial production, military
consumption and the share of military consumption in U.S., English and German
national income. The data not only showed differences in the degree of economic
mobilization and in the time during which these nations succeeded in maintaining a
more or less intense military consumption but also that in all the nations, although
after a certain time and to a varying degree, inevitably there occurred a slowdown
in growth and then a decline in the total production volume. This was followed by

a curtailment of military production. The degree of military-economic effort and

the time it could be sustained are closely related, being in an inversely propor-
tional dependence.

A certain notion of the relationship of modern military production with civilian
production and of the particular features of economic mobilization can be gained
from a study of the structural shifts occurring in the economy in relationship to
local wars. conflict situations and changes in military doctrines as well as in line
with crisis phenomena in the economy. As an example, take certain aspects of the
economic support for the dirty war of American inperialism in Vietnam. This was
the largest war in U.S. history since Horld Her II. In it 56,000 Americans were
killed and over 300.000 wounded. Expenditures on aggression reached 146 billion
dollars and during the most intense period rose up to 30 billion dollars a year.
The war did not cause a fundamental reorganization of the entire economy to a war-
time footing but had a noticeable impact on the load factor for defense production

capacity and was a testing of its nobility and capacity to reorganize in terms of
the requirements of such wars.

From the materials of the American press it is obvious that during the years of

the escalating of the Vietnamese war, the increased demand for various types of
military products by the American war machine occurred very unevenly. The most
rapid increase occurred in the consumption of products from the most militarized
sectors of the manufacturing industry, particularly the sectors producing artillery
and small arms weapons, aircraft, radio equipment, TV sets and communications
equipment. Here the growth in the number of persons employed in servicing military
needs was accompanied in some sectors by a significant increase in total employment
and. in others, by more or less proportional growth while in still others there was
no increase in overall employment. In order to bring out the causal dependences in
these processes, many factors must be analyzed, including: changes in the size and
structure of the armed forces, reserve capacity and manpower in the various sectors,
the length of the work week and so forth. But the matter goes beyond this. In the

92

FOR OFFICIAL USELCMNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given instance it was a question of a specific var. b‘ith a different type of war
there could have been completely different structural shifts, new problems put
forward, that is. the necessity of investigating different variations and utilizing
mathematical economics modeling for these purposes.

In theoretical terms it is possible to establish three levels in the process of eco-
nomic mobilization. At the first level the growth of military production does not
exclude accumulation. that is. it is carried out on a basis of expanded reproduc-
tion. The second stage is a critical situation where the scale of military consup—
tion excludes the possibility of accumulation and expanded reproduction becomes sim-
ple reproduction. When the growth of military consumption exceeds this limits, the
third level is reached and here there is the more or less rapid "consumption” of
basic fixed capital, material and foreign exchange reserves, property and assets of
the population and the physical exhaustion of people. Obviously with each level of
economic development there is a certain limit to the military-economic effort.

From the viewpoint of the theory of reproduction. the limits of economic mobiliza-
tion are expressed in the relationship of military-economic might (VB!) and
military-economic potential (VB?) understood as the maximum possible level of VII,
and economic night (PM). The corresponding relationships can be expressed in the
form of the following ratios:

VD! - K'VKP;
V913 EH-c;
val. K1 'Dl,

where K—the coefficient for realizing the VEP;
G-the volume of civilian production;
Kr—coefficient of economic mobilization.

It is important not only to disclose the direction and nature but also express
quantitatively the basic relationships of economic mobilization in terms of the
different situations. This will make it possible to find the optimum solutions

for certainly.

The essence of economic mobilization, as is seen, consists in increasing military
production up to the necessary amounts and the related reorganization of the
national economic proportions and the redistribution of society's resources. When
the corresponding patterns have been elucidated and defined quantitatively, the
question comes down to carrying out the necessary measures of preparing for eco-
nomic mobilization. Here one is fully confronted with the importance of the eco-
nomic and political aspects and their influence on the nature, forms and methods

of economic mobilization and on the creation and operation of the military economy.
It must be emphasized that just as the discovery of the objective patterns of capi-
talist reproduction and the conditions of realization did not mean the eradication
of anarchy and disproportions in capitalist production so the elucidation of the
patterns of economic mobilization still does not mean that their requirements are
fully observed in the military-economic practices of capitalism. The development
of military-state monopolistic capitalism has not eliminated the spontaneous action
of economic laws and this reduces effective regulation and the degree of utilizing
militarybeconomic potential.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USIZCNVLY

In contrast to this, a socialist state, in relying on the socialist economic system,
has an opportunity to carry out economic mobilization in a planned and organized
manner in accord with the war's requirements. The success of these activities is
largely dependent upon a profound understanding of military-economic patterns, upon
scientific prediction and early preparations for the forthcoming reorganization.

This determines the practical significance of studying the processes involved in
economic mobilization under present-day conditions.

Military Production as a Component Part of the Military Economy

As a phase of the military-economic process, military production represents the
starting point in realizing military-economic possibilities and the creation of
the physical elements of military night. This is the main and determining compo-
nent of a military economy because the scale, organization, structure and particu-
lar features in the functioning of its other elements and phases depend upon what

quantity of which means of armed combat military production can create and within
what time.

However, this relationship must not be interpreted in an oversimplified manner with
independent significance ascribed to military production and an automatic nature to
the military-economic process. The scale and composition of military production
and the nature of military consumption depend not only upon the available produc-
tion capabilities. The aims, directions and degree of utilizing these capabilities
at each given moment are determined by the state. It also defines the nature of
the operation of military might. To put it figuratively, cannons do not begin
firing merely because the battery has received the shells and has been supplied
with everything necessary to fire; the command to open fire is also needed. This
however is not the prerogative of the military economy.

If military production is viewed as that very source from which military needs are
satisfied, the need arises of concretiaing its functional structure.

In the production of end military product, two types can.be established in terms of
its functional purpose: the production of personal supply articles for the service-
men and the production of weapons, military equipment and other technical means.
Each of the types, in turn, has a complicated structure. Particularly complex is
the structure of the second type, the scale and role of which have been growing
particularly rapidly with the development of military production. The modern cata-
logs include several million types of military and articles. The question of the
structure of military production and the classification of military and articles
has assumed great pertinence and has become a question of lively debate.

One of the general concepts which has gained wide acceptance has been the concept
of military equipment which is used to designate all the technical devices in use
by the army. As part of military equipment, combat weapons are considered separate-
ly, and within them, the weapons, the delivery systems and the controls.20 However,
as yet there is no complete military economic classification and the related incon-
veniences are felt in many areas of knowledge and practical activity, for example,
in solving such important questions for increasing military-economic efficiency as
a scientific cataloging of military-end articles, the automating of processes in-

volved in accounting for their movement, information, inventory control and so
forth.

96

FOR‘OFFNJAI.USE(MWLY
INDR OFTWCJA1.USEZ(MVLY

In order to provide the armed forces with everything necessary to maintain constant
high combat readiness, to continuously improve and replace weapons and military
equipment, and finally, to be able to immediately end sharply increase armament pro-
duction, a rather large multisector defense industry is needed with a broad network
of scientific research institutes, laboratories, testing ranges and with a large
group of highly skilled specialists. For the socialist nations these are compulsory
measures in response to the aggressive preparations of imperialism. Even after the
conclusion of a number of agreements to limit and ban individual types of weapons,
military expenditures and military production in the main capitalist nations have
not declined but rather grown. This is largely aided by the military product
fetishism which for decades has been implanted in the Heat and continues to be im-

planted, for the source of this is the reactionary, aggressive essence of imperial-
ism which cannot be altered. '

The presence of military production as a permanent, large-scaled, multisector com-
plex is a generally recognized tenet in the military-economic concepts and military
technical policy of imperialism. Such complexes include a number of specialized
sectors and types of production, including aerospace, nuclear, shipbuilding, the
motor vehicle and armored industries, the production of artillery and firearms wea-
pons and auumnition and others.

No matter how diverse in their.essence and purpose, civilian and military production
are rather similar in technical and economic terms. Moreover, one can note a def-
inite tendency to unify them. "Military aviation, the motorized tank troops, the
military radio and military chemistry," wrote H. N. Tukhachavskiy, "represent almost
a complete standard with civilian models.... A situation is developing when masses
of the most technically combat weapons are found in the national economy itself."21
This process has continued under present-day conditions (along with the opposite
tendency of the specialization in military production).

In the capitalist nations, on this basis, there has been an ever-deeper merging of
military production into civilian and an increased role of the private sector in

the production of military-end articles. On the eve of world Hhr I the basic mass
of weapons was produced by state-owned defense plants. The war forced private en-
terprises to be widely involved in military production. After the war the role of
state-owned defense plants again rose. But they were now basically concerned with
improving existing types of weapons and developing new ones while the basic mass of
production was carried out by private enterprises. During the years of Horld “at 11,
with a simultaneous rise in the number and capacity of the state-owned and private
defense enterprises, the share of the private ones increased. Finally, in the post-
war period, in a majority of the capitalist nations, there has been a further de-
cline in the share of state-owned defense plants in the production of armament.

Each year the 0.8. Department of Defense concludes contracts and deals for the de-
velopment and production of weapons, military equipment and supplies with 22,000
basic contractors. In addition, over 100,000 subcontractors are involved in carry-
ing out defense orders. The structure and allocation of these orders between the

various firms may change but the same major monopolies are the basic contractors.
The 100 largest monopolies are responsible for 65-70 percent of the total defense
orders, the first 10 firms are responsible for 30 percent and the first five (Lock-
heed Aircraft, General Blectric, General Dynamics, McDonnell-Douglas and United
Technologies) for almost 20 percent of the total. The narrow circle of firms

95

F0!:0FFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

comprises the basic defense industry backbone around which defense production is
shaped. The extensive development of diversification and the formation of conglom—

erate firms gives higher mobility to the economy and makes it possible to quickly
increase military production.

A general notion of what place the various sectors hold in satisfying military needs
can be gained from date on the allocation of expenditures for purchasing goods and
services in the various sectors. For example, in the United States out of the

total purchases of the Defense Department in the 1960's, around one-half went to

the manufacturing industry, around one-third to the state enterprises, approxi-
mately one-tenth to transportation, communications and other sectors in the service

sphere, 2-6 percent for construction, less than 1 percent for agriculture and the
extracting industry and around 6 percent for imports.

Thus, under present-day conditions military production cannot be confined to spe-
cialized military sectors and enterprises. Many types of military and articles,

as before, are produced by civilian enterprises. The ratio of these depends upon
many factors, such as: upon the development of specialization and standardization
processes in defense and civilian production, changes in the structure of military

consumption, upon military doctrine and the military-technical policy of a state.
The given ratio varies in the different nations.

The defense industry of the Soviet Union, in possessing skilled personnel and in
having sufficient production capacity, a high scientific-technical potential and
significant reserves, provides an opportunity to maintain military production on
the necessary level. In considering the nature of the military-economic prepara-
tions of imperialism and the demands of modern warfare on defense production, the
socialist nations have given the necessary attention to the development of the de-
fense industry. In the USSR, on the basis of the last scientific and technical
achievements, various types of modern weapons have been developed and are being
produced and the combat and technical qualities of the weapons increased. The

Soviet Armed Forces are equipped with the highest class of modern military equip-
ment .

The development of our state's defense industry and the specific programs for its
activities depend largely upon the international situation. The USSR has worked
steadily to reduce weapons and for disarmament. As long as a military threat re—
mains, we are ready for any shifts in the development of events. "The economy,
science and technology in the USSR have reached a level where they are capable of
ensuring the development of any weapon on which our enemies may wish to wager."22

In technical economic terms, the defense industry has a number of particular

features. In the first place, military production requires specialized equipment
and high-quality materials. Secondly, here there is the particularly acute prob-
lem of maintaining production on a level of the most recent achievements of scienr
tific and technical progress. Thirdly, the ensuring of high mobility in terms of

structure and scale is of vitally important significance for defense production.
These particular features tell also on the defense industry's economy.

The necessity of special equipment and materials with special properties prevents
the satisfying of the need for these from a simple reallocation of'product from

96

POR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subdivision I and necessitates the creation of enterprises to produce the corres-
ponding materials and equipment. This complicates the problem of organizing de-

fense production and the ensuring of its mobility and requires great capital invest-
cents.

The situation is aggravated by the fact that due to the progressive obsolescence of
military equipment it must be constantly replaced. Over the last 10-15 years in
our nation as! abroad there have been two or three generations of missiles, a sigr
nificant portion of the combat aircraft, surface vessels and submarines have been
replaced and the systems of antiaircraft missile and radar weapons, controls and
communications equipment have been changed several times. Naturally, unique diffi-
culties in defense production are related to the rapid obsolescence of military
equipment. Having scarcely begun production of new weapons in an amount which
would replace the old, the defense industry should already be converting to the
production of new weapons. At the same time at any moment it should be capable
both of changing the types of products produced as well as sharply increasing the
production scale, and consequently, have significant capacity reserves. As a re-
sult the capital intensiveneas of military production is increased.

As is seen, the particular features of the defense industry complicate the problem
of ensuring its economy and efficiency. The efficiency of military production in a
decisive manner influences the efficiency of all the remaining elements of the mil-

Because of this there is an urgent need for an integrated solution to the interre-
lated scientific, technical, economic and military problems in forecasting and or-

ganizing the output or military-end articles and conducting a unified military
technical policy. '

Our military technical policy is a system of scientifically based views on the ques-
tions of developing weapons and military equipment. It is carried out in the aim of
maintaining the technical equipping of the Armed Forces on a level of today's re-
quirements. Its essence is that, in relying on economic and scientific-technical
potential and considering the advantages of socialism, to ensure the primary de-
velopment of those areas of scientific and technical progress which are capable

The unified military technical policy of the USSR reflects the antimilitaristic
socioeconomic essence of socialism and conforms to its peace-loving foreign policy
and the defensive nature of its military doctrine. The ”$83 is carrying out a
policy not of superiority in armaments but rather of redlcing them. But it cannot
allow anyone "to acquire a better or sharper sword"2“ as this would be extremely
dangerous for universal peace. "The achieved military strategic equilibrium be-
tween the socialist world and the capitalist world is a victory of fundamental, his-
torical significance. It serves as a factor restraining the aggressive drives of
imperialism and this conforms to the fundamental interests of all peoples," empha-
sized the June (1980) Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee.25 Only proceeding from
the general achievements of science, technology and the economy and from a clear
understanding of their development prospects is it possible to correctly foresee

the main directionsof military technical progress and ensure the development of the
most efficient types of weapons and military equipment, that is, those which possess

97

F0ﬁi0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFTICJAl.lEﬂE¢MVLY

the highest tactical and technical specifications with the least expenditure of
money on development, production and operation. It is quite understandable that

for carrying out this task there must be profound penetration into the development
patterns of military affairs and a study of the directions of use for military tech-
nical progress and the development trends in armament abroad.

Increased labor productivity in the defense sphere is an exceptionally important
problem in the unified military-technical policy. This applies to any military
labor, including to the labor of staff and headquarters workers and to the labor
of all ranks of commanders. For this it is essential to have equipment making it
possible to further improve the existing methods of troop and weapon control, to
develop new ones and improve the communications systems.

3. Distribution and Consumption of Military Products

The military-economic process. in deriving from production, then passes through the
stages of distribution and exchange and ends with the consumption of the military-
end product. Marxist-Leninist political economy has established the natural nature
of the relationship between production, distribution, exchange and consumption.

K. Marx wrote: "Certain production causes...certain distribution, consumption, ex-
change and certain relations of these various aspects vis-s-vis each other."26
Quite understandably, this dependence is also characteristic of the military eco-
nomic process as distribution, exchange and consumption of military and articles
are also predetermined by military production, its scale and functional structure.
This applies primarily to the consumption of the means of production earmarked for
military production. This is nothing more than the process of producing military
products while the distribution and exchange of the means of production comprise
aspects of production itself and are found in it. As for personal consumer goods
earmarked for the reproduction of the labor force employed in military production,
their distribution, exchange and consumption are also carried out in accord with
the known laws of political economy. Regardless of certain specific features, the
distribution process of the designated means of production and consumer goods is
basically carried out with the aid of the ordinary civilian distribution network.

The distribution and consumption of end military product are something quite else.
These are very specific and differ substantially from the corresponding phases of
the civilian economy. Just what are their specific features?

In accord with the functional structure of and military production, and military
product consists of two parts: in the first place, of personal consumer goods of
the servicemen and, secondly, of weapons, military equipment and other means of
armed combat.

The personal consumption of servicemen ensures the maintaining of their ability for
military labor. In the socialist countries this is regulated by the economic

laws of socialism. The law of distribution according to labor operates through a
differentiated system of food and clothing rations as well as salaries in terms of
position and military rank and surpayments. The constant rise in the well-being

of the Soviet people in accord with the basic economic law of socialism also has
specific forms of manifestation in the armed Forces. These are in increased ra-
tions and an improved assortment of supplies for the servicemen, an improvement in
their billeting and cultural-service conditions, increased pay and so forth. The

98

' INJRIOFIICIAI.IEHE(HULY
roe OFFICIAL use on“

Soviet soldier in all regards is a citizen of his state with full rights. In carry-
ing out his military duty to society, he constantly feels the concern of all the
people for him. '

The personal consumption of servicemen, with all its importance, does not exhaust
the process of realizing military-economic possibilities. The final act of this
process is the consumption of weapons and military equipment which are operated by
the servicemen. The consumption of weapons and military equipment occurs in the
process of armed combat (in peacetime, in the process of training to master the
weapons and military equipment and in strengthening defense capability). 'In this
sense military consumption is of a dual sort: as the military activities of the
troops it goes beyond the limits of the military economy, it is determined by the
laws of military affairs and is the subject of military art, but as the final phase
of the military-economic process it is subordinate to its laws. It is important
to consider both sets of laws in military organizational development.

Military consumption under socialism differs fundamentally from military consumption
under capitalism by its very social essence. while for capitalism a war is one of
the immanent forms of its existence and for this reason military consumption is in-
ternally inherent to it, for a socialist society military consumption is a phenome-
non which arisea not out of the systems essence but is rather imposed on society by
external conditions. Specifically military consumption, that is, the functioning

of the armed forces of the socialist nations, serves not to suppress the working
masses and is not used for predatory goals (both are alien to socialism) but rather
to ensure the secure defense of communist construction and to prevent a world war.
Finally, while under capitalism the entire mechanism serving to prepare for military
consumption is. in the definition of V. I. Lenin, systematic and legitimized pill-
fering of the treasury and a weapon to intensify the exploitation of the workers

and to enrich the monopolies, in a socialist society military consumption is f;ee

of this exploiting and parasitic function and it is organized in a planned and
purposeful manner considering the political, economic and military factors determin-

ing it.

In emphasizing the determining role of production and the fact that it creates con-
sumption, the founders of Marxism also pointed out that constmlption in turn creates
production. It creates production in a double sense: in the first place, by the
fact that "only in consumption does a product become truly a product," and secondly,
by the fact that "consumption creates the need for new production and thus an ideal,
internally engendered motive for production which is its prerequisite.... There is
no production without a need. But precisely eonsuption reproduces the need.”27
These words of K. Marx apply fully and completely to military consumption as well.
In the first place, a weapon becomes a weapon when it is used according to its pur-
pose. Secondly, combat training and armed combat during which the military-end
articles are consumed create a demand for their new production. It must be pointed
out that military production responds very sensitively to new needs and not only in
the sense of reproducing what is consumed but also in the sense of constantly 1.;
proving the means of armed combat in terms of the new requirements of military af-
fairs. For example, in the course of the Great Patriotic War, the Soviet military
economy not simply reproduced the consumed means of armed combat on an expanded
scale, but constantly improved them and developed new ones. One-half of the types
of firearms used by the Soviet Army in 1965 was developed and put into series

99

FOR OFEHJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR!OF11C1AI.IEHE(NVLY

production during the war and three-quarters of the new models of artillery systems
in use by the war's end had been developed by industry in wartime. The number of
submachine guns in a rifle division during the war increased by 21-fold. the weight
of a divisional artillery salvo increased by almost double and that of a mortar
salvo by more than 7-fold. Rocket artillery became a new effective variety of
weapon. In the middle of the war, the Soviet Army began to be armed with self-
propelled artillery sounts [SAD], and in 1965 4,000 units were produced. During
the entire war there was an intensive struggle for qualitative superiority in avia-
tion equipment and here our fighter aviation underwent the greatest development.
The development of ground attack aviation was an outstanding achievement. Other
armies did not possess such aircraft as the 11-2 and 11-10.

The process of improving weapons and the methods of their production under the im-
pact of the demands of developing silitary affairs has continued at present as well.
This has been accelerated by the evil alliance of armament manufacturers and the
upper military in the imperialist nations. The appearance of new weapons has caused
changes in military affairs but, in rising to a higher level, nilitary affairs also
set new tasks for military-technical thought and cause the states to broaden scien-
tific research. to reorganize the defines industry and improve weapons and military
equipment. This relationship has shown a tendency to grow stronger. The mass in-
troduction of new weapons in the postwar period has caused a chain reaction in the
improving of all the existing types of weapons and the inventing of new ones. The
ensuing further development of military art has given rise to the need for ever-ore
advanced means of armed combat and consequently produces ever-new impulses for the
development of military production.

The relationship and reciprocal influence of military production and military con-
sumption are mediated by the distribution and exchange (circulation) of military-end
articles. Distribution encompasses all the products while exchange involves only a
portion, mainly the means of production and consumer goods. The problem is that the
distribution of end military product to a significant degree is directly influenced
and determined by the corresponding plans. It should make certain that each con-
sumer receives those military products, in the amount and on the date which are
dictated by the tasks set by the command. For this reason here little rooa remains
for exchange (circulation). This specific feature in the relationship between mili-
tary production and military consumption tells on the organization and functioning
of the distribution element of the military economy and on the control of the cor-
respOnding processes. Favorable opportunities are provided by it for widely intro-
ducing automatic systems into management.

Just what is that element of the military economy which carries out distribution and
consumption? In performing certain functions of distribution, delivery and the
storage of military-end articles, the general civilian infrastructure is employed.
This applies chiefly to the distribution of the means of production and consumer
goods earmarked for military production. But the civilian infrastructure cannot
carry out a whole series of specific tasks in the distribution of end military prod-
uct and for this reason there is a special element of the military economy which
includes a diversified network of lines of communications, powerful means of trans-
port, military, naval and air bases, special dumps and storage facilities for mili-
tary property, fuel and equipment, repair and service enterprises, facilities and
the corresponding units and subunits.

100

FIN!(IHH(1AI.[EHE(NVLY
FIﬂICHHNCJAI.lEE§(ﬂVLY

This element which is part of the armed forces continues and completes the process
of producing the end military product as well as bringing the product to full readi-
ness for consumption. This is a function of the logistical support services} mil-
itary transport. communications, trade. as well as the repair enterprises and sub-
units. The-construction of military installations is also involved here.

The functions of the distribution, circulation and consumption of end military prod-
uct are closely intertwined with one another. This tells on the structure and or-
ganization of the corresponding elements of the military economy. These are sub-
stantially influenced by the fact that in structural terms, these elements which
form the specific housekeeping organism of the armed forces, are because of this
simultaneously an organic component part of them. This is a question of the rear
of the armed forces and the system of their logistical support. The higher ele-
ments of this organization (the strategic and operational rear) carry out predom-
inantly distributive functions while the inferior ones (the organic rear and unit
services and administration) serve end military consumption.

Since the economic organism of the armed forces operates simultaneously as a part
of the military economy and as a part of the armed forces, not only the structure
but also the process of its functioning and development are determined by the over-
lapping influence of the military-economic laws and the laws of armed combat.

The existence under today's conditions of large armies and the rapidly developing
military-technical revolution have brought about colossal growth in the scale of
the military administrative organisation of the armed forces and the intense occur-
rence of the processes of their economic support even in peacetime. Defense produc-
tion gives the armed forces exceptionally diverse products while the scale of
military consumption in the leading capitalist states. in increasing year after
year, has virtually equaled the scale of the World Bar II period. For this reason
the rear of the armed forces has assumed a complicated and developed structure
through the arteries of which various military end articles are continuously flow-
ing to the troops, in ensuring current consumption and the viability of the mili-
tary organism and in replenishing and renewing the stocks of weapons, military
equipment and other military products. The closer the military and articles come
to the unit. subunit or soldier the more complicated and diverse this network for
each consumer must receive specific items in a certain quantity and assortment.

The coalition nature of a possible war. the development of integration processes and
the creation of large ocean-going navies have broadened the spatial scope of the ac-
tivities of the armed forces rear services, having advanced their limits beyond the
territory of a single state and having increased the extent of the lines of commu-
nications. This is particularly characteristic for the 0.5. armed forces which

have assumed the role of the world's policvmen. The United States maintains one-
quarter of its troops overseas. While in the 1920's American soldiers were sta-
tioned only in 3 foreign countries and in 39 during h'orld War II, by the beginning
of the 1970's they were found in 64 countries. The United States has created more
than 650 major military bases on the territory of other states.28 For supporting
the American troops in Vietnam. a rear command was organized with a headquarters in
Saigon and in 1967 this numbered 60,000 men. Each month 752,000 tons of freight
were delivered. The freight flows were regulated by a computer center which
processed data on 20,000 different troop supply articles.

101

ETHICMﬂﬂCLAL.USEGIVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nature of a possible war requires high motorization of the rear services. The
rear is equipped with powerful motor vehicle and air transport which together with
the rail,.sea, water and pipeline transport make it possible to ensure the presently
required mobility. Another particular feature of the organizational development of
the rear under present-day conditions is the mechanising of the rear supply process-
es and the automating of rear control. with the present scale and diversity of
military consumption, a simple rise in the number of rear formations and control
bodies could not ensure the prompt servicing of the troops. According to the data
in the American press, in 1973, over 6,730 computers had been installed in the 0.8.
governmental organizations and of this number over 55 percent was used in the ASU
[automated.control system] of the Defense Department. Using computers..1°813C1¢§1
support for tne armed forces was carried out totaling 62 billion dollars with some

a million types of various supplies.29 Mechanization and automation, in sharply in-
creasing the productivity and efficiency of all elements in the rear service system,
make it possible to achieve a significant increase in its capacity and mobility as
dictated by the particular features of armed combat in a modern war. These are:

the enormous spatial scope, high intensity and dynamicness.

The theory of the armed forces rear is concerned with studying the patterns and
principles in the functioning of the rear support system. Among the most important
of these are: the constant readiness of the rear to supply the troops, the conformr
ity of the tasks in organizing rear support to the tasks and organisations of the
armed services, branches of troops and armed forces groupings, the combining of rear
support centralization with the necessary independence of the troop groupings and
naval forces and others. These are thoroughly considered in developing the rear
support system.

The rear of the Soviet Armed Forces represents the resources (dumps, depots, shops,
transport troops. medical and other units, facilities and subunits), both those
which are organisationally part of the Armed Forces and those made available by the
state to the military command for complete material, technical and medical support
for the troops. It consists of three elements: the rear of the center, the opera-
tional rear and the organic or troop rear. Characteristic of it is a strictly
centralized and ordered organisation of control. It is headed by a deputy minister
of defense who is the chief of the rear of the Armed Forces and in the armed serv-
ices by deputy commmnders-in-chief for the rear who are also the chiefs of the rear
of the corresponding armed services. In the military districts, formations and
units there are deputy commanders who are chiefs of the rear in the districts and
deputy commanders for the rear in the formations and units.

The technical equipping, the organisation and activities of the rear units and sub-
units are arranged considering the particular features of the armed services and
the branches of troops. With the creation of the Strategic Rocket Troops the cor-
responding rear bodies appeared and a system was worked out for the support of this
new armed service. The introduction of missile weapons and the improving of tra-
ditional types of weapons in the ground troops, in causing a further increase in
the amount of work to service then as well as the increased maneuverability of the
troops demanded the complete motorizstion of the rear units and subunits of the op-
erational rear and the mechanizing of the most labor-intensive jobs which now can
be carried out not only in a fixed position but also during troop movement. This
is major progress in the development of the rear in comparison with the period of.
the Great Patriotic War when the operational rear was stationary.

102

F!”l€ﬁﬂﬂ€1Al.lﬂﬂE(HVLY
INNIOFFKJAL.USE(NNLY

The rear of the airborne troops has its own particular features as it must support
combat operations under the conditions of extended autonomy. Characteristic of it
is high saturation with air transport equipment and a number of other specific fea-
tures.

In the activities of the air force‘s rear, a special place is held by the deliveries
of large quantities of fuel, compressed gases and electric power. The rear is
equipped with the corresponding technical devices while the airfield engineer and
airfield operations subunits ensure the rapid rebasing of the air units and the
equipping of new airfields.

The commissioning of atomic submarines and missile-carrying ships for the navy and
the development of the naval infantry and landing ships have determined the area for
the improvement of the naval rear services. It was necessary to significantly de-
velop the auxiliary fleet, to mechanics cargo handling work, to introduce container
shipments, to widely employ air transport and to support the naval fleet operations
far from shore.

The organic rear is the most widely developed element in the Armed Forces rear.

Each formation and troop unit has its own unit administration and services. The
organic rear directly serves military consumption, that is, it completes the process
of economic support for the Army and Navy. Military readiness and combat capability
of the troops and the success of their combat activities depend directly upon the
technical state, organization and functioning of the troop rear.

All the experience of Soviet military organizational development teaches that man ,
the Soviet soldier, should always be at the center of attention, that is, his health,

material and cultural needs.

Under present-day conditions, without a well-rounded. politically aware soldier who
has mastered the weapons and military equipment it is inconceivable to create
powerful Armed Forces which would be capable of carrying out the tasks entrusted

to them. In addition, military service in our nation is not only schooling in com-
bat skill. "During service in the army there is continued the process started in
the family, school and on the job of communist indoctrination, the process of shap-
ing a well-rounded, harmonious personality. In essence, the army plays the role of
the 'people's university' which 'is completed' by virtually all male citizens of '
the nation."30 Unit administration and services must also carry out this very im-
portant social role of the Soviet Armed Forces.

The increased scale and the greater complexity of unit administration and services
have posed certain questions of their running in a new light. At present the ques-
tion does not come down to promptly obtaining and economically expending materiel
or carefully storing and correctly operating the weapons and military equipment. It
is important to ensure the optimum structure and functioning of the unit administra-
tion and services as an organic component part in the military economy and the Armed
Forces proceeding from the particular features of combat training and armed combat
under present-day conditions. High military-economic and tactical-rear training

are essential.

The rear services of the Soviet Armed Forces are being constantly improved on the
basis of the development of the economy and military affairs. These services have

103

F0!‘0FFKJAI.USE(!VLY
FIN!¢)HRCIAL.USE(MVLY

been fully motorized and this has increased the maneuverability and nobility of

all the rear bodies. The mechanization of supply processes has increased and all
types of troop support have been improved. At Present the rear of the Armed Forces
basically meets the demands placed on it by modern warfare. In terms of its organ-

ization and eguipping it is capable of dependably carrying out the responsible tasks
placed on it. 1

4. Socialist Integration and Military-Economic Potential

At the present stage our motherland is carrying out the tasks of communist construc-
tion. defending its revolutionary victories and preserving peace not in isolation
but in a fraternal family of peoples from the socialist countries. After ﬂorid

war II, as a result of the victory of socialist revolutions in a number of nations.
there arose "a social, economic and political commonwealth of free, sovereign peo-
ples following the path of socialism and communism, and united by canon interests
and goals and by close ties of international socialist solidarity."32 Better condi-
tions and opportunities were created for the development of the socialist countries,
for defending peace in the world and for defeating imperialist aggressors in the
event that they would attempt to start a war against the socialist countries.

Socialist Integration and the Strengthening of Military Economic Potential

History knows many examples of how artificial state formations were created by vio-
lence and deceit. by "iron and blood," by "fire and sword," and how they inevitably
disintegrated. Similar methods and similar results are characteristic in our days
of imperialism. The world socialist system represents a fundamentally new type of
international relations. Its rise has been brought about by the action of both uni-
versal laws and also specific economic laws of socialism.

The question of the relationships among peoples who have thrown off the chains of
capitalist slavery arose for the first time with all its actual political signifi-
cance with the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution. In analyzing and
weighing the entire aggregate of factors which demanded the unification of our
nation's peoples, V. I. Lenin wrote: "...It is essential to work for an ever-
closer federal union, having in mind, in the first place, the impossibility of de-
fending the existence of Soviet republics surrounded by incomparably militarily
stronger imperialist powers of the entire world and without the closest union of the
Soviet republics; secondly. the necessity of a close economic union of the Soviet
republics. without which it would be impossible to rebuild the productive forces
destroyed by imperialism and ensure worker prosperity; thirdly. the tendency to
create a single, world-wide economy which is controlled according to a general

plan by the proletariat of all nations; such a tendency is clearly apparent even
under capitalism and will certainly undergo further development and full comple-
tion under socialism."33

On 30 December 1922, the First All-Union Congress of Soviets adopted the historic
decision to create the world's first multinational socialist state, the USSR. This
union has undergone complete testing. The merging of the economic capabilities of
all the republics and their planned development on a nationwide scale have made it
possible to accelerate the rise of each of them and even out their economic develop-
ment levels. On the basis of colossal successes in the economic ares, fundamental ‘
shifts have occurred in the area of social relations and a new historical community

106

IN)! OFFICIAL USIZCHVLY
FORioFFKJAl.USE(MVLY

of peoples has come into being, the Soviet people. A culture has flourished which
is socialist in content, diverse in terms of its national forms and internationalist
in terms of its spirit and nature. The union and friendship of all nations and
nationalities in our country have withstood severe testing during the years of the
Great Patriotic War and were one of the sources of our victory.

The Soviet Union, as V. I. Lenin foresaw, has become the prototype and center for
the unification of the world socialist system. "...I am profoundly convinced that
individual different federations of free nations more and more will group themselves
around revolutionary Russia,"3” he wrote at the beginning of 1918. At present this
Leninist prediction is a real vital fact and reinforced in the Soviet Constitution
which states that the USSR. as a component part of the world socialist system and
the socialist commonwealth, is developing and strengthening friendship and coopera-
tion, comradely mutual aid with the socialist nations on the basis of the principle
of socialist internationalism and takes an active part in economic integration and
in the international socialist division of labor. At present the socialist nations
account for 26.2 percent of the world's territory and 33.7 percent of its popula-
tion. These countries determine the main path of mankind's development.

Since the moment of its rise the world socialist system has undergone a series of
development stages. The 1960's held a special place in its history. During this
decade nany fraternal countries completed the creation of the foundations of social-
ism and moved on to building a developed socialist society, while the Soviet Union,
having built a developed socialist society, has entered the period of the full-scale
construction of communism. The process of socialist economic integration has de-
veloped widely on this basis. As was stated in the Comprehensive Program approved
jointly in 1971 by the nine socialist nations (Bulgaria, Hungary, the GDR, Cuba,
Mongolia, Poland, Romania, the USSR and the CSSR), the development of economic in-
tegration among the socialist countries represents a process of the international
socialist division of labor, the merging of their economies. the formation of a
modern, highly efficient structure of the national economies, the gradual drawing
together and evening out of their economic development levels, the formation of

deep and lasting ties in the basic economic sectors, in science and technology, the
broadening and strengthening of the international market of these nations and the
improving of commodity-monetary relations.35 The deepening of socialist integration
creates favorable conditions for the more efficient use of all resources in the
socialist countries and for the broad development of the scientific and technical
revolution. It increases the economic might of the fraternal countries and creates
favorable conditions for strengthening the defense capability of the socialist
countries and for preserving and strengthening peace throughout the world. What
specifically is the military-economic significance of socialist economic integra-
tion?

in the first place, the development of socialist economic integration multiplies

the economic (including the military-economic) possibilities of the member nations.
"...Hhen it is a question of cooperation among the socialist countries," L. l.
Brezhnev has pointed out, "then there is not merely the addition of forces but

rather their multiplying.”36 Integration means the joint tapping of natural re-
sources for common use, the joint construction of large industrial complexes de-
signed to satisfy the needs of all its members and cooperation planned for many
years to come between the enterprises and entire industrial sectors of our countries.
0n the basis of integration the socialist countries obtain favorable opportunities

105

FIIICMﬂﬂChhlllﬂECHVLY
FOR*0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY

to more fully utilize the benefits of the international division of labor, to
achieve thorough consideration of the requirements of the scientific and technical
revolution, to gain a fuller and more rational use of the labor resources, the pro-
ductive capital and natural possibilities and to substantially increase economic
efficiency. All of this helps to increase efficiency and reliability of defense
for the socialist states, it creates additional opportunities to successfully carry
out current economic tasks and makes it possible to reduce the economic strain
caused by ensuring constant high combat readiness of the armed forces, and conse-
quently, to maintain high rates of economic development and the growth of worker
prosperity.

Secondly, socialist integration makes it possible to more fully utilize the achieve-
ments of the scientific and technical revolution for the interests of defense. At
the present stage the optimum development of the productive forces can be achieved
only within a world-wide economic system. Economic integration has become a neces-
sary condition for organically uniting the achievements of the scientific and tech-
nical revolution with the advantages of the socialist economic system. Scientific
and technical cooperation makes it possible for the socialist countries to firmly
maintain the world technical level in all production spheres and this would be un-
attainable for individual small and medium-sized countries. The same determines
the great defense significance of scientific and technical cooperation among the
socialist countries. In addition, on this basis the cooperating nations increase
the efficiency of scientific research in coordinating it and in focusing efforts on
the key areas of scientific and technical progress which develop the economy along
the path of production intensification and higher product quality. All of this is
very important for defense, for V. I. Lenin taught that "the upper hand will be
gained by that side which has the greatest technology, organization and discipline
and the best machines."37 In possessing superior scientific and technical achieve-
ments, it is possible to respond to any of the enemy's military technical innova-
tions and promptly provide sobering responses which convince it of the hopelessness
of continuing the arms race.

Thirdly, socialist integration increases economic efficiency and mobility. This is
due to the fact that planned economic cooperation leads to an optimization of the
sectorial structure and territorial placement of production and to the creation of
optimum territorial economic complexes which are rationally interconnected; it de-
velops the capacity for the broad maneuvering of resources.

The communist party congresses of the socialist countries have noted with satisfac-
tion that the work in the area of carrying out the Comprehensive Program has led to
a situation where even now economic cooperation among the fraternal nations has been
significantly deepened and the complimentsriness of their economies has increased.
For example, take the problem of supplying the economy with raw materials and fuel.
0n the territory of the socialist countries which possess rich natural resources,
enterprises are being built jointly to produce scarce types of raw materials and
fuel. An example of cooperation in this area would be the construction of the vet'-
Ilimsk Pulp Plant with a capacity of 500,000 tone or the construction in Kingisepp
of the phosphorus mine and dressing combine. "...The carrying out of such vitally
important economic tasks for the 603 as supplying the energy and raw material base
and utilizing the achievements of the scientific and technical revolution for the
further construction of socialism have been possible only within the family of the

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fraternal socialist countries,"38 wrote the General Secretary of the SBPD_.§entral
Comittee, E. Honecker.

The socialist countries are working out and implementing long-range specific pro-
grams in order by common efforts to meet the needs for energy, fuel, the basic
types of raw materials and highly productive machinery and equipment. On the basis
of deepening the international division of labor, production specialization and co-
operation, sectorial and territorial ties are being broadened and unified supply
systems are being developed such as the Peace Unified Electric Power System, the
Friendship Oil Pipeline and the Fraternity Gasline. In improving transport ties
between them an important role is being played by the forming of an integrated
transport system based upon the further development of all types of transport, spe-
cialization and cooperation in producing the means of transport, the coordinated
development of the railroad and highway network, the building of reciprocal deep
railroad spurs of Soviet and western European gauges, the broadening of the canon
freight car fleet and other measures being carried out jointly in the area of the
comprehensive development of transport. All of this increases the economy's effi—
ciency and mobility.

As for the territorial placement of production, the socialist countries possess
exceptionally favorable opportunities. The world socialist system occupies a vast
territory. On this territory are found rich natural reserves of fuel, energy and
raw material resources as well as necessary conditions for producing agricultural
products. Its enormous extent in longitudinal and latitudinal directions, compact-
ness of placement and transport possibilities make it possible to locate the produc-
tive forces considering economic and other mutual interests, to effectively pro-
vide the necessary economic aid to one another and to widely maneuver material and
technical resources.

Of course, the question does not come down to the benefits of geographic position
and natural conditions. Their realisation, like the overcoming of historically
determined discrepancies in the structure and placement of production, depends upon
the nature of the economic and political system in the states, comprising the given
world system. In this regard the advantages of the socialist system are particu-
larly impressive. Precisely on their basis there has been the planned, steady and
rapid growth of economic might in each individual nation. The economic develop-
ment levels of the different nations have constantly and steadily been evened,
socialist integration has been deepened, economic mobility has been increased and
so forth. All of this is the result of the enormous efforts taken by the peoples
in the socialist countries under the leadership of the conunist and workers parties.
As a result of these collective efforts a dependable and effective system of all-
round cooperation has come into being and this meets the vital interests of the
peoples in the socialist countries and helps to strengthen the cause of peace.

The Development of Military-Economic Cooperation Among the Socialist Nations
As a response to the creation of the aggressive North Atlantic Military Bloc in
1969, the socialist states in May 1955 concluded a Pact of Friendshipg Cooperation
and Mutual Aid in Warsaw. Since then the Warsaw Pact member nations (Bulgaria,

Hungary, the GDR, Poland, Romania, the USSR and CSSR) have acted as an organised
defensive coalition. Each of them carries out defense tasks as part of cooperation.

107

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY

"The further deepening of cooperation among the socialist countries in the political,
economic, defense and other areas and the constructive activities of their joint
organizations, that is, the Warsaw Pact and CEHA, dependably serve the cause of
peace and progress."“° The economic, political and military alliance of the social—
ist countries has created favorable opportunities for their military-economic co-
operation.

The military-economic relations of the socialist countries are an essential compo-
nent part of the relations between them under conditions when there are a military
threat and the ensuing necessity for maintaining the high defense capability of the
socialist commmnwealth. These relations exist not only in the sphere of their in-
ternational exchange but also in production. They also encompass rear support for
the Joint Armed Forces. The specific forms of military-economic cooperation have
not remained fixed. They have been improved on the basis of the strengthening and
development of the world socialist system.

Lenin's "Draf t Directive of the Central Committee on Military Unity" (Hay 1919) is
of important significance for understanding the essence and basic development
trends of military-economic cooperation among socialist countries. It pointed out
that a necessary condition for success in a war which the RSPSR together with the
fraternal Soviet republics was forced to wage against world imperialism and the in-
ternal counterrevolution was the "unified command over all the Red Army detachments
and strictest centralization in the disposition of all the forces and resources of
the socialist republics, in particular, the entire military supply apparatus as
well as rail transport as a most important material factor in the war....“ In line
with this it was proposed "to recognize as unconditionally essential during the en-
tire time of a socialist defensive war to have the unification of the entire Red
Army supply question under the unified leadership of the Defense Council and the
other central RSFSR institutions....""1

The experience of jointly carrying out military-economic tasks by the Soviet repub-
lics in the Civil and Great Patriotic wars and during the years of peacetime con-
struction is presently being creatively applied by the nations of the world social-
ist system in solving specific problems of econoaic support for their defense.
Their military-economic relations are developing on a basis of deeper economic,
political and military cooperation.

One of the first forms of military-economic cooperation among socialist countries
was the aid in supplying weapons and other military-end articles. This form was
greatly developed in the concluding stage of the Great Patriotic Var. Upon the re-
quest of the governments in the liberated nations of Southeastern and Central
Europe, the USSR supplied them with weapons which made it possible to outfit 20 in-
fantry divisions, l artillery division and 3 antiaircraft artillery divisions, 6
artillery brigades, h tank destroyer brigades, 2 mortar brigades and l cavalry bri-
gade of the Polish Army; a infantry divisions, l cannon brigade and l tank de-
stroyer brigade of the Czechoslovak Army; 10 infantry divisions of the Yugoslav
People's Liberation Army; 5 infantry divisions of the Bulgarian People's Liberation
Army; 2 infantry divisions of the Romanian People's Army. Soviet tanks were used
to outfit tank corps and two separate tank brigades of the Polish Army, a separ-
ate tank brigade of the Czechoslovak Army and a separate Yugoslav tank brigade.

The USSR also turned over 630 aircraft for the air corps of the Polish Army, 691

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft for the Yugoslav Air Force and 25 aircraft for a Yugoslav air division.
Finally the fraternal armies were provided with supplies, food and fodder totaling
1.5 billion rubles.”

Bilateral military-economic cooperation among the socialist countries did not lose
its importance in the postwar period. "At present our motherland." stated F. Castro
in 1976, "possesses magnificently equipped armed forces and military equipment re-
ceived from the USSR. This great nation, regardless of the high cost of the weapons,
but considering the special economic conditions in Cuba. has supplied us with them
gratis.""3 But along with providing aid in equipping the armed forces and in train-
ing military personnel, other forms of military-economic cooperation are also de-
veloping on a basis of the further, closer unification of the socialist countries.

with the changeover to stable ties in the area of material production. cooperation
has begun to develop more widely in the production of military-end articles. The
comonwealth's nations have elaborated a coordinated military-technical policy, they
are standardizing military equipment and weapons, they exchange licences for the
production of weapons and military equipment and are carrying cut specialization and
cooperation of military production. On this basis favorable conditions have arisen
for the development of cooperation in the inferior elements of the military economy
as well. As a result, military economic cooperation among the socialist nations is
now developing in all the areas of economic support for their defense capability,
that is: in carrying out the tasks of strengthening economic might and military
economic potential. in creating and developing military production and in improving
rear troop support. This is becoming evermore effective.

One of the important development patterns of the world socialist system is the high
and steady economic growth rates due to which the socialist countries have rapidly
increased their economic potential. The average annual increase rates in industrial
product during 1951—1978 in the socialist nations were 9.6 percent, and in the de-
veloped capitalist nations 4.8 percent. The share of the socialist countries in the
total volume of world industrial product increased from 20 percent in 1950 to 1:0
percent at present.“

However important quantitative growth of economic night is for strengthening defense
capability, it does not fully describe the capabilities of the conunity's countries.
it is also important to consider that "along with the flourishing of each socialist
nation and the strengthening of the sovereignty of the socialist states, their ties
are becoming ever-closer, evermore elements of couonnese are arising in their poli-
cics. economy and social life and the development levels are being gradually evened
out. This process of a gradual merging of the socialist countries is now fully ap-
parent as a result pattern.""5

For determining the military economic potential of a coalition of nations there is
the widespread method of totaling the various indicators of economic might for the

countries comprising the coalition and comparing the obtained data with analogous
data for another coalition. For example. a comparison may be made of the total pro-
duction volumes of steel, electric power and other types of products, the share in
world industrial production is determined and so forth. Hithout denying the valid-
ity and advisability of such comparisons. we must emphasize the hypothetical and
limited nature of such a method, for the economic potential of a coalition is not a
more totaling of the potentials of the states which are members to the alliance.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is particularly important to bear in mind in comparing the two opposing world
systems which differ not only in terms of degree but also in the nature of integra-

tion among the member countries.

0n the basis of the-on-going growth and economic improvement in the socialist coun-
tries, the necessary conditions have come into being for the creation of a modern
defense industry in each of them. The Soviet Union which possesses a well-developed
defense industry, highly-skilled engineers and technicians as well as powerful sci-
entific potential has provided complete aid to the fraternal countries in the crea-
tion and development of military production, in its technical equipping and organi-
zation and in training specialist personnel.

In the interests of defense, each socialist nation presently has enterprises produc-
ing various weapons, ammunition, various types of military equipment and supply
articles for the servicemen. For example, Poland produces jet aircraft, helicopters,
combat ships, tanks, motor vehicles, various engineer and radar equipment, communi-
cations equipment and so forth. The CSSR manufactures diverse military-end products
including aircraft and motor vehicles. Military production has also been organized
in other nations. It is based upon the solid foundation of socialist ownership of
the means of production and planned national economic development in accord with

the demands of the economic laws of socialism. Completely foreign to it is a spirit
of gain and mercinariness as the scale of military production is determined by the
actual defense needs of the socialist countries.

The international division of labor, specialisation and cooperation are characteris-
tic not only for civilian production but also for military. The specialization of
each country in these most important spheres is determined by its economic speciali-
zation. For example, the GDR with its developed precision machine building, chemis-
try and electrical engineering is specialized in producing all sorts of instruments,
explosives and other military-end articles. Consideration of economic specializa-
tion conforms to the interests of each country. Integration processes in the de-
fense industry of the Harsaw Pact countries are evermore clearly apparent in the
process of developing their military-economic cooperation. This applies both to the
sphere of direct scientific and production activities in developing and producing
military equipment as well as to the questions of planning and realizing the program
for scientific and technical progress in the interests of improving and strengthen-
ing the material and technical base of defense.

The carrying out of a coordinated military-technical policy by the commonwealth's
countries is of exceptionally important significance, in making it possible to es-
tablish large series production of the most recent types of weapons, to standardize
the military equipment and armaments and to consider the availability of production
capacity, personnel and raw material and fuel resources in one or another nation in
organizing military production. All of this helps to reduce costs and to increase
the efficiency and economy of military production as well as the quality of military

equipment.

The material and technical base of the fraternal armies is constantly being improved
and their technical equipping raised. Thus, the number of tanks in a Soviet divi-
sion of the 1960's in comparison with 1939 has increased by 16-fold, for armored
personnel carriers by 37-fold while the weight of an artillerquortsr salvo has
risen by 30-fold. The motorization level of the motorized rifle formations in the

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bulgarian People's Army in recent years has risen by more than 30-fold and for the
tank formations by 50-fold. An artillery salvo of a modern Bulgarian division is
6—fold more powerful than that of a division from the World War II period. The
fire power, strike force and maneuverability of the units and formations in the
Hungarian People's Army have increased by several-fold. In comparison with the
Hhrld War II period, the fire power of a Romanian mechanized division has inzreased
by 3.5-fold. Each tank division of the Polish Army how has 2-fold more armored
equipment than existed in the entire Polish Army by the start of Hbrld Hhr II. The
present-day mechanization of the Polish Army is 35-fold more than in the prewar
times."6 The technical equipping of the armed forces in the other socialist coun-
tries is up to present-day demands and this comprises the material basis for their
successful carrying out of the most complex tasks.

The communist and workers parties in the socialist nations give great significance
to the development and improving of combat cooperation among their armies. The
military organization of the Warsaw Pact is constantly being improved and the forms
and methods of cooperation among the armies are being developed on the most diverse
levels. Actual combat cooperation has helped to develop effective forms for mutual
enrichment in the experience of troop control, for their military and political
training and all-round support.

The daily life of the armed forces is full of military-economic activities. Quite
understandably, military cooperation among the armies has numerous military-economic
aspects. These include the questions of troop rear support, the questions of
military-economic analysis in making decisions, economic work in the troops and much
else.

The carrying out of a coordinated military-technical policy by the commonwealth's
nations, cooperation in the area of military production, the development of stand-
ardization and unification. on the one hand, the unity of military theory and policy,
the uniform organizational structure and system of troop training, on the other,
create favorable opportunities for improving logistical support for the Joint Armed
Forces and for establishing a unified and standardized system of their supply.

These opportunities are being turned into reality in the process of daily troop
combat training, in the thorough study of the existing rear support systems, their
constant improvement, mutual enrichment and standardization.

There are various forms of cooperation among the fraternal armies in solving such
ouestions. For example. there has been the extensive exchange of specialists in
the aim of the rapid mastery of new military equipment by the men as well as for
gaining experience in servicing and operating it. Also widefound are the exchange
of military literature, the organization of exhibits and the holding of military-
theoretical conferences at which the most important problems of troop rear support
are examined among others.

5 study of the very rich experience of the Soviet Armed Forces is a most important
source for improving the fraternal armies. Joint troop and command-staff exercises
are an effective means for raising combat skill, for developing cooperation among
the armies and for improving their economic support. These exercises also serve to
further develop military science. Due to systematic military-scientific informa-
tion, the results of research conducted by military scientists in the socialist

111

‘h

FORiﬂﬂﬂCIAl.USE(NVLY
FOItOFFKJAl.USE10NlY

countries are becoming generally available in the fraternal arnies. Scientists

from the fraternal countries have contributed greatly to the development of
military-econonic theory.

Strong unity and solidarity of the socialist countries are an indispensable condi-

tion for their ever-new successes in strengthening their economic night and defense
capability.

10

ll

12

I3

16

15

FOOTNOTES

8. M. Shapoehnikov, "Vosponinaniya. Voyenno-nauchnyye trudy" [Menoirs. Military
Scientific Vorks], Moscow, 1976, p 666.

See: "Bol'shaya Sovetskaya Entsiklopediya," Vol 5, Moscow, 1971, p 260;
"Sovetskaya Voyennaya Entsiklopediya" [Soviet Military Encyclopedia], Vol 6,
Moscow, 1978, p 677.

M. V. Frunze, "Izbrannyye proizvedeniya" [Selected Uorks], Moscow, 1977, pp 167-
168.

See: K.Knorr. "Voyenny potentsial gosudaratv" [The Military Potential of States],
Moscow, 1960.

T. K. Pinletter, "Sila i politika" [Power and Policy], Moscow, 1956, p 216.

C. Bitch and R. McKean, "Voyennaye ekononika v yadernyy vek" [Economics of
Defense in the Nuclear Age], Moscow, 1966, p 50.

See: 3. Brodie, "Strategiya v vek raketnogo oruzhiya" [Strategy in the Missile
Age], Moscow, 1961, pp 186, 626.

See: 8. G. Strumilin, "lzbrannyye proirvedeniya" [Selected works], Vol 6,
Moscow, 1966, p 83.

See: 6. S. Kravchenko, "Ekonomika SSSR v gody Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny,"
p 170

See: "Voyenno-ekononicheskiye voproay v kurse politekononii" [Military-Boonenic
Questions in a Course of Political Bconony], Moscow, 1968, p 70.

K. Marx and Fe. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 26, p 665.

V. I. Lenin, PSS. Vol 1, p 72.

Ibid., Vol 3, p 39.

See: K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 26, p 653.

See: V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 1, p 80.

112

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(MVLY
5

7

FOR10FFKJAI.USE(MVLY

K. Marx and P. Eagles, "Soch.." Vol 24, pp 154, 155.

For comparison see: "Dvs podrsrdelsniye ohshchestvennogo produkts (metodologiys
deleniya)" [The Two Subdivisions of Social Production (The Methodology of Divid-
ing)], Moscow, 1976, p 25.

See: V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 34, p 173.

See: PROBLEMY MIRA I SOTSIALIZMA, No 5, 1974, p 95.

See: "Neuchno-tekhnicheskiy progress i revolyutsiya v voyennon dele" [Scientific-
Technical Progress and the Revolution in Military Affairs], Moscow, 1975. p 32.

M. N. Tukhschevskiy, "Izbrsnnyye proizvedeniys," Vol 2, p 182.

D. P. Ustinov, "Inbrennyye rechi i stet'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles],
Moscow, 1979, p 425.

See: "Partiys i ermiys," p 296.
L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kurson," Vol 7, p 676.

"Materialy Plenums Tsentrsl'nogo Konitets KPSS, 23 iyunye 1980 g." [Msterisls of
the Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee, 23 June 1980], Moscow, 1980, p 13.

K. Marx and P. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 12, p 725.

Ibid., pp 717-718.

See: PROBLEM? MIRA I SOTSIALIZMA, Mo 5, 1976, p 91.

See: A. S. Muzychenko, V. A. Dsrsnyuk and V. I. Vorob'yev, "Avtonstizstsiys
:grzggenggz tylom" [Automation of Beer Control and Command], Moscow, 1976,

A. A. Yepishev, "Mogucheye ornrhiye pertii" [A Powerful Htspon of the Party],
Moscow, 1973, pp 26-25.

See: 3. Kurkotkin, "Born Dy Crest October," TYL l SNABZHENIYB SOVBTSKIXH
VSSRUZHENNYKH SIL, No 2, 1978, p 7.

"Programme KPSS," p 20.

V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 61, p 160.

1bid., Vol 35, p 288.

See: "Rompleksnsys programme dsl'neyshego uglubleniys i sovsrshenstvoveniys

sotrudnichestvs i rszvitiys sotsielisticheskoy ekonomicheskoy integretsii stren-

chelnov SEV" [Comprehensive Program for Further Deepening and Inproving Coopers-
cion and for Developing Socialist Economic Integration Among the CEMA Member
Nations], Moscow, 1971, p 7.-

113

INJI10PFIC1Al.lﬂNB(HVLY
36

37

38

39

'00

lol

'02

‘03

Mo

‘05

'06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

L. 1. Brezhnev, "Lcninakin kuxeon," Vol 6. p 304.
V. I. Lenin, PSS. Vol 36. p 116.

PRAVDA. 4 October 1974.

Since 1962, Albania has not participated in the work of the Warsaw Pact Organiza-
tion and in 1968 officially vithdrew from it.

"Materialy Plenuna Tsentrel'nogo Koniteta KPSS._23 iyunya 1980 3.," p 14.

V. I. Lenin, PSS. Vol 38, p 1000.

See: "Iatoriya KPSS." Vol 5, Book 1, p 574.

PRAVDA, 31 January 1976.

"Narodnoye khozyayetvo SSSR v 1978 3.," p .57.

L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskia kureon," Vol 5, p 1953.

See: "Boyevoye eodruzheetvo bratekikh narodov i amiy" [Co-bat Cooperation of
the Fraternal Peoples and Arliee], Moscow. 1975; ”Varehavekiy Dogovor-aoyuz vo

inya nira i eoteializna" [The Hareav Pact-An Alliance for the Sake of Peace
and Socialism], Moscow. 1980.

116

FOIOFHCIALUSBONLY
FOB OFTNCJAI.USElMNLY

CHAPTER IV. THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ECONOMIC SUPPORT POR DEFENSE

Intensive management and a shift of emphasis to effectiveness and quality are typi-
cal of a developed socialist society. This assumes a more detailed understanding
of the essence and mechanism of the action of economic laws. an improvement in
management methods and a rise in vorkers' activeness in the struggle to fulfill
economic plans. This is why increasingly complex tasks are being advanced for eco-
nomic science in the given phase and economic educatioh'is assuming primary impor-

tance.

The issues of increasing effectiveness and quality are of exceptional importance

not only in economics, but also in military organizational development. They are
specific, require consideration of the features in the defense sphere and, conse-
quently, assume a further development of military-economic science and an improve-

ment in the economic training of military personnel.

1. The Need, Essence and Features of an Economic Approach to Defense Problems

The effectiveness of military expenditures cannot be viewed abstractly as a
standard-normative category. It reflects the class essence of society and its
basic economic lav. If surplus value is the law of movement in the capitalist
method of production. then profit and its amount and rate are necessary components '
in the concept of the effectiveness of economic support for this society's military
needs. The social content of defense expenditures of effectiveness in a socialist
society is determined by the basic economic law of socialism, which subordinates
production to fullest satisfaction of the needs and comprehensive development of
workers. The comprehensive nature of development, the consumption and the activi-
ties both of an individual and of society depend on saving time. wrote K. Marx.
Marx considered the saving of time and its planned distribution by production sec-
tors to be the “first economic law" of socialism.1

Being forced to divert a portion of its personnel and funds to military purposes.
a socialist society strives for that use of them in which the goal is achieved in
the most economic way. V. I. lanin stated that "the cause of defending the Soviet

republic insistently demands the greatest economy of personnel and the most produc-
tive application of the people's labor."2 This task has special significance in

the defense sphere because here we are speaking not just about the expenditure and
replacement of personnel and resources; the lives of millions of people and the fate

of revolutionary achievements depend on the effectiveness of their use.

F03‘0FFKJA1.USE¢HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And so the social essence of the category of effectiveness of using funds intended
for military purposes is predetermined by the basic economic law. In a socialist

a1 defense with a minimum diversion of personnel and resources for the accomplish-

ment of the direct tasks of building communism. The Greeting of the CPSU Central
Committee, Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and USSR Council of Ministers to

Forces emphasises: ”The essence of our military policy is everything for an effec-
tive defense, and nothing more than this. The Soviet Union never has armed itself

for thg sake of armament; it never was and never will be an instigator of the arms
race."

The problem of the effective utilization of resources earmarked for defense is a
specific one. It combines not only economics but also political and military inter-
ests and factors. The end result which must be achieved is by its nature a politi-
cal result or a military result or both simultaneously. And although it also has an
economic content, in that it affects the development of productive forces and the
people's welfare in one way or another, it is directly incommensurate with economic
expenditures. A military-economic analysis views these expenditures as the price of
the political or military effect obtained. Depending on the nature of the specific
task, the unique combination of economic, political and military factors may advance
to the foreground and attach decisive importance first to one, then the other. In-
asmuch as different tasks are being accomplished at different levels of leadership
and in different areas of military organisational development, the approach to their
economic evaluation and the role of economic considerations cannot be identical.

In one instance the economic factor plays a decisive role, and in another it ac-
quires importance only "with other things being equal."

A number of specific features are determined by the fact that the effect obtained
and costs connected therewith are incommensurate in the defense sphere. By virtue
of this we have to compare not costs with results directly, but either compare
variants in achieving a set goal by costs (minimisation of costs) or, based on
specific costs, select the most suitable of possible goals (maximization of results).

These are the basic kinds of tasks being accomplished in the process of a military-
economic analysis.

The problem of the effective use of defense-allocated resources is a complex one
requiring a systems approach, strict subordination according to degree of impor-
tance, a certain sequence of resolution and a precise coordinated system of criteria
which consider the specific nature of tasks being accomplished at different levels
of economic support of defense.

suggested reducing it to a specific size (7 million rubles) and, based on this

amount, "calculate the proportions in which this amount must be designated for
particular purposes within the framework of the ship repair program, of our ship

ll6

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

repair yards to metal articles needed bv the peasants.M This example attests to
the precise subordination of problems being resolved according to the degree of
their importance. and of the need for a concrete analysis of the economic, political
and military aspects of the problem.

The prohlea of effectiveness has its specific features at every level and in every
part of economic support of defense. At the highest level it must be viewed in
conformity with the sun total of social needs, interests and relationships and must
be evaluated both from the position of social production as a whole as well as that
of the armed forces, since the former determines military-economic capacities and
resources and the latter determines concrete requirements for military economics.
The effectiveness of economic support of defense in this case will appear as the
ratio of the state's military might (the result) to the scale of the functioning
military economic system (the costs connected with maintaining military might)-VH
[military might] to VD! [military-economic might]. The meaning of this ratio is
simple. If two states have identical military force, then the effectiveness of eco-
nomic support of defense is higher for the one which achieved this result with the
least scale of military economy and the fever costs.

This ratio can be presented in different forms. If we are speaking not of the
status at this very moment, but of states' maximum capabilities, then military
potential (VP) must be used in place of Vii. and economic potential (KP). economic
might (EH) or military-economic potential (VB?) must be used in place of ma depend-
ing on the aspect of the problem. Either the minimisation of costs at a given level
of military might or maximization of result with given resources can be used as the
criterion of effectiveness. '

The effectiveness of economic support of defense can be expressed quantitatively by
various indicators, which are constructed or. the basis of a comparison of results
and costs. It is customary to characterise military might using indicators of

troop strength. number of combat-ready divisions and numbers of the basic types of
weapons and combat equipment in armies of the belligerent countries. Corresponding
data are given in absolute proportions and in relative terms, as of a specific
moment and in the dynamics. Data on human resources, the amount of productive
capital, production volume of basic kinds of products, the gross product and nation-
al income are used as indicators of economic potential and of economic and military-
economic night. The different forms of comparison of these two groups of indicators
are the concrete indicators of effectiveness of economic support for defense. None
of them pretends to be universal. Each one describes effectiveness only to a cer-
tain degree and highlights only a certain aspect and a separate side of it. Pot
example, the ratio of troop strength to human resources shows the degree of their
mobilization5 and the ratio of the amount of weapons supplied to troops to economic
resources describes the effectiveness of resource utilization for military purposes.
A ratio given previously is very indicative: with approximately 3-6 times less
steel and 3-3.5 times less coal, the USSR produced twice the combat equipment of
Germany during the Great Patriotic "at. These data persuasively indicate that the
Soviet Union subordinated economic resources for winning victory in the var more
fully than did Germany and used them more efficiently.

The effectiveness of economic support for defense is shaped on the basis of the ef-
fectiveness with which all component elements of the military econaaic systems and

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

all its parts function. Therefore specific criteria and indicators of effective-
ness characterizing the work of each section of the military-economic system and
each stage of the military-economic process are of exceptionally great importance
for its optimization. Specific criteria are constructed so as to reflect the spe-
cific nature of the section being described, and at the same time so as to enter
the framework of requirements of general effectiveness criteria. Here a breakdown
of the process of economic support for defense may reach the primary part of each
structural unit: the enterprise. shop, brigade and work station in the production
unit and to the lowest section, service or subunit in the logistical support system.
Optimum functioning of the military-economic system assumes the presence of a de-
veloped system of mutually related, precisely subordinated criteria for its optimi-
cation.

Effectiveness criteria for its primary park-military production—are the next ef-
fectiveness criteria of the military-economic system in rank. With respect to the
production costs of military goods, their measurement bears no substantial features
or differences at all from the measurement of resources of public production. The
result, on the other hand, is very specific-dc must be measured not only with an
economic yardstick, but with a military one as well. Herein lies the chief diffi-
culty for developing an effectiveness criterion for military production. Based on
the purpose of the military-economic system. the result of functioning of military
production is determined not only by the amount of manufactured products. but also
by what kinds of weapons and combat equipment are produced and how the aggregate
combat effect expected from the use of these weapons and equipment is correlated
with costs. For example, the Soviet T-34 tank was one of the most effective kinds
of weapons in World war II. It is believed that the colossal expenses of the V-Z
were not repaid by the effective operation of this kind of weapon, and that fascist
Germany's only weapon meeting the demand of maxim effectiveness with minimum ex-
penditure of personnel and resources for its production was the antitank rocket
launcher, the l-‘auetpatrome.6

Selection of weapon systems has seemed exceptionally great importance in the modern
scientific-technical revolution. No matter how well and economically organised
military production may be. there can be no mention of its high effectiveness or
that of the military-economic system as a whole if the weapons being manufactured
are obsolete or do not correspond to the nature of missions assigned the armed
forces. That means a comprehensive and scientifically substantiated approach is
needed to determining military production programs with consideration of the very
latest achievements of military-technical thinking and the demands of modern mili-
tary art. The development of precise criteria of military production effectiveness
is a necessary condition for success in this matter. This is a complex knot in
which technical. economic and military problems are intertwined, which require a
complex approach and the use of economic-uthematical modeling and modern computer
technology.

The problem of effectiveness of the armed forces rear and the entire system of their.
logistical support is no less specific. The effectiveness of this part of the
military-economic system can be defined as the capability of providing troops with
weapons, combat equipment and other military goods on a timely basis, in the neces-
sary amounts, with the necessary assortment and with minimum costs. The determina-
tion, measurement snd quantitative expression of the results of work represent

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR(MHH(JAI.USE(MVLY

great difficulty. He will touch on two specific problems without going into the
special issues in the work of the armed forces rear.

The first problem is what should be considered a result, how it is to be measured
and what indicators should be used to express it. Different indicators are being
used: the amount of ammunition, fuel, rations and other military goods supplied to
the troops and used by them for an entire war, for an operation or for one day in
physical indicators (tons, standard rail cars, and so on); the amount of food prod-

ucts procured, shipping volume by different kinds of transportation; amount of re-
pairs performed, and so on.

The question of a development of generalizing indicators for the operation of the
armed forces rear thus arises above all, but matters are not reduced just to this.
In describing the amount of work performed by the rear, all these indicators are
insufficiently tied in with results of troop activities. The fact is that logisti-
cal support is not a goal in itself, but the means to achieve a goal assigned to
the troops. Therefore, the most important characteristic of the rear's effective-
ness should be considered its conformity to the missions of the armed forces and
its direction toward their achievement. If such conformity is absent, an increase
in the amount of rear activities may not signify an increase in effectiveness;
moreover, it may lead to a drop in effectiveness. As an example, let us refer to
the evidence of American military economist Bccles, who analyzed the activities of
the supply service during Uorld War II and concluded that "the volume of logistical
work tends toward an uncontrollable expansion or exceeding of the bounds of any
reasonable proportions...." He wrote that there were instances where American
naval supply units "operated so inefficiently that they not only did not contribute
to support of the fleet, but, to the contrary, became the chief consumers of sup-
plies coming to it."7

It follows from what has been said that the work effectiveness criteria and indi-
cators of the armed forces rear must be linked with the end result of troop activi-
ties or else they will not serve for optimization of the logistical support system
to the proper extent.

The second problem concerns a determination of the contribution of the armed forces
rear toward attainment of the overall result, and an elimination of the distorting
effect of external factors on work effectiveness indicators of the rear. The fact
is that particular features of military production on the one hand and features of
troop activities on the other influence the work effectiveness of the rear. High
mobility of war production and the capability to adapt rapidly to changing troop
requirements permits a decrease in stockpiles of military goods in the lowest parts
of the military-economic system and a reduction in costs involving attainment of a
specific effect. And to the contrary, if production does not ensure the prompt
fulfillment of troop requests, this has a negative effect on the work effectiveness
of the armed forces rear. Various features of troop operations also have a sub-
stantial influence on it: their disposition (the compact or excessively extended
nature of lines of communication affects the volume of logistical work); their
combat skill (it has a direct influence on the amount of ammunition, fuel and so on
required for performing a combat mission); the operational-tactical and military-
economic competence of the command, and so on.

119

FOIioiFKJAl.USEIHNLY
' roe OFFICIAL use ONLY

Both problems lead to the idea of an ever-increasing universalization of military-
economic knowledge and the need for it to train highly qualified military person-
nel. There were instances during the war, recalls Mar SU G. K. Zhukov, when "tens
of thousands of tons of ammunition were put out witout result. And how many un-
substantiated and unjustified regroupings and different kinds of troop movements
were performed during the war! A colossal amount of fuel and other costly material
was consumed for all this and, most important, the people's efforts were spent
without any benefit."8 This emphasizes once again the importance of military-
economic training not only for military personnel engaged directly in military-
economic functions, but also for commanders and political workers. Speaking at the
All—Army Conference for Improving Troop Helfare, USSR Minister of Defense Mar 50

D. F. Ustinov expressed this idea very clearly. ”There is a need to improve the
style of all our economic work and achieve its highest effectiveness," he said.

"We leaders must be the example in this. Commanders-in-chief, commanders, politi-
cal workers and supply service workers are not simply people holding particular
posts, but active conductors of party policy in our Armed Forces, including in the
sphere of economic organizational development within them."9

2. Military Economics as a Science and Its Significance in Training Military
Personnel

The training of highly qualified military economists and the raising of the economic
education of all Soviet Army and Envy specialists and all military personnel is a
necessary condition for high effectiveness in utilizing funds earmarked for defense.
Life suggests that every officer now must be familiar with a broad range ofmdlitary—-
economic issues both of a general theoretical and applied nature. He has to know
the operating features of economic laws in the defense sphere and master the funda-
mentals of military-economic analysis and an approach to daily tasks with economic
criteria so as to raise the effective use of funds and physical assets and the ef-
fectiveness of all work. This also is of great importance for econonic indoctrina-
tion of personnel and for increasing their activeness in combat training and improv-
ing efficiency.

A well-developed and differentiated system of such education has been created in
the country on the basis of resolutions of congresses of the party, which teach
that economic education of all cadres and broad masses of workers acquires primary
importance in the present stage of building communism. It is in this system that
many millions of workers of industry and agriculture acquired economic knowledge.

In further developing economic education, the party is striving to ensure that it
contributes to the maximum dissemination of foremost erperience of labor organisa-
tion everywhere and to the introduction of the achievements of science and technol-
ogy in production.10 All this also applies fully to the economic education of offi-
cers and all military personnel.

A study of Marxist-Leninist political economy and other economic sciences comprises
the basis of economic education. Economic laws dictate behavioral logic for every
Soviet citizen, including military personnel. By arming a person with a knowledge
of objective economic laws, political economy permits a correct evaluation of
states' military-economic capacities and an understanding of the features of their
realization as determined by a given economic and political system. But in order
to take account of the demands of economic laws in the military sphere knowledge-
ably, it is absolutely necessary for a person to have a knowledge of military

120

I“)! 0F1ﬂ€1A1.USI§(H‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

science as well as of concrete military-economic and special disciplines, and he
needs a specific goal orientation for this knowledge. Military-economic theory
contributes to this goal orientation. Its study provides the necessary connection
between political economy and other economic sciences on the one hand and with
military sciences on the other. It activates and integrates this knowledge and
permits an understanding of the operating features of economic laws in the defense
sphere and mastery of the methodology of an approach to and proper accounting of
their requirements in daily military activities. In addition, in training engineer
and economic cadres, it is the general theoretical base for specific military-
economic disciplines being studied, it allows a detailed comprehension of their
content and performs a methodological function with respect to them. Let us dwell

on the question of the subject and place of the theory of military economics among
other sciences.

It was explained in Chapter I that military economics as an objective reality has
two aspects: technical-econoeic and socioeconomic. The first aspect is studied by
military-technical and special sciences, while the second, i.e., social relation-
ships formed in connection with the production, distribution, exchange and consump-
tion of military goods, is studied by the theory of military economics. Having
originated on the boundary between economic and military sciences and relying on
them as its basis, the theory of military economics makes extensive use of their
scientific apparatus. For example, the categories "military-economic potential,"
"military production" and "military consumption" are derivative from the categories
"economic potential," "production" and "consmption" and express interrelationships
and phenomena similar to those reflected in the given categories of political econo-
my. The presence of general elements in these phenomena permits use of one and the
same categories. At the same time, the specific nature of these phenomena in the
sphere of military economics is emphasised by the attribute "military": military
production, military consumption and so on. Use of these categories, a clarifica-
tion of the specific nature of the action of laws uncovered by political economy in
the sphere of military economics, reliance on provisions of military sciences, and
application of the material of specific economic and military-technical disciplines
comprise a necessary condition for developing a truly scientific method and a sys-
tem of categories, laws and principles of military-economic science.

The most essential aspects of military-economic relations and the stable cause-and-
effect ties between phenomena and processes in military economics find their reflec-
tion in objective laws. Penetrating deeper and deeper into the essence of military-
economic relations, military economics as a science uncovers the laws and principles
internally inherent to them and the mechanism of their action and use.

An increasingly deeper penetration into the essence of military-economic relation-
ships and processes presumes an understanding not only of their qualitative aspects,
but of their quantitative definiteness as well. The possibilities of a quantitative
expression of particular military-economic processes are predetermined, on the one
hand, by the nature of these processes and their inherent dialectics of quantity
and quality and, on the other hand, by the level of science development, i.e., by
the degree of understanding of the essence of these processes and by successes of
mathematics and computer technology in the matter of their formalization.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The exceptional complexity of the relationships they express and the high degree of
abstraction is a feature of economic laws. In describing economic laws, P. Engels
wrote that "none of them have any other reality than in an approximation, in a
trend, in an average, but not in direct actuality. This occurs in part because
their action crisscrosses with the simultaneous action of other laws and in part as
a result of their nature as concepts."11 For example, studying the dynamics of the
average profit rate, K. Marx identifies first of all the main interrelationship—
the inversely proportionate dependence of the amount of the profit rate on the level
of organic construction and turnover time of capital; and secondly, the large number
of factors counteracting a reduction in the mean profit rate and giving its law the
nature only of a trend toward reduction.

The features of economic laws generate a skeptical attitude toward their mathemati-
cal interpretation in some economists and mathematicians. For example, N. Hiener,
one of the originators of cybernetics, believed, in emphasizing the complexity and
dynamic nature of economic phenomena, that it was "useless and dishonest" to ascribe
a special precision to economic values and "deception and an empty waste of time" to
apply precise formulas to them.12

With respect to the laws of military economics. these features stand out even more
starkly in them, since here we are dealing with secondary, derivative relationships,
and a need to consider overlapping actions of economic laws, laws of warfare and
military-economic laws and principles. Nevertheless, an ever-deeper understanding
of the essence of these relationships, clarification of the action mechanism of
their inherent laws and the level of development reached by mathematics and computer
technology have opened up new opportunities for creating mathematical models of
economic, including military-economic, processes. The works of academicians L. V.
Ksntorovich and V. S. Nemchinov, professors V. V. Novozhilov and A. L. Lur'ye and
others made an important contribution to this aatter. In recent years the quantita-
tive aspect of military-economic phenomena is attracting more and more attention of
military economists.

Based on the general law of war’s dependence on economics, military-economic science
studies concrete forms of their interaction determined by the given level of eco-
nomic development and its inherent method of warfare, i.e., it studies above all
historically concrete methods of economic support of wars. By clarifying available
economic capabilities and demands of warfare and the content of military-economic
relations forming objectively on these bases, it reveals natural ties of military-
economic phenomena and processes inherent to a given stage of development. By
studying them in close connection with the technical aspect of military economics,
it serves as a theoretical basis for comprehending concrete manifestations of these
principles in individual sectors of military-economic efforts (transportation,
supply, finances and so on), which are studied by sectorial and special military-
economic disciplines. The theory of military economics is linked with these dis-
ciplines, relies on their data, generalizes them and is enriched and developed as

a result of the interaction with them.

Concrete methods of economic support of wars are examined in their development.
Military economics is linked with economic history and military-historical science
and has its own history. Hhat occurs is not a simple accumulation and systematisa-
tion of knowledge (laws, categories and principles) which reflect processes of the
economic support of warfare more and more fully and correctly. In time, certain

122

FOR OFFICIAL L82 ONLY
IYJR10F1WCJAL USE2CNULY

conclusions of military-economic science lose their significance while others are
updated and transformed. New fields of science open up and new problems appear
simultaneously with this.

And so military-economic relations in their integrity are the subject of the theory
of military economics. In studying the relationships of production, distribution,
exchange and consumption of military goods in their internal unity and causality and
in their interconnection with the technical aspect of military economies, with all
economics and with political and military affairs, military economics, as a science,
clarifies objective laws and principles of economic support for were in different
stages of historical development. Together with other economic, military and spe-
cial sciences, it is called upon to substantiate scientifically the most effective
solutions to contemporary military-economic tasks of defending the socialist home-
land and maintaining a constant combat readiness guaranteeing an immediate rebuff

to any aggressor.

Military economics is a profoundly class, party science. In its goals, method,
class-political character and ideological directions, it is the opposite of various
bourgeois military-economic teachings. In serving the selfish interests of the im-
perialist bourgeoisie, these teachings are reactionary and antiscientific. Serving
the high goals of defending socialism and the building of communism, and the cause
of peace and progress represents the firm foundation of the genuine scientific and
progressive nature of socialist military-economic theory.

The struggle of the two ideologies is especially acute in the military-economic
sphere. Bourgeois military economists deal not only in questions of aggressive
wars, but also in their justification. In contrast to this, the military-economic
science of socialist society exposes all apologies of militarism, reveals the true
substance and reactionary nature of imperialism's military economics, and clarifies
the need. features and advantages of socialist military economics and ways of real-
izing them.

In the process of its development, every science develops a method corresponding

to its subject and tasks. The development of military economics as a science is
linked inseparably with the application of laws and categories of materialistic
dialectics to an analysis of the economic support of wars. This permitted identify-
ing military-economic relationships from among the sum total of social relation-
ships and clarifying their natural link with the development of economics, politics
and warfare, the dialectical unity of which is determined by the development of the
economic support of wars. The alternation periods of slow evolutionary changes and
revolutionary leaps marking a change in the methods of economic support for were
arose as a result of corresponding natural processes in the development of produc-
tive forces, production relationships and the political superstructure. The laws
and categories of materialistic dialectics are the basis for understanding specific
military-economic principles and categories. The method of military economics is
nothing more than concretieation of dialectical materialism as applicable to its
features and tasks. It is characterised by the broad use of mathematics and elec-
tronic computer technology for the purpose of understanding the quantitative rela-
tionships of processes being studied as well as for modeling military economics and
developing the foundations of military-economic analysis and criteria for selection
of optimum solutions. The need for considering a wide range of factors relating
only to strictly military economics, but also to the entire national economy,

123

IIIICHﬂﬂCIAI.USE(ﬂ‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

politics and warfare, and the need for comparing and correlating quite heterogene-
ous phenomena of economics and warfare reinforce the importance of a universal
method-“materialistic dialecticsnfor military-economic science.

Military economics as a science studies a most important field of military organiza-
tional development, and this determines its importance for training military cadres
and elaborating the most important theoretical and applied problems of economic
support of the armed defense of socialist countries. In training commanders, polit-
ical workers and specialists in various areas, it is important to arm them with a
system of military, economic and special knowledge revealing the complex mechanism
of objective laws by which the military organism functions, including military-
economic laws. This is what goes to create the foundation on which the high politi-
cal awareness of military personnel and their desire to work imaginatively and
zealously, thus achieving high effectiveness in utilizing resources earmarked for
defense, alone can be realized in concrete deeds. A knowledge of military economics
is necessary for developing the correct over-all view and concrete methods and
methodologies of military-economic analysis, which is beginning to receive increas-
ing emphasis in the work of army and navy economic and engineering-technical ape-
cialists. The methodological function of military economics is of very great im-
portance in training personnel.

The growing importance of economic education of military personnel is reflected in
the programs of military educational institutions and the command training system,
in agitprop work and in the military press. This is quite natural, since the task
of improving the economic training of officer personnel can be accomplished success-
fully only on condition of universal attention to it and complete use of available
reserves.

No matter how much the training process improves in academies and schools and no
matter how much the propaganda of military-economic knowledge is battered. the offi-
cer's independent work will of course remain as before the basic method for increas-
ing his level of economic education. As a rule, independent work introduces a
certain goal-orientation, inventiveness and interest in training, since it usually
contains an impetus coming from life and from day-to-day work and a search for
answers to questions posed by practical work.

The most important element in independent work is above all a detailed and imagina-
tive study of the works of Marx, Engels and Lenin and documents of the CPSU and
Soviet government. They contain the foundation of success, since works by the
founders of Marxism-Leninisn have a permanent ideological and methodological impor-
tance and their study helps develop a correct approach to contemporary military-
economic problems. Marxism-Leninism created an ordered teaching on war and the
army, it revealed natural interrelationships of war and economics, and clarified the
essence, class nature, place and role of military economics. The works of Lenin for
the first time provided a scientific analysis of economic principles of imperial-
istic wars, of the essence of "a capitalist economy for war" and military-state
monopoly capitalism, and of a broad range of military-economic problems of imperial-
ism.

Lenin formed the foundations of Soviet military economics as a science and provided
ingenius examples of a practical solution to problems of economic support of the de-
fense of socialism. A study of Lenin's work is a necessary condition for thorough
mastery of military-economic science.

124
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ROR OFFIClAllJSEINVLY

It is important in any matter not only to master knowledge, but also to acquire an
ability to apply the knowledge obtained. Samples of a capable implementation of
theoretical conclusions are provided by the many-sided work of the Communist Party
in the field of economic support of national defense. Its basis consists of Lenin-
ist ideas on the importance of the state's economic organisation, on the unity of
the front and rear, on the entire country's conversion to a single military camp
during war, on the need for serious and comprehensive preparation for the defense
of socialism and others. How did the party apply them in fact and how did it de-
velop them? An answer to these questions is provided by corresponding party and
state documents and by the works of L. I. Brezhnev and other party and state
leaders. A study of them arms one with knowledge of practical party experience and
the method of an imaginative approach to tasks of economic support of a defense of
socialism's achievements.

There is a very rich material contained in the basic works by collectives of Soviet
scientists devoted to the Civil and Great Patriotic wars and in works by Soviet
state, party, economic and military workers. They cover specific issues of economic
support of our motherland's defense in various phases of its historic history. They
clearly and persuasively show the basic features and advantages of Soviet military
economics and expose the reactionary teachings of the apologists of imperialism.
works dedicated to contemporary military economics are of special interest.

In refuting bourgeois military-economic teaching on the main, fundamental points, it
is impossible not to see or take account of developments on specific military-
economic problems in capitalist countries. Take, for example, the system for eval-
uating and substantiating decisions in the field of military organizational develop-
ment, the so-called PPS (planning-programming-budgeting) system. According to
foreign specialists, the effectiveness of resource utilization is increased as a
result of its application. For example, the 0.8. Defense Department used it to es-
tablish the irrationality of a large number of systems under development (the 3-70
bomber, Skybolt air-launched missile) and rejected them. Conversion to the PPB
system facilitated development of a standardization of military products. For ex-
ample, while there were 78 types of internal combustion engines of 8-20 hp in the
0.5. Armed Forces in world War 11, now a total of six models have been developed for
this range of power and the number of parts for manufacturing engines has been cut
tens of times. 3 There is no doubt that the PPB system facilitates a rationalisa-
tion of imperialism's war machinery, but in serving the interests of the military-
industrial complex it is being used to intensify the arms race. with respect to
general theoretical matters, bourgeois scientists capable of providing valuable
work in specialized fields cannot be believed one bit when the talk turns to general
theory. Lenin directed attention to this repeatedly, emphasizing that the bourgeois

"professor-economists are nothing more than learned henchmen of the class of capi-
talists...."

3. Current Issues of Hilitary-Bconomic Theory and Practice

New opportunities for productive studies both of a general theoretical and basic
nature as well as of an applied nature, open up at the boundary of different sci-

ences. Military economics is the junction point in which social and natural sci-
ences, economics, politics and military affairs interact. There is a broad field
for study here and its currency and importance is exceptionally great.

125

FOIIOFFICLA1.USEIMVLY
FOR QFFICIAL USE ONLY

An increase in the role of basic, general theoretical research is a general

feature of modern times. The correctness of words to the effect that there is noth-
ing more practical than a good theory is especially understandable under conditions
where science more and more is becoming a direct productive force and when the gap
between Iajor scientific discoveries and their realization is being reduced sharply.
The present practice of financing scientific research and development projects in
developed countries, including the USSR, attests to the fact that approximately
one-third of appropriations are spent to conduct scientific research and two-thirds
for development work. At the same time one notes a certain increase in the share
of appropriations for basic research.

Every science has its own general theoretical and applied tasks, and they are
present in military economics as well. General theoretical research has acquired
special urgency. The fact is tnat essential changes are occurring in economic sup-
port of defense. They are caused, first of all, by the rapid development of produc-
tive forces and economic capacities as a result of the scientific-technical revolu-
tion; secondly, by the resulting revolutionary transformations in the means of

armed warfare and in military affairs as a whole; and thirdly, by the dynamic
process of opposition of the two world systems-capitalist and socialist. These
changes concern not the individual aspects of economic support for defense, but
rather encompass the entire system of military-economic relationships as a whole
which are being improved constantly. Therefore, it is necessary to have systelatic,
complex general theoretical research in the field of military economics which per-
mits delving deeper into the essence of military-economic processes, reflecting
them in the form of a strictly subordinated system of laws, categories and princi-
ples; to generalize and systematise the knowledge gained in concrete economic and
military disciplines; and analyze current military-economic activities. These are
necessary conditions for the scientific substantiation and perfection of the state's

military policy and of all endeavors in the field of economic support of defense.

As the essence of military-economic processes and their qualitative aspects are
clarified, the center of gravity shifts to their quantitative characterization, to
the conduct of applied military-economic research and to the development of practi-
cal reconmendations on the most important tasks and directions of economic support
of defense under present-day conditions. The level reached in development of math-
ematics and computer technology creates new opportunities for mathematical modeling
of military-economic processes, but these opportunities can be realized only on the
basis of broadening the understanding of the essence of military-economic phenomena
and their inherent objective laws. Therefore a detailed theoretical elaboration of
military-economic categories and laws as a single, thoroughly articulated and
strictly subordinated systel has become the primary task of the general theory of
military economics in the present stage. This is a complex, many-sided task requir-
ing methodological unity and coordination of efforts of different collectives
specializing in specific areas of work. There are numerous outputs from it to con-
temporary practical military-economic activity, since it is inseparably linked with
a proper understanding of the essence and main trends in development of military
economics and ways of strengthening military-economic potential, with an increase
in effectiveness of utilizing funds allocated for defense, and with questions of
personnel training.

Those basic directions of economic support of national defenses mentioned in the
first chapter draw attention above all among the_rather broad range of current

126

ETHICHWICLALIJSBIMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military—economic problems. Each of them requires a comprehensive theoretical
elaboration on the basis of a complex approach. In addition, there are problems
permeating all directions of military-economic endeavor.

Strengthening of the military-economic potential is one of the basic areas of eco-
nomic support for defense and at the same time one of the fundamental problems of
military-economic science. A comprehensive study of the content and structure of
military-economic potential and of its interdependence with economic and military
might is necessary for a study of the military-economic capabilities of one's own
state and of probable enemies, of the existing balance of forces and of their
dynamics; and it is necessary for developing military policy and doctrire. Oppor-
tunities are especially broad here and there is an especially insistent need for
applying achievements of mathematics and contemporary computer technology. There
must be a theoretical elaboration of the methodology and procedures of mathematical
modeling of social reproduction. A special complexity is presented by an account-
ing for the effect of socioeconomic factors on the dynamics of economic might and
military-economic capabilities. Practical studies of the military-economic capa-
bilities of individual states and coalitions must develop on the basis of the solu-
tion to theoretical problems of military-economic potential.

Economic mobilization. With the appearance of military needs, a differentiation of
military and civilian production occurs, specific interrelationships form between
them, and the problem of a proper distribution of personnel and resources intended
for satisfaction of particular social needs arises. Study of the interrelation-
ships of military and civilian production in each phase of development is a neces-
sary condition for clarifying the limits of economic mobilisation, the magnitude of
the military-economic potential, optimum ratios of military and civilian production,
ways and methods for military reorganization of the economy and a number of other
problems which must be solved in order to develop the most common guidelines in the
field of economic support for defense. The study of this group of relationships
has been given especially great attention since Horld War I, which required the
reorganization and subordination of the entire national economy of warring states

to the satisfaction of military needs. Nevertheless, these issues are very current
even today, since fundamental changes in the method of economic support for defense
and warfare which occurred in the postwar period introduced much that was new to the
interrelationship of military and civilian production.

One of the features of economic mobilization in the present stage is its multiple

variants, determined by the possibility of quite varied wars, requirements of which
for a military reorganization of the economy differ substantially in content, scale
and time. Another feature consists of the sharply increased importance of mobility

of the economic system. The economic system must adapt rapidly to changing condi-
tions and needs of warfare, caused first of all by the multiple variants of economic

mobilization; secondly, by the fact that the scope and composition of military needs
in the era of scientific-technical revolution are subject to frequent abrupt changes
in peacetime, let alone in wartime: and thirdly, by the fact that the status and
conditions for the functioning of the national economy also will change often and
abruptly in modern warfare as a result of a reinforcement of its fluid nature and
sharply increased capabilities of armed influence on the economic system. This
adaptability depends on preliminary preparation for possible reorganizations.
Economic—mathematical modeling of corresponding processes and the playing through

127

FORIOFFICIALIJSE(M‘LY
FOIIOFT1C1AI.USE¢0NLH

of different variants of economic mobilization as well as variants for restoration
of the economic system subjected to armed pressure on the part of the enemy help
understand the sake-up and character of necessary preparatory measures.

Relationships in the process of production of military goods make up a most impor-
tant group of military-economic relationships. As has been explained, in the nar-
row sense of the word, military production signifies the production of the end
military product going directly to the troops. It plays a decisive part with re-
spect to other phases of the military-economic procesa-distribution, exchange and
consumption. At the sane time, military production is the chief structural element
of the military-economic system, since the character, quantity and quality of wea-
pons and combat equipment being produced determine the possible scale and character
of military consumption, the system of troop supply and activities of the armed
forces rear as a connecting link between military production and ultimate military
consumption. By virtue of this, studies of relationships in the sphere of military
production have a fundamental, key importance in the understanding of relationships
and processes occurring in other elements of the military-economic system.

Military production must be examined not only in the narrow sense, but also in the
broad sense of the word, having in mind the entire system of relationships connected
with economic support of defense. In this sense, along with production of the end
military product, it also includes production of means of production for military
production and production of consumer goods for workers engaged in military produc-
tion. A broad approach to military production is necessary first of all because it
provides a key to solving problems of economic mobilization already mentioned; and
secondly, because without such an approach it is impossible to understand the social
essence of military production and features of its functioning stealing therefrom.
Since military production is based on production in general, features of the his-
torically concrete method of production with its advantages or flaws directly affect
it. Advancement of the task of combining achievements of the scientific-technical
revolution organically with advantages of developed socialism also is of fundamen-
tal importance for the military-economic system and its effectiveness. Finally, an
examination of military production in the broad sense is necessary in the interests
of a systems approach to economic issues in a single military-technical policy,
since it cannot be separated from the common front of scientific-technical progress.

Problems of military distribution and consumption and consequently of the organiza-
tional development and functioning of the economic organism of the armed forces,
hold a special place in the range of military-economic problems. As has been noted,
military distribution and consumption in peacetime serve combat training, and in
wartime they serve armed warfare. In this sense their study is a subject of mili-
tary science. At the same time, however, military distribution and consumption are
the intermediate and final phases in the process of functioning of the military-
economic system, and the economic organism of armed forces is a link within it.

That means these problems have an economic content which military-economic science
is called upon to reveal. This is necessary for a more effective and economic solu-
tion to corresponding problems of military organizational development.

Issues of logistical support have attracted the attention of many sciences and many
researchers. There are scientific research institutes in western countries engaged
in problems of logistical support. For example, an Armed Forces Logistics Manage-

ment Institute was set up in the United States in 1961. It drew up programs for

128

FOR(NHH(1AI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supply economy and fighting surpluses and for such procurement methods as incentive
contracts and fixed-cost contracts. In view of the fact that problems of logisti-

cal support are within the sphere of many sciences, their study requires s complex

approach and coordination.

The problem of effective use of funds earmarked for defense is a problem which per-
meates all aspects of military—economic endeavor. This problem is not just one of
military-economic science. The highest effectiveness of military economics will be
reduced to naught if military leaders and the commanders have not developed the de-
sire and ability to win victory with fewest losses of men and material.

"The problem of the economic utilisation of human and material resources in a period
of war has been and always will be one of the most important,"15 noted Mar SU G. K.
Zhukov in a foreword to N. A. Antipsnko's book.

The complexity and multifaceted nature of the problem of effectiveness assumes the
need for developing its general methodological principles designed to assure a uni-
form approach to solving concrete problems of effectiveness in all defense spheres.
0n the other hand, the development of simple. rather precise particular methods of
military~economic analysis easily understood by appropriate specialists is an appro-
priate condition for achieving high effectiveness of the military-economic system

as a whole, of each of its individual parts, and of specific decisions by commanders
of all ranks. The work of raising the effectiveness of all kinds of military en-
deavor and all structural elements of the Armed Forces is being analyzed more and
more under conditions of nationwide attention to problems of effectiveness and qual-
ity. A comprehensive development of Soviet soldiers' creative activeness, of ra-
tionalization and invention, patriotic initiative and socialist competition. and

an upswing in economic work among the troops are very effective means for rational-
izing the economic organism of the Armed Forces and for increasing the effective-
ness of military work.

The study of international military-economic relationships is one of the current
and very difficult complex problems. This problem assumed special acuteness and
importance in the postwar period in connection with the formation of two world sys-
tems and the rapid development in each of them of integration processes which encom-
passed economics, politics and military affairs--all aspects of state life.

External military-economic relationships in the capitalist world have colossal scope
and importance. New forms have appeared as a supplement to the traditional form of
these relationships--the arms trade, which saw exceptionally great development in
the postwar years: military assistance, military production on the basis of foreign
licenses. joint research. development and production of armaments, the creation and
development of a military infrastructure on the territory of countries participating
in aggressive military blocs and so on. It is impossible to assess the real scope
and basic directions of physical preparation of war by aggressive forces or to
understand the actual processes occurring in the military economic system of im-
perialism without a thorough analysis of all these forms. In solving all military-
economic problems at any level one now has to take account of their international
aspects. when we speak of military-economic potential. we must examine it in a
system of states and in the make-up of s coalition. when we study military produc-
tion, we can evaluate it correctly only with consideration of the international
division of labor. But it is not only problems of production, economic mobilization

129

Ft”l(NﬂW(1AL USEiDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and vitality of the economy which have an international aspect. Also questions of
transportation, communication and troop logistical support are resolved with con-
sideration of the capabilities and interests of a coalition.

A developed system of military-economic relationships also exists in the socialist
community of countries, as mentioned earlier. It is fully understandable that a
comprehensive study of coalition problems and their consideration in military-
economic activity is necessary for realization of the advantages of a world social-
ist system.

Generalization of the experience of econonic support for wars in defense of social-
ism is one of the important tasks of military-economic science. This experience
permits a deeper understanding of the advantages of socialism and the art of their
realization. The decisive role of the Communist Party's management activities was
displayed in all its greatness during the Civil and Great Patriotic wars. It was
thanks to these activities that all sources of strength contained in the socialist
social and state system were used fully for victory. The need has matured to create
a scientific history of the military-economic system of socialism and illuminate
this important aspect of the many-sided process of struggle for establishing social-
ism. This is a task which goes far beyond the narrowly specialized military-
economic framework.

The history of the military economic system from its inception to our days, as
written from a Marxist position, would have very great importance along with the
creation of the history of socialist military economics. This would be a document
of supreme importance. "historians have estimated that some 15,000 wars have taken
place over the last 5 millennia. Some 6 billion persons perished in these wars,
which approximately equals the entire present population of earth. Capitalism and
imperialism brought the most disastrous of them. Lenin saw in victorious socialism
for the first time in history the appearance of a physical force capable of oppos-
ing war."16 Now the Soviet Union and other socialist countries are a reliable bul-
wark of peace and the center of gravitation of all peaceloving forces.

These are the most urgent problems of military-economic science. They are closely
interconnected and interdependent, being successive links in a single process of
economic support of defense of the socialist state. Close interaction and precise
coordination of the work of collectives engaged in elaborating them is a necessary
condition for successful resolution of these problems. The presence of a single
theoretical and methodological base is the main coordinating factor here.
FOOTNOTES

1 See: K. Marx and 1?. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 66, Part 1, p 117.

2 V. I. Lenin, PSS, Vol 37, p 367.

3 PRAVDA, 23 February 1978.

“ Lenin, op. cit., Vol 45, pp 312-313.

130

FORiofFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 See: 1’. V. Sokolov, "Voyno 1 lyudakiye reoursy" [War and Human Resources],
noscou, 1961, p 51.

5 See: ”Itogi vtoroy virovoy voy'ny" [Results of World War 11], collection of
articles, Moscow, 1957, p 362.

7 a. Becleo. "Rol' tyh v Wm." pp 112-114.

3 Quotation from the book: N. A. Antipenko, "la glam upravlonii," p 17.

9 o. r. mum, "Izbrannyye teen 1 nun." p 411.

1° See: 1.. I. Brezhnev. "Leninokln kurool,” Vol 5, p 537.

11 run: and Engels, op. c1c., Vol 39, p 355.

12 N. Wiener, "ﬂorets 1 robot" [The Creator and the Robot], Moscow, 1966, p 100.

13 See: Yu. S. Solnyahkov, "Ekononichukiyc fcktory 1 vooruzheniyc" [Boone-1c
Factors and Arno-ant], Moscow, 1973, p 66.

1" Lenin, op. cit., Vol 18, p 364..
15 Antipenko, op. c1t., p 17.

15 u. Suslov, "Historical Truth of Lenin's 1am and work," mm. No a. 1980,
p 27.

comma: Voyenizdat, 1981

10272
080: 86b6/1848

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY