APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014-1

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

was mean
5 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LAW OF THE SEA
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014—1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a orief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumsrised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Time‘s within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT ”"5 AND REGULATIONS WERNING WRSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOd BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8378
5 April 1971

TRANSLATIONS 0N LAW OF THE SEA

(9000 2/79)
CONTENTS

NW! AFFAIRS

Horoccan Dispute “1th Spain Over tubing nights Continues
(ms ‘l'lOPICMll 21' mm. 9 In! 79)...........

mutational Reopen-15111:, To Protect brim Invitation:
(a. A. 61m; sovrrsmn com I "MO.

M 78)....000000000to...one.ooooboonnoooooooooooooooto...

ASIA

INTER-ASIAN APPAIIS

Japanes- ﬂchcmn Otdcrul Out. of m Hater:
(“8 JAP“ Tm. 27 J.“ 79).OC'IOOOOOOIOIODD‘IOOOODOC...

In.“
Japan“. Fleet to PIC

JAPAN

none ”an National Prone: on Human: Nodal. lining
("mmsam’ 1 ’ab 79).OOOOOOOODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

LATIN ”ERICA
M OFFICIAL “8! ONLY

WWII)! AFFAIRS

WROCCAN DISPUTB um SPAIN om FISHING Imam CONTWBS
Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX 31' MEDITERRANBBNS in French 9 Mar 79 p 623

[Text] The boarding of Spanish trawlero by the Moroccan navy has disturbed
relations between Spain and Morocco. At the beginning of february, l8 Span-
ieh trawlere were fined a total of 8 million dirhans. 'No of these trawl-
ers. with regietration lielilla. were boarded on 2‘ February and eecorted to
the Horoccan port of Al-Iloceina. The next day, three others identified aa
having fished within the protected linit (70 niles for Horocco) were boarded
off Agadir.

The negotiationa are continuing in Rabat between the lioroccan minister of
transport and the Spanish hbaasy to arrange their release and to avoid
keeping thee idle for an extended period in Moroccan ports. The Spaniah
aabassy in Rabat states that it is not in contact with the Helilla authori-
ties and thua cannot co-ent on Moroccan press reports. AL-Auu daily on
28 February reported that the Spanish authorities in Helilla had decided to
expel within the next few days all Dioroccans resident in the enclave in
"roprisal" for the boarding of the crawlers. Anti-Horoccan denonstrationa
were reportedly held in Helilla on 26 Pebruary. Also. AL-ALM reports that
a number of Koroccan trawlers had been forbidden to enter the port to take
on water and fuel. and others had had their fish catch seiaed.

In this strained atnosphere. a boob explosion on 5 Hatch in Ceuts which
eeriously wounded six. all Spanish. and for which a ”Horoccan Denocratic

Front” claimed responsibility. has caused concern that the two countries'
relations nay be deteriorating dangerously.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie. Paris. 1979
cso: 6600

m OFFICIAL US! 01“.!
1'03 OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

m3 AFFAIRS

INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY 'IO memo: MARIN! ENVIRONMENT
Moscow SOVETSKOYE GOSUDARBTVO I PRAVO in Russian No 9, Sep 78 pp 16-80

[Krticle by M. A. Gitsu. senior scientific worker at the State Planning-
Survey and Scientific Research Institute of Sea Transport (Emmornii-

proyekt), candidate of Juridical sciences: ”International Res nsibility
of States in the Area of Protection of the ﬂarine Environment"

LText/ The problem of protecting the biosphere. including the marine en-
vironment, has now acquired s global nature. In the process of realise.
tion of their lights in the utilization of the natural environnent all
states must observe the generally accepted principles and norms of present
international law. Among them of ever greater inportance is the new prin-
ciple of rational utilization of nature. which was expressed and concret-
ized in nore than 250 international agreements on the protection of nature

and in nuserous reconsendetione and resolutions adopted by international or-
ganizations for the protection of nature and, finally, in the Declaration
on the linen Environnent dated 16 June 1912 (Stockholm, 5-16 June 1912).

The principle of protection of living narine resources serves as a concrete
expression of this principle of col-Ion international law as applied to the
sphere of utilization of the marine environment. Pursuant to this principle
states should refrain from any acts that can do irreparable damage to the
marine ecosystem. biocenoses, flora and fauna and, when engaged in the fish-
ing of living resources. nust take the necessary neasures to maintain their
productivity at the minu- possible steble level with an absolute preserva-
tion of the ecological balancg and of all plant and animal species to lest
the diverse needs of mankind.

In the accountability report of the CPSU Central Connittee to the 25th party
congress L. I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU Central Conittee.
stressed the urgency of such global problems "as the raw material or energy
problem, elimination of the nost dangerous and widespread diseases. environ-
mental protection, conquest of space and utilization of the resources of the
world ocean. In the future they will have an ever more narked effect on the
life of every nation and on the entire system of international relations.
Our country, like other countries of socialism, cannot dissociate itself

from the solution of these problem. which affect the interests of all men--
kind.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron orrrcm. use on?

The efficiency of the international acts confirming. developing and con-
cretizing the principle of rational utilization of nature depends to a
considerable extent on the strictest observance and further inprovenent of
the existing norms on nature protection. The need for cooperation along
states in the area of environmental protection by providing support and as-
sistance for the implementation of the relevant international conventions,
to which they are parties. in particular those directed at preventing and
controlling the pollution of seas and fresh waters. was reflected in the
Concluding Act of the All-European Conference in helsinhi.

The institution of international responsibility serves as one of the most
important guarantees for ensuring international lav and order concerning
the protection of nature in the world ocean. Attaching special significance
to this institution, in 1972 the Stockholm U! conference on Envirouental
Problem in the adopted Declaration on the Hts-an Environent recognized the
obligation of states ”to cooperate in the further development of interna-
tional law regarding responsibility and compensation for the victims of pol-
lution and other environmental damage caused by activities within the guru-
diction or control of such states to areas beyond their Jurisdiction.”

The specific nature of international responsibility in the area of rational
utilization of the marine environment and its resources necessitates a spe-
cial investigation of the problems of responsibility in the indicated area
of relations.

Types of international infringements of the lav in the sphere of utilisation
of the narine environment. International infringement of the lav. that is.
breach by a state of its obligations established by a provision of inter-
national lav. are the general legal-factual basis for international respon-
sibility. Usually. two basic groups of international infringements of the
law connected with the utilisation of the natural marine cnvireuaent and re-
sources are singled out: 1) nonrational utilisation of living urine re-
sources (violation of catch quotas. fishing in prohibited zones and during
prohibited periods. use of forbidden fishing tools and so forth); 2) pollu-
tior of the narine environment inhabited by living organisms (continental
pollution, pollution fran ships and as a result of the exploration and ex-
ploitation of the mineral resources of the sea bed). At the same time. this
implies pollution in the legal sense. vhose definition vas approve‘. in "I
bodies and organizations. The stereotypic definition of the pollution of
the narine environ-ent is contained in the "Revised Single negotiating Text"
submitted by the chairman of the third coamittee of the Third UN Conference
on the Law of. the Sea: “Pollution of the marine environment’ neans intro-
duction by nan. directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the
marine environment (including estuaries) resulting in such deleterious ef-
fects as her: to living resources. hazards to human health. hindrance to
marine activities, including fishing and other legitimate uses of the sea.
inpaingﬁnt of the quality of the used see vater and reduction of recreation
zones.

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Proceeding from the scientifically substantiated concept of the unity of
the biosphere, it is necessary to single out another relatively independent
group of possible infringements of the law-disturbance of the ecological
balance in the world ocean. the point is that by no neans aw pollution

of the aarine envirouent. Just as not every case of nonrational utilisation
of living resources. can result in a qualitative disturbance in the histor-
ically forasd relationship within ecological systems. At the sane tine.
actions absolutely not connected with the pollution of the urine environ-
nent. or with a disturbance in specific conditions of exploitation of living
narine organisms. can be the cause of destruction of ecological relations.
For example. the exploitation of biological sea resources can cause a dis-
turbance in the ecological balance if. at the sane tine. the deleterious
effects of such an activity for species biologically connected vith fishing
resources are not taken into consideration. in change in the living environ-
aent of sea organisas as a result of the exploitation of aineral resources
of the sea bed ego also lead to a disturbance in the ecological balance in
the vorld ocean. It seens that the preservation of the ecological balance
should become an independent object of international cooperation. lonful-
fillnent of specific contractual obligations in the preservation of the e-
cological balance in the vorld ocean would be a factual basis for the inter-
national rasponsibility of the transgressing state.

The formation of nev democratic principles of international lav (principle
of protection of the natural environment. principle of protection of man's
right to a healthy living environment and principle of inadaissibility of
utilization of the natural environnent for military purposes). whose viola-
tion seems especially dangerous for nations, ashes it necessary to also dif-
ferentiate international infringelente of the lav in the area of utilisation
of the marine environment. at the sane tine. singling out international
crimes.

Article 19 of the draft of articles on the problen of the international res-
ponsibility of states adopted by the UK International Law Omission in 1976
includes breach by a state of the international obligation prohibiting the
pollutign of seas or of the atmosphere in the category of international
crines. In cements on this article the UN International Law Omission
noted that. considering this obligation basic for ensuring the vitally in-
portant interests of the international canunity, it proceeded fro. the re-
sults of analysis of the international la: in effec . the practice of states
and the opinions of the nest authoritative Jurists.

however, characterisation of the pollution of the marine environaent as an
international crime. obviously. cannot be exhausted by such a diffuse con-
cept as "ms." In our opinion. the irreversible nature of the destruction
of the natural environment associated with dsnage done to the well-being and
health not only of the present generation. but also of future generations. of
aanhind serves as the deter-ining factor. In particular. radioactive po u-
tion as a result of nuclear veapons tests on the high seas leads to this.

6

'0? OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is noteworthy that V. A. Vasilenko. differentiating the concepts of in-
ternational crimes and of especially dangerous international infringements
of the law. classifies nuclear wet-pone tests in three environments with 3“
category of especially dangerous international infringements of the law.
One can hardly agree with such an opinion. Illegal nuclear weapons tests
completely fell under the criteria characterizing the features of interna-
tional crimes. which, according to V. A. Vasilenko's definition. include
"offenses against the most important subjective rights of individual states
and nations. which obJectively are also offenses against the very founda-
tions of international law and order and against the most important rights
and interests of the entire international con-unity of states.”10

As is well know, damage from nuclear tests in the ocean is manifested not
only in a direct infection of fish and see products,” but also in a de-
crease in the capability of marine animals for reproduction connected with
this and in destruction of their populations. as well as in possible gen-
etic consequences for mankind. Ultimately, nuclear tests in the ocean in-
fringe upon one of the basic husan rightsnthe right to a healthy living
environment. The principle of protection of this right is now ever more
recognised both in national and international law. The Declaration on the
lumen Environment states that ”nan has the nmdamental right to freedom.
equality and adequate conditions of life in an environment of a quality that
permits a life of dignity and well-being.” To preserve the nest favorable
natural enviromnent. the Stockholm Declaration. in particular. urges that
Mn and his environment ”be spared the effects of the use of nuclear weapons
and all other means of mass destruction."

The marine environment can also become the object of anﬁher international
crime in the area of environmental protection-ecocide. Bcocide neans a
deliberate effect of other states on the natural (including marine) environ-
nent and destruction of the aechanism of interrelations in nature for the
purpose of annihilating all the forms and manifestations of life there. The
so-called "geoplwsical war” in Indo-Chinauthe active utilization by the
United States of natural processes for military purposes, which resulted in
vast ecological damage and in the death and suffering of the people of Viet-
nam, Laos and Cambodia--can serve as a glaring example of ecocide. The draft
of the Convention on Prohibiting the Effect on the Natural Environment and
Climate for Hilitaiy and Other Purposes lot Compatible With the Interests of
Safeguarding International Security and Human Health submitted by the USSR
delegation to the 29th session of the UN General Assubly for consideration
envisaged the inclusiOn of ecocide. in particular the “change in the ter

exchange and ecology of the biological mass of sea and ocean waters," in
acts directly concerning the marine environment and forming the obJective
aspect of international crime.

The Convention on Prohibiting Military or any Other Hostile Uses of Means of
Effect on the natural Environment signed on 18 New 1917 as a result of the
persistent efforts of the Soviet Union and all peace loving forces of the
world is aimed. essentially. at a legislative consolidation of the prohibi-
tion of the international crime of ecocide.1 States-oparties to the con-
ventionuundertook the obligations "not to resort to military or any other

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1188 ONLY

hostile uses of means of effect on the natural environment. which have ex-
tensive. long-term or serious consequences. as methods of destroying. harm-
ing or damaging any other member state."

Taking into consideration the special danger of international crimes in the
area of utilization of the marine environment. it seems necessary to estab-
lish the principle of full compensation for the damage actually done. Of
course, under such conditions only the state can bear the material respon-
sibility for the harmful effects of illegal activity. Physical persons
should bear international criminal responsibility.

Problems of obJective responsibility. Hith the present level of develop-
ment of productive forces the use of the resources of the biosphere. includ-
ing the marine enviroment, is fraught with the danger of inflicting vast
damage both on the interests of individual users and on the natural re-
sources themselves and. therefore. on the future generations of mankind.
Lawful activities in the exploitation of the world ocean are carried out
with the use of technical means. which. as a rule. are great hazards to the
environment. Right now. along with nuclear incidents. accidents with such
new sources of great hazards as supertenkers. marine drilling platforms and
underwater oil pipelines result in grave consequences. In the opinion of
specialists. with the existing degree of pollution of the marine environment.
an accident of only one ﬁg tanker in the Baltic Sea can completely destroy
the life existing there.

All the international agreements on the responsibility for nuclear e
are based on the principle of obJective (absolute) responsibility.1 The
advanced development of the institution of international responsibility re-
quires the use of the principle of the absolute responsibility of the oper-
star of a supertanker. of a petroleus pipeline. or of another similar tech-
nological installatigp. whose activity is characterized by an especially
high degree of risk.

Under the present conditions of the critical state of the enviroment any
activity associated with the degradation of the marine environment, prim-
arily under the deleterious effect of pollution. creates great hasards to
mankind. The well-being of narine organisms. as well as of the marine flora
and fauna in general, depends to an ever greater extent on the preservation
of the most optimal natural enviroment for them. which 3s directly connected
with the protection of the biosphere against pollution}l As stressed in the
report of the U1! Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the See. and Ocean Bed Be-
yond National Jurisdiction of the 26th session of the III! General Assembly.

in the opinion of various delegations. the need for recognizing the obJec-
tiVe international responsibility of states in connection with the pollu-
tion of the marine space pertains "to the interests of the international
camsunity.”19 In particular. the principle of the objective responsibility
of states for the pollution of the marine environment forms the basis for

the Soviet draft of articles of the Convention on the General Principles of
Preservation of the Marine Envirment. which was submitted to the couittee

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in 1973. The draft stipulates that every state "bears responsibility for
pollution, which does damage to the marine environment, in all cases when
such pollution occurs as a result of the activity of the official dies
of a state, or of its Juridical or physical persons” (article 3). How-
ever, this new principle, unfortunately, was not embodied in the draft of
the new Convention on the Law of the Sea--"Informal Composite Negotiating
Text."21 Meanwhile, the application of the principle of the obJective res-
ponsibility of states to all cases of pollution of the marine environment
could serve as a reliable guarantee for a proper compensation for damage
and would be a new legal means of protecting the vital interests not only
of the present generation, but also of future generations, of mankind.

The problem concerning the grounds of the responsibility in the sphere of
rational utilisation of nature in the world ocean also has another specific-
ity connected with the special nature of possible damage. The traditional
doctrine of the responsibility for the inflicted damage does not make it
possible to properly resolve problems connected with the compensation for
losses for damage done to the marine fauna and flora. Reducing the grounds
of responsibility to the fact of infliction of damage would lead to the
elimination of international responsibility in the absence of direct damage
for specific users in case of infliction of damage to the marine environ-
ment as such. Such a situation can occur in case of pollution of the high
seas deleterious for bioresourcea, or of a violation of fishing rules on
the high seas. Meanwhile. under the present conditions of limitation of
the living resources of the world ocean and of the imminent danger of their
depletion the damage to the marine ecosystem and biocenoses acquires inde-
pendent importance. To avoid the degradation of the marine environment, in

addition to compensation for the damage done to individual subjects, right
now there is a need for compensation for the vast ecological damage done to
all mankind as a result. for example, of the decrease in the natural rege-
nerstion of fish stocks, disturbance of the capacity of water for self-clean-
ing and so forth. Therefore. the opinion of authors, who consider the lack
of provisions on the material responsibility for pollution on the high seas,
if it does not have a direct destructive effect on natural resources within

the natiggal Jurisdiction of a state, a gap in international law, seems
correct.

At the same time, it should be kept in mind that the regulation of interna-
tional responsibility for infliction of damage on the fauna, flora and eco-
system in ocean spaces is associated with the need for the solution of a
number of complex problems. First of all, the following question arises:
aho is the holder of the right to receive the appropriate compensation if.
in case damage is done to the marine environment, no state suffers direct
losses? Obviously, the answer to it lies in the legal status of the marine
resources beyond national Jurisdiction. The international status of marine
resources on the high seas, as the property of all mankind, organically pre-
supposes the right of all states to an access to the utilization of these
resources and the obligation of countries to rationally utilise them for the
good of the present and future generations of mankind. Proceeding from the

7

P08 OFPICIAL USE ONLY
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY

essence of the concept of "international-legal natural resources" proposed
by Soviet scientists for the substantiation of the status of the resources
of the high seas at the intergovermental conference of umco experts on
the rational utilization and protection of the resources of the biosphere.
it can be stated that. despite the lack of damage for specific users. all
states. as members of the international community equally interested in the
preservation of natural resources. have the right to the appropriate com-
pensation for the damage to the living resources of the high seas. When
solving the problem as to in favor of when should the payment for such
losses be made. the environmental fund instituted by resolution 2997 (X'XVII)
dated 15 December 1972 of the UN General Assembly formed from the voluntary
contributions of states should be kept in mind. The money contributed to
the fund as compensation for the damage to marine ecosystems and to the
fauna and flora can be used for the restoration of the disturbed ecological
balance and for the reproduction of the animals on the verge of extinction.

mom

1. See at greater length: _0. S. Kolbasov. "Bkologiya: PolitikanPravo"
(geology: Politics-Lay. noscov, 1976. pp 172-173; V. A. Chichvarin,
The Principle of Rational Utilisation of lature as One of the Inter-
national-Lega1_Principles" ("Sovetskiy Yezbegodnik Mezhdunarodnogo
Prava. 1968 [Soviet Yearbook of International Lav. 19697, Moscow.
1969. PP 351-352).

2. See V. A. Chichvarin. "Some Problems of the Theory of International-
Legal Protection of the Marine Environment and Its Resources" (MIROVOYB
RYBOWSTVO. 1973. no 1. pp lit-19; ll. 8._Ivanchenko. "Ratsional'noye
Ispol'sovaniye Zhivykh Resursov Marya" [Rational Utilisation of the
Living Resources of the 8e27, Moscow. 1975. p 55).

3- UN docmsent A/Oont'. ”8/15. 3 3m 1972.
1:. See U! docuent Meonf. 62/"? 8/Rev./Part III, 6 May 1976.

5. see K. v. Ananichev. ”Problem Omahayushchey Sredy. Energii i Pri-
rodnykh Resursov. uezhdunarodnyy Aspekt" LProblems_of the aniromnt,
Energy and latura1 Resources. International Aspect]. Moscow. 1911:,

PP 7’25. 88-

6. See "Report of the UK International Lav Col-ission on the Work of Its
28th Session (3 Hay—23 June 1976)." General Assembly. Official Records.
31st session. Supplement No 10 0/31/10). p 252.

1e mid, pp ”1"”20

8. Concerning the illegality of nuclear tests in three environments see
1.. II. Galenskaya. "International Crimes and International-Legal Res-
ponsibility" (PRAVOVEDEIIIYE, 1965, lo 1. p 169).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.
11.

12.

13.
lb.

15s

16.

17.

18.

19.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

See V. A. Vasilenko. "Otvetstvennost' Gosudarstva as Meshdmrodme
Pravonarusheniys" [State Responsibility for International Infringements
of the my, Kiev. 1976. p 189.

ma, p 187.

See P. A. Moiseyev. "The Effect of an Atomic Explosion on Fishing"
(amen: mozms'rvo. 1957. lo 5. pp 81-82).

See V. A. Vasilenko, op. cit.. p 192; 0. S. Kolbasov. op. cit., p No;

"Problems Okruzhyushchey Sredy v Nirovoy Ekonomike i Meshdunarodnykh
Otnosheniyakh" LThe Problem of tne Environment in the Horld Boonow and
in International Relationy. Moscow, 1976. p 281. Sometimes the term
"biocide." as equivalent to the concept "ecocide." is used in the lite-
rature (see 0. V. Bogdanol. "Razorusheniye-Garsntiya Mira“ @isarmament
Is the Guarantee of Peac_e_/. Moscow. 1972. p 73)-

See the draft of the convention (PRAVDA. 27 September 1971:).

See NOVOYE VRMA. 1977. 1‘0 2’1. pp 30-31- The USSR ratified the con-
vention on 16 Mar 1978 (PRAVDA. 18 May 1978).

See w. Karoszevski. "0n the Increasing Threat to the Waters of Our
Seas" (samup osomoIczm', 1972. 20. no 5. pp eat-236).

At greater length see 8. A. Malinin and V. A. Nusin, ”Pravovyye Prob-
lesw Morskoy Atomnoy Deyatel'nosti" Lugal Problems of Marine Atomic
Activitﬂ. Leningrad, 1971:. pp 98-99.

See about this 1.. Goldie, ”Development of an International Environmental
Law-an Appraisal" ("Iav, Institutions and the Global Environment," New
York. 1972. p 138).

According to the forecast by the famous oceanographer J. Piccard. at the
present rates of pollution in 25 years any life in the world ocean will
cease completely (see A. Danzig, "Marine Pollution. A Framework for In-
ternational Control." "Ocean Management," Rev York. 1973. P 3107).

See Uﬂ document A/8h2l. Supplement No 21, pp 15-16.

See UN document A/AC. 138/80. III/L. 2‘2. 15 March 1973.

See UN document A/Conf. 62M. 10. 15 July 1977.

See A. Danzig, op. cit.. p 256.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Nauka". "Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo", 1978

11.539

680:

5200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-ASIAN AFFAIRS

JAPANESE PISIIEIIHEN ORDERED OUT 01’ PN6 UATBRS
Tokyo Till: JAM“ TIMES in angliah 27 Jan 79 p 5 0"

[Text] The Piehery Agency diacloaad Friday it had ordered Japaneae fiah-
ing boata operating near Papua New Guinea to etay away fro. the country'a
zoo-um excluaiva tone pending the concluion of a new bilateral provi-
aional tiehing accord.

The talke on the fiahing pact are not likely to aae a conproniaa reached
before the expiration of the current proviaional fiahing agree-ant at the
end of thin nonth.

After eatablinhing the ZOO-tile zone laet Hatch. Papua New Guinea con-
cluded a proviaional agree-ent with Japan in May to allow fiaharIen to
operate within the axcluaiwe tone until the end of January.

In return, Japan agreed to pay 1 million Irina (about 260 nillion yen) in
a package.

During the telka on reviaion of the (inhing accord. Japan denanded that
the fiahing licence fee be lowered and the package pay-ent changed to

individual paynent by each Japaneee fiahing veeeel.

But Pnpua New Guinea rejected the lowering of fiehing licenae teen and
etuck to package pay-ent.

In making in requeat. Japan pointed to the dacraaeing bonito and tuna
haula in Papua New Guinea watera and the dwindling ealea pricea of
bonito in Japan.

Japan alao aeeerted that the current rate of the licenae teen to actuel
fiah haula uee ouch higher than agreed on between Japan and the United
States and Japan and New Zealand.

COPYRIGHT: THE JAPAN TIRES 1979

(:80: 5200
10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Inn-ASIAN MARS

BRIEFS

JA' 158 ”881‘ 1‘0 PRC-.Tuyo Planer: Conny allcloud on 11 Jamar) that It omludod
o pmvlolnnn contract with China's mum; [mum] Province It um“ (“when
on 28 Deco-Im- for tho onort of a mum; nut owl-tun; 15 ohms. "mod at u
bullon yon. 1M! parohuo of the float to In equipped vtth pmoum runny...

vul be part or the pmvtnoo'o fishery Index-mutton pron-u. (moor tho oontuot. tho
:3an am he ado 1n foodstuffs pmcouod mam n ohtp of tho nut tn 5 your-
one:- I 2401:- uuco pol-Loo. [Tokyo mm mm: surreal in now“ 12 Jun 79

"omlnr. Edition 9 8 ovum 07710:". US! ONLY]

(:80: $200

11

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100040014-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

none uncss NATIONAL rmacr on menus: MODULE ammo
fokyo mm tom snmuu in Japanaae 1 Feb 79 p 2

[Text] The Japan Deep Ocean Hining Corporation
(Ahbrevieted mac; Preaident. Kunio Ota: 23
participating cowaniea) ia aoving forward on
exploitation of the nanganeae nodulea which

are a natural resource on the deep aea had

of the Pacific. The MIC haa eatahliahed a
policy of nking every effort to raise the
exploitation of unganeee nodulea iron the
atatua of a feaeihility atudy on co-ercial
production to the atatua of a national pro-
ject. The reaaona for thia are: (1) Tech-
nical develop-ent under the (1300) Group.

one of the four large international capital
groupa in which book: participatea, haa uade
progreaa and. in the firat half of laat year.
eucceaa waa achieved in full acale teating of
mining equipnent which ia the key to the advic-
ahility of a develop-eat plan.

(2) Furthermore. since Japan did not aiqu
participate in the funding but alao played an
important role in the technical arena. Japan
haa the advantage of being able to uae inde-
pendently the equip-en: and ayateu which

Japan developed.
(3) At the production atage it would he deaire-

able iron the viewpoint of national policy for
many of the fine concerned to particpate.

(4) when mining areaa are aet up and production
hegina. thia undertaking will he cloaely te-
leted to the Law of the See which the United
Nationa it working to for-date and. for thia

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014-1
FOR OFFICIAL 088 Oh!”

a project in which the govern-ant is also
involved. none plans to approach the govern-
Iaent with this line in the near future and to
sound out doaestic firas at the seas tine. If
these approaches go saoothly. the first national
project on exploitation of seabed resources will
result.

none was established as a window for 23 manufacturers. banks. and trading
coapanies such as Sunitono Shoji. Harubeni. and Nissho lwai to participate
in the moo) group an international capital group for the exploitation of
'nanganese nodules.

0f the four large international capital groups. the (1800) Group is the most
advanced in the develop-ant of technology. In March last year. the group
carried out nining tests on an operational scale off Hawaii. The result was
that both pump type and air lift type systena for gathering nanganese nodules
frost the seabed at 5.000 aeters. which is the point to which technology

has been developed. proved successful and prospects for setting the systeas
practicable were established. In addition to assessing the results of the
tests. the group is currently using the nearly 1.000 tune of manganese nodules
gathered in the tests to work on operation of refining equip-ant in a test
plant with a daily production of 5 tons st lNCO's Canadian plant. end it is
said. success is anticipated. Pros this year until 1981 none will solve
technical problems and draw up charts of lining tones; it will begin feasi-
bility studies in 1982 and will start co-ercial production in 198‘ or

1985.

Therefore. our: has decided to go beyond the group structure in tackling
this operation becuase. in the judge-ant of none. the United States. Rest
Ger-any. Britain. and other advanced countries such as trance which is
developing technology on its own. can be expected to cowete in production
when the cos-ercial production stage is ruched. son: therefore feels that
in the long range view it would he tore effective for resource poor Japan
to look at this latter fro. the standpoint of national policy and treat it
as a national project including any lore of the fir-s concerned than it
would be for individual private groups to proceed separately with production
plans.

COPYRIGM': Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1979

9111
C50: 5200

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AMERICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

VENEZUELAN-WINICAN OMCATlON TREATYuCerecee, I. Met (PL)-The locel preee
today highlights the eigning of e urine and eubeerine denercetion treety
enacted in Santa Doeingo between Venezuele end the Doeinicen Republic.

The docuent wee eigned yeeterdey by Veneeuelen Foreign ﬂinieter silon
Alberto Coneelvi end Vice Mnirel Renon Beilio Jinene: of the Doninicen
Republic in e cerenony ettended by Doninicen Preeident Antonio Cue-ten.
Foreign Minister Coneelvi eeid thet the treety concludee e proceee under-
taken when both netione incorporeted into their legel eyetee the concept

of en exclueive econoeie zone. he expleined thet the treety epecifiee

zones in which the two etetee will exerciee their correeponding righte of

sovereignty. [Text] [Cerecee PRELA in Spenieh to PRBIA hevene 1520 GMT
I: Her 79 PA]

cso: 5200 m

1‘

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040014-1

END or
  FICHE
’ um FILM

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000400144

hl

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040014-1