FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/10194
16 December 1981

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 12/81)

LOKAL'NYYE VOYNY: ISTORIYA I'SOVREMENNOST'

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreignclanguage
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation Has summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses vere not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGNT LANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

JPRs 1/10194
16 December 1981

USSR REPORT
MILITARY AFFAIRS
(P000 12/81)

LOKAL'NYYE VOYNY: ISTORIYA I SOVREHENNOST'

Moscow LOKAL'NYYB VOYNY: ISTORIYA I SOVWS‘I' in Russian 1991 (signed to preu
13 Jun 80) pp 1-62, 92-95, 126-129, 166-168. 200-203. 227-290. 303

[Annotatiom introduction, chapter 1. heading- and conclueiona of chapters 2-6,
chapter 7, conclusion. and table of content. tron hook "local ﬂat - niatory and
the Present Day", edited by Any Gen 1. Ya. Shavrov, Voyenixdat. 30.000 copiea,
301. pages]

Coureurs
moutiont.O'OOOOOOOOOOOOOIII00....00....0.0.00.0000000QOOOOOOOIOO000.50.... 1
Table of MtenteooioldotoOtllOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOO'O0.0000ICOOOOOCOOOOOO 1

(a)

mtmdwuonncneeeeeoooeaeacocooneooenuanced...aeeeoeeeeooeoooeeeaeeeaeaeeeaa

QIBPLBI’ 1. Essence Of ““1"a“.aa.nee.oe0.0.0.0000.evooooeeoooeeeeeaaeaoee 10

Gmpter 2. Historical Patterns of Interrelationahip Between local
ad wrld "an (““Wt.)aaeoaaeeaoooeooaaaoooeooaeeoeeeooeeaoeaa 37

Owner 3. Loca1 "era in Asia (Excerpta).................................... 39
aiapter 4. be“ "‘1'. in "I. ha: mt (“c.rpt.)00'00...OOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOO ‘1

mapte’ 5. me.1".u 1“ “dc. (B‘cerpt.)..0...OOOODOOOOO0.00COOOOOOOOOOOOO ‘2

Olapter 6. local Hate in latin Amrica (lacerpta)........................... #3

amp“! 7. 13.30;“. of local "anoooeoaoocoo-econaoeaoeoeoaceecoo-000.0000... “

mduiononae.oa-ooooaeaeloaoeaonetoona.0.00.00.00.00...0000000000000.000“.“ 91
- a - [III - USSR - 4 fOUO]
POR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

Annotation

[Excerpts] This book synthesizes the experience of local wars and najor nilitery
conflicts fro- the end of the 19th century to the later half of the 1970's.

The authors conprehensively investigate, free a Marxist-Leninist position, the
theory and history of local vars. their place in the global strategy of i-perialin,
as well as their character and specific features. The authors devote considerable
attention to developeent of the art of warfare taking into account the experience
of local military conflicts. as well as exposure of contnporary nilitary concepts
and doctrines of the imperialist nations.

This book is intended for scientific workers, teachers, propagandists, and all those
who are interested in nilitary problens.

table of Contents Page
Introduction ' 3
Part 1. Local Wars of leperialisa: Essence, history. Theory ll
Chapter One. Essence of Local "are 11
l. Harxisn-Leninisn on the Sociopoliticsl Essence of Local Hers ll
2. 0n the Classification and Systea of Local Hats and Military Conflicts 19
3. Concept of Local Hera: Pest and Present 27

chapter No. Historical Patterns of lnterrelationahip Between Local and
Horld Hare 42
1. The Horld Ia Divided ‘2
2. Local Hers for Division of the ﬂorid 66
3. 0n the bed to Horld Her 11 60

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘Oll OFFICIAL "SI-1 ONLY

6. Local Hers in tho Postwar Horld 79
Part 11. Local Hare of the Contemporary Era: Practical Experience and

Lessons 95
Chapter Three. Local Hare in Asia 95
1. Survey of Military-Political Events in Asia 95
2. The Har in Korea (1950-1953) 108
3. The Her in Vietnan (1966-1975) 116
Chapter Four. Local Hars in the Near East 129
1. Survey of Military-Political Events in the Near East 129
2. The 1967 Arab-Israeli Har 162
3. The 1973 Arab-Israeli Har 152
Chapter Five. Local Hers in Africa 168
1. Survey of Military-Political Events in Africa 168
2. The Har in Algeria (1956-1962) 177
3. The Hat in Angola (1961-1976) 189
Chapter Six. Local Hare in Latin America 203
1. Survey of Military-Political Events in Latin Anerica 203
2. 0.8. Aggression Against Cuba (1961-1962) 213
3. 0.8. Aggression Against the Doninican Republic (1965) 221
Chapter Seven. lessons of Local Here 229
1. Military-Political and Strategic Lessons of Local Hers 229
2. Experience in Conbat Employment of Ground Torces 239
3. Experience in Conbat Enploynent of Air Forces and Air Defense 268
6. Experience in Conbat Enploynent of Naval Torces 263
5. Soae Problems of Troop Control 275
Conclusion 286

Appendix 1. Chronology of Local Hare and Military Conflicts fron 1898
to November 1917 291

Appendix 2. Chronology of Local Hars and Military Conflicts fro: Rove-her

1917 to September 1965 293

Appendix 3. Chronology of Local Hers and Hilitary Conflicts fron Sep-
teaber 1965 to 1975 296

2

lili¢lﬂﬂ€1A1.U8£IMNLY
FOROFHCIALIJSEONLY

WWII“

At the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century the attention of the entire
world was focused on Central Aaerica and Southern Africa, where the Spanish-Alarms
and Boer wars had erupted. Although sull in spatial scale, they played an in-
portant political role, since they were the first landnarks indicating capitalisn's
entry into its final stage of developnent — iapsrialisn.

Isperielisn had furnished practical proof that of all the exploiter systeas it use
distinguished. as V. I. Lenin wrote, "by the least love of peace," ”by the greatest
tendency toward violence," and therefore "by the greatest tendency toward conflict."
The two world wars as well as hundreds of local were and nilitary conflicts were
born precisely in the web of inperialisn.

"Capitalisn has becone reactionary fron progressive," consented V. I. Lenin. charac-
terizing its transition to the nonopolist «tags. "It has developed productive
resources to such an extent that nankind aust either dung: over to socialise or

for a period of years and even decades experience arned struggle by the. great'
powers for the artificial preservation of capitalisn by scans of colonies,
monopolies, privileges, and all types of national oppression.”

Lenin's analysis of capitalise at the iaperialist stage of develop-ant served as

the foundation for the struggle by the working people of Russia, under the guidance
of the Comist Party. to overthrow the rule of the exploiters and for socialise.

It ares Columnists of all countries with a developed prograa of action, directed

against the domination of the nonopolies, colonialism and national oppression,
and for social progress.

The Conunist Party of the Soviet Union has consistently advocated and continues
to advocate peace and international security, harnessing the forces of war and
aggression. The 26th and 25th CPSU congresses confined the i-utahility of the
party's policy line of doing everything possible to ensure conditions of peaceful
construction in our country, for the cause of peace and security of all peoples.
"...He shall continue this policy," stated 0986 Central Co-ittee General See-
retary L. I. Brezhnev at the 25th CPS!) Congress, ”with redoubled energy, seeking
to curb the forces of war and aggression, to strengthen vorld peace, and to 2
guarantee the rights of peoples to freedoa, independence, and social progress.”

CPSU foreign policy, aimed at restraining the forces of war and aggression, is
grounded on a Marxist-uninist appraisal of the correlation of forces in the world
at each given nonent in history. Taken into consideration is the experience

of nuaerous vars unleashed by inperialisn, including local wars.

um does this experience tell us?

Having perpetrated such a nonstroua cries against unkind as a world war, in-
perislisa had by no aeans given up local wars.

As forerunners of a world conflsgration, local wars fostered its initiation and
the fornation of hostile coalitions, and because proving grounds for testing the

MWWONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONEY

latest weapons, new modes and forms of conduct of military operations. As

regards local were as a legacy of the world wars, the experience of history demon-
strates that they. just as world were, do not and cannot resolve the conflicts
which are organically inherent in imperialism. The results of the world were.
favorable for one group of monopolists and imperialist powers. proved unfavorable
to the other. and this merely aggravated the conflict. Local wars and military
conflicts arose on this soil. aimed at "adjusting" the results of the world wars
to some degree.

Inperialisn has extensively utilized and continues to utilise local were and con-
flicts to crush the revolutionary movement of the proletariat and the liberation
movement of oppressed peoples which, as is indicated by the experience of history.
become intensified in connection with world were.

As we know, world Her I fostered maturation of a revolutionary situation in a
number of countries. This led to socialist and democratic revolutions, and par-
ticularly to the Great October Socialist Revolution in lussia.

As a result of the collapse of German fascism and Japanese militarism in World War
II, reactionary regimes fell in a number of countries of Europe and Asia, and the
national liberation movement acquired great strength. which led to the collapse

of the colonial system.

it is characteristic that inperialism resorted to the force of arms time and
again, endcevoring to hold back the growth of the revolutionary movement of the
proletariat and the national liberation struggle. We know that since 1965 were
and military conflicts have erupted more than 100 times in various parts of the 3
world through the fault of the forces of imperialism and international reaction,
while the number of domestic counterrevolutionary ineurrections and nilitsry coups
is so great that it is difficult to make a count.

5 udy of the experience of local wars and military conflicts which have taken

place since Uorld Her 11 shedelight on the military policy and strategy of world
imperialism in the new, changed conditions. which are characterised primarily

by strengthening of the influence of the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries on the course of world events, by increase in the class struggle by the
working people of the capitalist countries against the oppression of the monopolies,
and by victory of the national liberation movement. This experience helps under-
stand why, having created a colossal war machine and stockpiling enormous quantities
of nuclear weapons. imperialism resorts to local wars. in which these weapons are
not directly utilized.

As we know. in the principal capitalist countries military expenditures are in-
creasing year after year. and the arms race is escalating. At the same time im-
perialist circles cannot ignore the military might of the Soviet Union and all of
the socialist nations as well as the consequences of another world war. This com-
pela the ruling elite in the imperialist nations to seek modes of utilization of
military force which would not threaten to undermine the foundations of imperialism

and at the same time would forestall development of world events disadvantageous
to imperialism. Local wars constitute an effective and, in the opinion of militar-

ist circles, quite acceptable nesns of achieving these objectives.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”...lnperialisn...ﬂ noted the 1969 International Conference of Connunist and Horher
Parties, "is forced to take into consideration the present correlation of forces in
the international arena, the nuclear potential of the Soviet Union and the possible
conavquences of a nuclear aissile war. It is beconing increasingly sore difficult

and dangerousfor iaperialisn to place its bets on unleashing another world war. In

these conditions... the ruling circles, while not refraining fron preparations for
such a war, place special enphasis on local wars."‘

Adapting to changes in the world balance of power and encountering such a factor as
the unified nilitary sight of the socialist nations, the aggressive forces of in-
perislisn are directing their "local" attacks against individual socialist countries,
the revolutionary soveaent of the proletariat, the national liberation nova-ant, and
against developing countries in which progressive regises have been established.
They understand full well that the outcoae of the struggle between socialian and
capitalise depends in large neasure on how the world revolutionary process develops,
what path will be taken by peoples which have becone liberated iron the colonial

yoke.

It is extreaely iaportant to expose the true sins and intentions of the forces of
iaperialist reaction, which are carefully concealed by various theories, and partic-
ularly by the claim that various forms of local aggression present no danger to the
world. western nilitary ideologues atteapt to convince people that local wars are
easy to limit or even to extinguish, and that the experience of such were allegedly
provnhs nothing in the sense of preparations for a nuclear world war. It is quite
obvious that behind all this stands the sinister desire spiritually to disar-
peoples in the face of nilitary danger.

This is indicated in particular by a persistent effort on the part of 0.8. alliter-
ist circles to clain that such an inhunsn weapon as the neutron hosb is a tactical,
alnost conpletely safe weapon. This is nothing other than an atteapt to "efface
the boundary" between conventional and nuclear weapons and to sake the transition
to nuclear war externally imperceptible.

The facts show that the inperisliats have extensively utilized in local wars all
types of nodern weapons, including strategic bosbers, carrier task forces, chenical,
bacteriological and incendiary agents. And in a nunber of instances aggressive
circles have pushed local nilitary conflicts toward a point beyond which nuclear
weapons could be enployed. According to asterials recently published by the
Brookings Institution (USA), since world war II in at least 33 of the 215 instances
of enploynent of 0.5. troops and naval forces do question of possible eaployaent

of nuclear weapons was discussed. The possibility of initiation of a world nuclear
conflict was thus allowed. This once again confirna the falseness of the
bourgeois propaganda thesis that local aggression presents no danger to the world
as a whole.

Any nilitary conflict, including a local conflict, is a two-sided process. There-
fore study of the experience of local wars is inportant not only to understand the
silitary policy and strategy of world inparialisa but also for understanding the
capabilities and nodes of action of opposing forces, and national liberation arnies
in particular. The experience of local wars enables one to judge the effective-
ness of the strategy and tactics of opposing forces as well as the effectiveness of
their enploynent of weapons and cosbat equipnent.

IN)! OFFICIAI.IISEZ(HVLY
INDRIDFFKJAI.US£G)NLY

The experience of local wars is investigated at two levels.

First of all. it is examined with observance of the principle of historiciaa in
approach to societal phenomena. which requires that they be studied in movement, in
development from one historical stage to the next. Military history is not only

a chronicle of events but also an active instrument in people's hands. which
enables one correctly to assess facts and phenomena of the contemporary era.

"...The most important thing in approaching this question from a scientific stand-
point." wrote V. I. Lenin, "is not to forget the basic historical linkage, to
examine each question from the standpoint of how a given phenomenon... took place,

and fro-5the standpoint of its development to determine what a given thing has now
become."

Secondly, local wars are investigated fro. the position of a logical approach to
study of the events and facts of history, which makes it possible to appraise in-
dividual local wars and conflicts not as isolated phenomena but as links in a
single chain of expansionist desires characterizing the strategy of the struggle
of imperialism with the progressive forces of our planet. All this made it pos-
sible to apply a systems analysis in studying the experience of local wars and
military conflicts.

v. I. Lenin taught that when investigating complex and repeating social phenomena
"one must endeavor to establish... a foundation of accurate and indisputable facts
on which to rely.... In order that this genuinely be a foundation, it is necessary
to take not separate facts but an entire aggregate of facts applying to the matter
in question. without a single exception...."6

if one traces change in the role and place of local wars in the strategy of world
imperialism in the last 80 years. one cannot help but see the principal landmarks
of this evolution.

0n the threshold of the 20th century, local wars comprised an important element in
the predatory policy of the imperialist countries. But for a number of reasons,

in particular by virtue of the effect of such a factor as interimperialist con-
flicts, they were not yet subordinated to a single goal. 0n the eve of Horld Her 1
local wars essentially constituted a test of forces of different. but homogeneous
in their social essence. national detachments of the world bourgeoisie.

Following the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution imperialism, as

V. I. Lenin noted, sought to elaborate "an optimal international strategy" of class
struggle against revolutionary forces and to incorporate in a practical manner the

idea of "counterrevolutionary holy alliances." Apparent in these alliances, along-
side a community of interests, were conflicts in the struggle for world domination

which tended to tear them apart.

Both these trends were in evidence on the threshold of Horld Her II. On the one
hand two hostile groups of imperialist powers were sndeavoring to improve their

strategic position with the aid of local silitary clashes initiated at that time,
and were sndeavoring to test the strength of one another's position on tha eve of
a new major armed conflict. In addition, the very process of formation of these

FOR‘OFEKJAL.USI¢N¥LV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

group: was determined in large measure by the outcome of local wars in the 1930's.
0n the other hand. imperialists of every hue and shade were united by hatred of
the Soviet Union and the desire to destroy or at the very least to weaken it.
Therefore a number of local wars also pursued concealed aims of anticommunism. at-
tempts to test the military strength of the USSR. But in the final analysis con-
flicts within the camp of the enemies of socialism, which had become more acute in

the struggle for world domination, for a certain period of time gained the upper
hand over the desire to crush revolutionary forces.

The victory over fascism created favorable conditions for development of the world
revolutionary process. As a result of successful revolutions in a number of

European and Asian countries, a world socialist system areas, the general crisis of
capitalism deepened. the Communist and worker movement in the capitalist countries

experienced further development. and the foundations of the colonial system becane
seriously undermined.

The new period of international relations is characterised by aggravation and a
complex interweaving of various forms of struggle between the two social systems on
the political. econoaic and ideological fronts. in conditions of a dynamically
changing disposition of forces in the world arena and further deepening of the
general crisis of capitalism. There is taking place, as L. I. Brezhnev noted,

"a certain shifting of the center of gravity of the strategy of imperialism in the
world arena. The policies of imperialism are determined to an ever increasing
degree by the class aims of the general struggle against world socialism, national
liberation revolutions and the worker movement.”7

The European and Far Eastern centers of imperialism (Germany and Japan) were
toppled as a result of Horld "or II. The United States advanced to the front lines
of struggle against communism and all the revolutionary forces of our planet. as-
suming the role of "guarantor and protector" of the capitalist systea. The strategy
of world imperialism, dictated in fact from a single center. assumed from the very
outset a clearly marked reactionary, anti-Soviet thrust. A cannon front of
struggle by imperialism against the forces of socialism, the revolutionary and
national liberation movement was forming. Bach military action by imperialism,
each local war or military conflict. initiated or provoked by imperialism. now
proved to be linked to one degree or another with the struggle between the two sys-
tems in the world arena and became links of a common chain of aggressive actions

by imperialism in the struggle against the revolutionary and progressive forces of
the contemporary era.

All this had a substantial effect on changing the role and place of local wars in
the strategy of imperialism. Analysis of these changes essentially comprised the
principal task of investigation.

The authors of this volume have proceeded from the position that a local war is
in its sociopolitical essence a continuation of the politics of classes and
nations by means of armed violence. In contrast to a world war. a local war is
characterized by a relatively limited political objective, which determines a
certain linitedness of the scale of military operations, a specific strategy and
tactics. and limited use of weaponry.

FOR OIINC1A1.USE1NVLY
INJR 0F11C1AI.IEHECMQLY

Ipcnl wars are initiated or provoked by imperialism with the aim of seizing or
strengthening economic or strategic positions in various countries and regions,

in order in the final analysis to undermine or push back the forces of socialism
and to crush the revolutionary and national liberation movement. For the countries
and peoples which have become the victims of imperialist aggression or the targets
of acts of political provocation, a local war becomes a general, just war of
liberation for social and national independence.

ln its sociopolitical essence a military conflict is alsoacontinuation of the
politics of classes and always possesses a specific political significance. Even a
battle, as V. I. Lenin noted, "which possesses no political significance is not a
battle but simply a fight.“8

A military conflict is an arned clash which is characterised. in contrast to a local
war. by a significantly smaller scale and smaller quantity of forces involved in

the actions. As is indicated by military-historical experience, sometimes it is
difficult to draw a line between local war and military conflict. But such a line
exists, and it can be found by employing the criteria of quantitative analysis
(spatial scope of military operations, quantity of forces involved in the armed
clash. numerical strength of forces. etc). The root difference between a local

war and a military conflict lies in the fact that a war usually characterizes a
specific state of a country, while in most cases a conflict characterises the state
of the armed forces and even a portion of the armed forces.

Military conflicts in our time possess similar or identical causes as local wars.
Frequently military conflicts precede wars, develop into or accompany were. This
also determines the necessity of examining them within a systemic unity. as adjacent
links of the cannon chain of military actions of capitalism.

war is an expression of extreme aggravation of political conflicts between nations
or classes, at the sane time constituting a specific form of manifestation of these
conflicts and their resolution. A necessary attribute of war is armed violence.
Since it is present in such phenomena of history as, for example, popular armed
uprisings. these phenomena can be studied from the standpoint of employment of
means of armed violence by the warring parties. But nevertheless war and such an
event of history as a popular uprising are far from identical phenomena. since the
causes of war and popular armed rebellions are different. war -- a product of an
exploiter society -- is not necessarily always directly linked to a conflict be-
tween productive forces and production relations, while this conflict is the prin-
cipal cause of popular armed uprisings.

The authors' subject of investigation is local were and military conflicts proper.
and the most significant of these and, in addition, studied in a correlation with
the entire course of international relations in each historical segment of time.

Investigation of local ware and military conflicts is one of the most important
tasks of Soviet military-historical science. proceeding from the resolutions of
the 26th and 25th CPSU congresses. It expands our knowledge of the general crisis

of the world capitalist system and provides concrete knowledge of the military
policy and strategy of world capitalism. And this serves as a genuine theoretical
aid in the campaign to implement the program points advanced at party congresses

FOIiOFHKJAl.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dealing with securing peace and international cooperation, the freedon and in-
dependence of peoples, and expands possibilities of counteracting the forces of
aggression and reaction.

The theses of Hararisn-Leninisa contained in the works of K. Marx. P. Engels. and
V. I. Lenin. as well as in the doculents of the world Co-Iniat nova-ant serve as
the ideological-theoretical and nethodological foundation of this value. '31s
has nade it possible to perforn a conprehensive analysis of the policies of the
capitalist powers in relation to colonial and dependent countries. the political
essence of local wars. the character and mtive forces of the national liberation
novenent and its relationship to socialise and the international worker novenant.

0f exceptional importance for this investigation were the articles and speeches of
CPSU Central Co-ittee General Secretary 1.. I. Brezhnev. chairnan of the Presidiu-
of the USSR Suprae Soviet. published in the nultivolura work "Leninskin kurson"
[Following a baninist Course] (1970-1979).

Fairly extensive Soviet and foreign literature dealing to one degree or another
with the problen of local wars and ailitary conflicts was enployed as sources.

The authors would like to express their thanks to all persons and organizations

which assisted than with comsel and advice at various stages of this project.
WES

l. V. 1. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Co-plete works], Vol 26, page 316.

2. "Haterialy XXV s"yezda 055" [Proceedings of the 25th CPS!) Congress]. Moscow,
1976, page lo.

3. See 1.. I. Brezhnev. "Savetskiye profsoyuay — vliyatel'naya aila naahego
obshchestva" [Soviet Trade Unions - Influential l'orce in Our Society]. Moscow.
1977, page 29.

lo. "Hezhdunarodnoye Soveshchaniye ko-unisticheskikh i rabochikh partiy.
Dokuaenty i naterisly" [International Conference of min and ﬂorker
Parties. Docuents and Materials], Moscow. 1969, page 288.

S. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 39, page 67.

6. Ibid., Vol 30. pp 350-351.

7. L. I. Brezhnev. "Leninskin kurson. nachi i :tat'i" [Following a Leninist
Course. Speeches and Articles], Vol 2, Hoscow, 1973. page 369.

8. Lenin. op. cit., Vol lb, page 113.

MMWWLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Part 1. mm HARS OF IMPERIALISH: ESSENCE, HISTORY, NEGRY
Chapter One. Essence of local Wars

1. Marxism-Leninisn on the Sociopolitical Essence of Local Hers

K. Marx and F. mgele, the founders of scientific cot-mien, deaonstrated that wars,
a product of a class-antagonistic society, are initiated and waged in the name of
the economic and political goals of specific classes. Hhatever the motive behind a
war, its roots lie in econonics. "...Violence is only a means, while economic ad-
vantage is an end."1 noted 1". Engels. At the same tine he eaphasired that military
violence is a political act.

The ideological. leaders of the proletariat deeply and comprehensively investigated
the origin and character of the wars of their time. employing methods of dialectical-
materialist analysis and closely linking it with the general tasks of the liberation
novenent of the oppressed masses, and particularly with the struggle of the worker
class, whereby they determined the relationship to the concrete wars of their are
from the standpoint of the prospects of this struggle. The founders of Marxian sub-
divided wars into wars between bourgeois states, colonial were, general wars, and
minor wars. The theses they formulated served as a basis for a genuinely scientific

understanding of the essence of local wars.

Addressing the question of "minor" wars, K. Marx and F. Engels called then "local-
ized," viewing them as such in relation both to a European war and a general

world war. In a letter to H. Liebknecht dated February 1878. for example, It. Marx
initially speaks of "localized" wars. and later of ”general" ware.2 In March 1887
F. Engels. in a letter to A. Rebel, points to the efforts of Czarist Russian
diplomacy to cause a "localized" war and to avoid a European war. P. Engels com—
nents. however, that "localized" wars in Europe contain the danger of escalation
into a "general" war. He "who would act first, would provoke a general world war."3

‘Ihus K. Marx and F. Engels distinguished "minor". "localised" wars in their cor-
relation with European and general world wars, the possibility of occurrence of

which they foresaw. They defined "localized" were as were with the participation

of two or three countries in a limited area, the course of which could be controlled.“
They wrote that these wars are waged by nunerically smell armies and are not accos-
panied by disastrous consequences for the vanquished.

K. Marx and F. Engels also called coalition wars fought by European countries in
Africa, As La, and America "ninor" wars. They devoted considerable attention to
disclosing their social content and pointed to their aggressive, unjust character
on the part of the European countries.

Condenning colonial wars, the founders of Marxism at the same time justified wars
in defense of national independence and struggle by the peoples of colonies for
liberation from the colonial yoke. They viewed colonial peoples as an ally of the
worker class in the revolutionary struggle against the bourgeoisie. In particular,
assessing the significance of the struggle of the peoples of India for a

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revolutionary movenent in the hone country, 1". Bagels noted that "India, with that
drain of manpower and money which it will cost England, is presently our best ally."5

At the sane time the leaders of the proletariat pointad to the fact that defeat of
the bourgeoisie in the home country can ease the face of enslaved peoples in the
colonies, since it undermines the might of the world's calonial enpires.

Being realists, K. Marx and P. Engels of course could not help but see the total
domination of capitalism and the overwhelming superiority of its colonial arnies
over the practically unarmed, disorganized masses in the oeuntries of Asia and

Africa. In that historical period in which K. Marx and P. Engels lived, the na-

tional liberation movenent in the colonies was only just gaining strength and was
not unified.

Realistically appraising the insense inequality of forces in colonial wars, the
founders of Marxisn saw the enormous difficulties VhLCh blocked the road to suc-
cess for the enslaved peoples in their struggle with the colonialiets. At the same
tine they were firmly confident in the victory of forces pursuing just aims in war.

0f great theoretical and practical significance were the conclusions of the
founders of Marxian on armed rebellion, and in particular the conclusion that under
certain conditions a rebellion can develop into a war. and a war can be attended
by an uprising. The basis for this conclusion was furnished by the experience of
revolutionary uprisings by the worker class in the hone countries, and the ex-
perience of the Paris Come in particular, which was a consequence of the Franco-
Prussian war of 1870-1871. This was also indicated by the experience of the armed
struggle of insurgent military detachnsnts in the colonies (the Sepoy Revolt in
India in 1857-1859).

V. I. Lenin, great successor of Marxist teachings. began his revolutionary career
in the period of transition by capitalism to its highest stage - iaperialiss. He
called the new era an era of wars and revolutions. Based on e dialectical-
materialist analysis of the era. V. I. Lenin revealed the interrelationship between
the politics of imperialism and armed violence, demstrating that violence is an
instrument for strengthening and broadening the class donination of the nonopoly
bourgeoisie. Applied to vars. the principal thesis of dislectica, noted V. I.
Lenin, "is that 'war is simply a continuation of politics by other' (namely violent)
'means' ...Precisely this was always the via: of Man: and Engels, who viewed every
war as a continuation of the politics of given, interested powers - and different
classes within then -- at a given time."6

Further developing the ideas of K. Marx and P. Engels. V. I. Lenin revealed the
essence, character and place of "minor," local were in the new era. The collapse of
the capitalist system, wrote V. I. Lenin. "will be a world-historic period, an en-
tire era of the most diversified wars -- isperialist were. civil were within a
country, an interweave of both. national were. were of liberation of nationalities
crushed by the imperialists in various cosbinetions of ilperialist powers...."7

The wars of capitalist nations were directed against forces of social and national
liberation and were of a clearly marked expansionist. unjust character. They led to
completion of territorial division of the world. At the same ties, the first were

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for rudivision of the world broke out at the end of the 19th and beginning of the
20th century. These wars were mutually aggressive and unjust. The warring sides
pursued predatory aimsinthese wars.

Colonial wars were occurring more frequently in the new, 20th century. "The history
of the 20th century," wrote V. I. Lenin, "this century of 'unbridled imperialism,’
is filled with colonial wars."8 Lenin named imperialism as the sole culprit of
these wars, for imperialism "accelerates the development of capitalism in the most
backward countries and thus broadens and aggravates the struggle against national
oppression.... From this it inevitably follows that imperialism should frequently
engender national wars."9

Any just (national) war arises only in response to reactionary violence, in response
to an unjust military action, which the exploiting, dominating and oppressing
classes themselves always begin. In his "Notebooks on Imperialism," V. I. Lenin
demonstrated the true essence of colonial wars and those, as he put it, "small" wars
which the imperialist powers were waging on the European continent, in the Beer and
Far East, and in Africa. The objective of both types of war, V. l. Lenin noted,

is to maintain the system of violence and eatraeconomic coercion, the struggle for
redivision of the colonies and for preserving the system of colonial rule.

V. I. Lenin pointed out that a world war presented an enormous danger to the

peoples of the colonies. "It is a war (World War I - Auth.), first of all, to
strengthen the slavery of the colonies by means of a more 'just' division and sub-
sequently a more 'amicable' exploitation of the colonies; secondly,for strengthening
oppression of other nationalities within the 'great' powers themselves...; thirdly,
to strengthen and prolong hired s1avery...."1°

At the same time V. I. Lenin also saw another aspect of the interrelationship be-
tween the imperialist world war and the struggle of the peoples of colonies for

their liberation. Initiating a world war, he commented, imperialism impels the
masses to resist, aggravating on an enormous scale class conflicts at home and in
dependent countries. At the sane time, forming of the indigenous population colonial
troops for defense of their own interests, the inperialists are unwittingly teaching
the inhabitants of the colonies military organization and "the extremely useful
skill" of using arms.

V. 1. Lenin viewed wars between imperialist nations and crisis situations in the
home country as conditions favoring the victory of national liberation forces.
Armed intervention by imperialist powers in the affairs of the colonies, he taught,
can be paralyzed by a war erupting between them and by aggravation of imperialist
conflicts. Oppressed peoples will definitely take advantage of crisis situations
occurring in this manner in the home country.

The national liberation movement, developing and growing, deals a blow to the rear
areas of world imperialism -- its colonial system. and thus the peoples of the
colony become allies and a reserve force of the proletarian revolution. Lenin's
idea of alliance between the proletariat and oppressed peoples in the struggle
against imperialism and the idea of supporting national liberation wars and in-
surgencies is grounded on this.

12

FOR 0FIWCJAI.USEIMNLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. I. Lenin stressed that "there is no major difference... in a political respect"
between a national insurgency and a national war fought by oppressed peoples.

"Military war historians are entirely correct in also placing revolts in the same
category as were . "11

while supporting national vars, V. I. Lenin at the same time warned of the harmful-
ness of s non-class approach to their assessment, as was done by the leaders of

the Second International. He emphasized that a non-class appraisal of a "national
war” helps the national bourgeoisie fool the masses and conceal their private-
ownership interests behind ideas of national unification. But as soon as the
prospects of victory in a "national war” become apparent, most frequently the

national bourgeoisie betrays the interests of its people and makes a deal with the
colonial powers.

The ideas of this eminent strategist of proletarian revolution pertaining to the
nature of imperialism, its politics and various forms of antiimperialist armed
struggle formed the basis of the policies of Marxist parties regarding imperialist,
civil and national liberation wars. Totally condemning predatory imperialist wars
and exposing the predatory policy of the bourgeoisie in these wars, Marxists in-
alterably supported civil wars of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, national
liberation wars and insurgenciesin dependent cauntries and colonies. "Socialists
always take the side of the oppressed. and consequently they cannot be opponents of

wars th; objective of which is a democratic or socialist struggle against oppres-
sion."

Developing the legacy of the founders of Marxism-Leninism, Harrist-Leninist
parties made a creative contribution both to the teaching of Marxism-Leninism on
vars and to the practical matter of struggle against imperialism and its policies
of colonialisn and neocolonialism.

Much was done to determine the paths and forms of the anticolonial struggle of
peoples by the Comintern. the program of which proclaiaed the right of the peoples
of colonies and senicolonies to armed defense against imperialism. The Comintern
proceeded thereby from the Lenin thesis of the interrelationship between the na-
tional liberation struggle and the proletarian revolutionary movement.

0f great importance for the struggle against local wars of imperialisn on the eve of
Uorld War II was the point contained in the resolution of the Seventh Enlarged
Plenum of the Comintern Executive Committee on the importance of the military

factor in national revolutions. The resolution noted that intervention by imperial-
ist powers was assuming a flexible, camouflaged character, that initially civil var
breaks out in the country, support is given to the counterrevolutionary forces,
subsequently followed by armed intervention.13

Adopting this resolution. the Comintern Executive Committee based its decision on
actual facts and events. In 1924. for example. the imperialists unleashed a civil
war in China, and subsequently invaded that country. Later the Comintern'e predic-
tion was emphatically reconfirmed. The imperialists ignited the flame of civil war
in Spain, supporting the counterrevolutionary forces with armed intervention. The
interventionist policy of the imperialist powers in the 1930's was fraught with the
danger of escalation of "minor" wars into major wars. "...The new phase of

13

FOR OFIWCJAI.U88¢DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperialist policy," stated the Comintern at that time, "is characterized by the
fact that capitalism is preparing to transition from ’minor' wars to major wars."1‘

The subsequent course of world events fully confirmed this conclusion. The ag-
gressive policies of German and Italian fascism in Europe and Japanese imperialism
in the Far East led, as we know, to the formation of two focal areas of war.

World War 11, initiated by the imperialists, constituted a most profound social
shock for the entire capitalist world. One of its consequences was a powerful up-
surge of the national liberation movement, which encompassed all the world's con-
tinents. World imperialism, endeavoring to preserve its colonial rule and to hinder
the processes of national liberation, embarked upon a course of local acts of ag-
gression against the peoples of the colonies and dependent countries. The Con-
ference of Representatives of Communist and Worker Parties in 1957, exposing the im-
perialist, aggressive character of local wars against the peoples of Indochina,
indonesia, Malaya, Kenya, and Egypt, Algeria. Oman, and Yemen, stressed that the
imperialists are endeavoring to prolong their colonial supremacy in new forms, are
uniting efforts in the struggle against peoples seeking to throw off the colonial
yoke and independently to determine their own destiny, but they are unable to im-
pede the collapse of the colonial system.

Representatives of Communist and worker parties once again, at their Conference in
1960, devoted considerable attention to the struggle of the peoples of colonies and
dependent countries for their liberation. They thoroughly analyzed the situation in
the countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America and appealed for all-out support for
peoples fighting against imperialist colonial oppression and armed aggression. The
conference pointed out that imperialism is seeking to preserve colonial exploitation,
resorting to utilization of an entire system of military instruments and methods
(military blocs, bases. military-dictator regimes, local wars).

The documents of the 1969 Conference of Co-unist and Worker Parties contained a
comprehensive description of imperialisa and its aggressive nature. Defining the
methods with the aid of which the imperialists are attempting to hold back the
development of the national liberation struggle of peoples and the process of
revolutionary reforms, the Conference stated: "Armed interventions and cruel acts
of repression -- especially where the struggle is assuming the most acute forms and
where revolutionary forces are fighting with weapon in hand - everything has been
thrown into the fray by imperialism - counterrevolutionary plots, reactionary and
fascist coups. acts of provocation and hlachmail."15

Examining the question of the correlation between the policy of peaceful coexistence
and the national liberation struggle, the Conference emphasized that ”a policy of
peaceful coexistence is not in contradiction to the right of oppressed peoples to
utilize in the struggle for their liberation that path which they consider neces-
sary -- armed or unnrmed...."15 This thesis was also reflected in the final

document of the June 1976 Conference of European Communist and Worker Parties.
At its 26th Congress, the Communist Party thoroughly analyzed the world situation,
the policies and strategy of the imperialist nations, proceeding from a most im-

portant factor of contemporary history -- collapse of the colonial system of im-
perialism under the onslaught of the national liberation struggle of peoples. As

1b
IND! OFFICIAI.lEﬂ!(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the congress noted, imperialism is not repudiating local were against liberated
peoples. and in the zone of the national liberation movement imperialist aggression
is focused primarily against countries which have chosen the path of noncapitalist
development. The congress pointed out that those who are fighting colonial regimes
which still remain in some countries can count on the full support of the Soviet
Union.

Analysis of the military policy and strategy of imperialism occupied.a significant
place in the proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress. the congress noted that,
although the capabilities of imperialism to undertake aggressive actions have been
significantly diminished, its nature is unchanged and there remains a real danger
of occurrence of military conflicts.

world peace is by no means guaranteed at the present time - this is one of the
conclusions reached at the congress. The congress emphasised that the Soviet state
will continue with redoubled energy its policy of restraining the forces of war and
aggression. strengthening world peace, and securing the rights of peoples to freedom,
independence, and social progress.

The experience of the world revolutionary movement of recent years has shown that

if there arises a genuine threat to the supremacy of monopoly capital and its
political henchmen, imperialism will stop at nothing. including employment of means
of armed violence. The policies of a number of imperialist countries. and the

United States in particular, even today continue to contain aspects which threaten
the freedom and independence of peoples, and the actions of these countries frequent-
ly constitute crude meddling in the domestic affairs of developing countries on the
side of the forces of oppression and reaction.

Collapse of the colonial system of imperialism by no means signifies that such a
reactionary phenomenon in international affairs as colonialism has come to an end.
In conditions of change in the correlation of forces in the world arena and a
crisis of the imperialist "policy of force," colonialism is taking on new forms.
The forms of armed expansion. which pursue imperialist policy aims, are also chang-

ing.

Inciting local wars and military conflicts, imperialism is endeavoring to restrain
the aspiration of peoples for freedom. independence, and socialism. and to utilize
them as a means of achieving political objectives. These aims include the following:
weakening of the world socialist system by detaching individual countries from it;
crushing of the national liberation movement in various countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America, and imposition of reactionary puppet regimes to weaken the front
of the allies of the socialist nations in the struggle against imperialism; export
of counterrevolution for the suppression of democratic, antiimperialist movements
and prevention of radical revolutionary reforms. At the same time local wars and
silitary conflicts are being utilized by imperialist powers as a means of preparing
for a world war, as a convenient excuse for continuing and escalating the arms race,
and as a temporary "lightning rod" against economic decline and a "stimulator" of
production. All this attests to the extremely reactionary role of local wars and
military conflicts initiated by the imperialists and to the fact that they are sub-
ordinated to the general political aims of imperialism in the struggle against its
class enemies in the world arena.

15

F!"I(JPF!CIAI.I£§EL(HVLV
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With all the diversity of contemporary local wars, one cannot help but see their
common sociopolitical features.

First of all, with the existence in the world of two opposing sociopolitical sys-
tems and the struggle between them, which constitutes the principal conflict of the
contemporary era, any local war initiated by the imperialists affects to one degree
or another the class and national interests of the countries of these systems.
Therefore it bears the imprint of a limited armed conflict between capitalism and
socialism.

Secondly, in many instances contemporary local wars are of a coalition nature. in
local wars imperialists seek to unify the efforts of all reactionary forces, since
they do not count on handling on their own the powerful revolutionary and liberation
movement. The imperialists act in concert out of fear over the fate of the capital-
ist system, which is engulfed in a deep general crisis. Local wars initiated by

the imperialists receive in turn, as a rule, a collective rebuff on the part of

the socialist countries and all progressive forces throughout the world.

Thirdly, contemporary local wars have a complex political content, in which are
interwoven the class political objectives of imperialism as a whole and the selfish
interests of the national groups of the monopoly bourgeoisie of the various
countries. 0n the other hand, elements of civil and national liberation wars are
combined in the struggle of peoples against imperialist acts of aggression.

Fourthly, indicative of contemporary local wars is an increase in the role of the
masses in the course and outcome of military operations and involvement of all
segments of the population in the war. This is characteristic both of aggressor
nations and of the nations against which aggression is directed. for even local
armed conflicts affect the vital interests of the working people. In aggressor
countries they inevitably engender a protest movement and aggravate social con-
flicts. Today the imperialists are less able than ever before to count on the sup-
port of the population of their countries, and therefore they count on an army of
mercenaries, while in those countries which are the victims of aggression the en-
tire people, inspired by an awareness of the just aims of the war, rise up for the
struggle.

2. 0n the Classification and Systen of Local Hare and Military Conflicts

The scientific principles of classification of wars were elaborated by K. Marx and
F. Engels and were further developed by V. I. Lenin, applicable to the era of im-
perialiam and proletarian revolutions.

In spite of the fact that the founders of scientific communism based their
theoretical investigations on the experience of preceding wars and wars of which
they were contemporaries, the theses they formulated still serve today as a
reliable methodological foundation for classifying wars.

"hat is it important to emphasize in the ideological legacy of the founders of
Marxism-Leninism in this area? First of all we should stress the fundamental
thesis of a class approach to evaluation of a given war.

16

FOR 0F1HCJA1.USEGDNLY
FOR 0FFNJAl.UEEZONLV

K. Marx and P. Engels viewed all wars. regardless of their scale and silitsryvtech-
nological content, [toe the standpoint of whether they fostered development of the
revolution and victory of the worker class or, on the contrary. impeded the revolu-
tionary process and conplicated the struggle by the proletariat for its liberation.

They taught the proletarian parties to assess various were precisely from these
class positions.

V. l. Lenin made quite definite statenents on this score. In our time. he wrote,
the legitimacy and justice of a war can he established "only from the standpoint of

the socialist proletariat and its struggle for its liberation; we do not recognize
any other point of view."17

This ﬂarxist-Leninist thesis reflects the objective pattern of nan's revolutionary
transition fro- capitaliem to socialism. It possesses enormous mobilizing and or-
ganizing force. expressing the actual attitude of working people toward war, name-
ly: the necessity of a resolute struggle against imperialist predatory wars and
selfless support of revolutionary and national liberation were.

The founders of Harris! attached prime importance in determining the social
character of wars and the attitude of the worker class toward wars to an analysis

of their political content and the political aims of the warring sides. The politi-
cal content of a war determines its progressive or reactionary role in the ef-

fairs of society. On this basis, V. I. Lenin divided were into just and unjust.

He linked the legitimacy and justice of certain wars and the injustice of others

to their progressiveness or reactionary character. Lenin wrote: "...There are

just wars and unjust wars, progressive and reactionary were. were of progressive
classes and wars of backward classes, were pronoting strengthening of class
oppression and were serving to overthrow class oppression...."18

The concept of just war is applicable in present-day conditions primarily to were

of socialist nations against imperialist aggression, to revolutionary wars and arsed
rebellions of the worker class and the worker masses against the oppressors, for
democracy and socialism, and to national liberation wars of oppressed peoples
against colonialists and in defense of national independence.

The sociopolitical character of wars of the proletariat and its governmental
systems against oppressors and the aggression of exploiter nations, independent of
the form of war (local or world), is always just. Thus the struggle in local

wars is of a just nature if it is being waged: in defense of the achievements of
socialise in individual countries; in the interests of victory of a socialist or

democratic revolution; for national liberation or in defense of national in-
dependence.

lnperialist local were against individual socialist countries, local were for the
seizure of territory of other countries. for redividing spheres of influence. for
preserving and reestablishing colonial rule, and counterrevolutionary wars by the
bourgeoisie against the proletariat which is carrying out a revolution in an in-
dividual country are unjust.

V. l. Lenin stressed that there are always two sides operating in war. For
analysis of were as a bilateral process. V. I. Lenin introduced the concept of

17

INDI‘OFINCIAI.IISIiCNVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

type of war. he presented a model of Marxist analysis of types of wars of
premonopoly capitalism and the era of imperialism. In a letter to Inessa Armand,
V. I. Lenin pointed to the existence of three major types of political relations
which are formed between nations, and the types of wars of the era of imperialism
which correspond to these types of political relations.

”(1) The three main types: relationship of the oppressed to the oppressing nation
(every war is a continuation of politics; politics is a relationship between na-
tions, classes, etc). As a general rule, war is legitimate on the side of the
oppressed party (regardless of whether it is defensive or offensive in a military
sense).

"(11) Relationship between two oppressor nations. A struggle for colonies, for
markets. etc (Rome and Carthage; England and Germany, 1916-1917). As a general
rule, a war of this type is robbery on both sides; and the relationship of

democracy (and socialism) toward it falls under the following rule: 'Iwo thieves are
fighting, let them both die'....

"(111) Third type. A system of equal nations. An extremely complex questionllil
Especially if Czarism stands alongside civilised, comparatively1 democratic nations.
This was the case (approximately) in Europe from 1815 to 1905."

The era of transition from capitalism to socialism is distinguished by a complex
interweave of different systems ofpolitical relations and social conflicts. The
principal conflict of this era is the conflict between two opposing social systems --
imperialism and socialism. Also characteristic of the contemporary era are con-
flicts between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, between imperialism and the
national liberation movement, and between capitalist nations.

As is attested by the experience of history, a corresponding type of war is
determined in relation to the type of conflicts being resolved in that war. Among
the great diversity of wars of the contemporary era -- the era of transition from
capitalism to socialism -- we can distinguish the following types of wars, according
to sociopolitical attributes:

were between nations (coalitions) of the two opposing social systems - im-
perialism and socialism;

wars between antagonistic classes within a single country;

wars between imperialist nations and peoples (countries) which are defend-
ing their freedom and independence or are waging a national liberation struggle;

was between different capitalist countries.
Rnrcly can the principal types of wars be isolated in "pure form." For example,
national liberation wars in Indochina (1954-1975) were combined with a struggle
against imperialist aggressors and in defense of the achievements of socialism.

The civil war in the USSR (1918-1920) and the civil war in Spain (1936-1939) were
interwoven with a struggle against foreign intervention.

18

FOR OFIWCJAl.lEﬂE(HNLY
nos OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contemporary wars ol colonialists against the national liberation movement frequent-
ly are of a clearly marked entisocialist thrust. And this is not surprising. In
the course of the national liberation struggle oppressed nations and smell

countries inevitably draw close to the community of socialist nations. which
promotes these conntries' aspiration toward a noncapitalist path of development, to-
ward socialism, and the imperialists fear this more than all else.

In the last 30 years the imperialists have initiated or incited were:

against individual socialist countries (the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea. the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. and Cuba); '

against developing countries which have chosenthepath of noncapitslist
development (Angola. Congo, etc);

against peoples fighting for their national liberation (Algeria. Burma.
Indonesia. etc);

civil wars (Greece in 1966-1959, China in 1946-l9k9);

between individual capitalist or developing countries (between Turkey and
Greece. between India and Pakistan).

The collapse of the colonial system led to the formation in Africa. Asia, and Latin
America of a large number of new sovereign and equal developing nations. which

find themselves, however, at different stages of economic. political and cultural
development and which have differing relations with one another as well as with the
imperialist and socialist countries. In many developing countries the process of
nation forming has not been completed. while in some of these countries intertribal
strife has not yet been overcoee. Various trends are in evidence in the internal
affairs of these countries -- a trend toward peoples drawing closer together in
the antiimperialist struggle and a trend toward national individualization, isolation
even hostility, a trend which is a legacy of colonialism. Superimposed on relations
between developing countries is the imprint of borders which were artificially
"cut" by the former colonialists. which leads to territorial disputes and military
conflicts. By means of various intrigues and acts of provocation, the imperialists
seek to incite one country against another, to place them in opposition to one
another and to subordinate them to the imperialists' influence. Many of the were
and conflicts which arise between developing countries cannot be isolated as an
independent type of military clash, since relations between these countries repeat
the principal types of intergovernmental relations inherent in the contemporary
era.

0f importance for classifying wars and military conflicts is a scaling or quantita-
tive approach to their evaluation. It includes taking into account such criteria
as the number of countries participating in a war and military conflict, the sire
of the territory involved in military operations and, finally,such an important
criterion as the degree of involvement of armed forces and weapons in military

operations.

19

FOIiNﬂﬂKJAl,USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Local wars and military conflicts can be subdivided according to geographic at-
tribute into the following:

into wars and military conflicts between two or several countries of a single
geographic region;

into wars and military conflicts between two or several countries of differal
regions of the world;

into wars and military conflicts within a single country.

All local wars and military conflicts known to history were waged primarily with the
aid of conventional weaponry. In world Her I, however, and in a number of local
wars which preceded world war I, incendiary devices were extensively employed. And
in the course of some local wars of recent years, in which American forces parti-
cipated, 0.5. militarist circles entertained plans of employing nuclear weapons.

Local wars and military conflicts can be subdivided, on the basis of degree of em-
ployment of manpower and weapons, into the following:

into wars and military conflicts in which only regular armed forces take
part, with employment of all types of weapons with the exception of nuclear;

into wars and military conflicts in which, alongside regular troops, ir-
regulars also take part, employing conventional weapons, including obsolete
weapons in a good many instances.

Taking account of all the attributes and criteria, both sociopolitical and military-
technical. one can differentiate among local wars and military conflicts as fol-
lows:

1) Local wars and military conflicts initiated by individual capitalist
countries against individual socialist countries. These were unjust wars and con-
flicts on the part of the capitalist countries, aimed at destroying the socialist
achievements of peoples and thus weakening the world socialist system. The social-
ist nations were defending in these were and conflicts the just aims of protecting
their achievements.

As experience showed, wars of this kind demanded a considerable effort by the
resources and capabilities of the warring aides. The scale of wars depended on the
specific features of the area of military operations and on the degree of involve-

ment of other nations in the conflict. Such Local were contained the danger of es-
calation to a world war.

2) Local wars and military conflicts of capitalist nations with peoples
(countries) fighting for or defending their haepeuince. These were also unjust,
reactionary, predatory wars on the part of the capitalist countries, aimed at using
the force of arms to hold or restore lost supremacy in former colonies and
dependent countries. 0n the part of peoples (countries) fighting for their in-
dependence, however. these were just wars. Distinctive features of these were in-
cluded the focal character of military operations which, however, gradually

20

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(N‘LY
FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(M‘LY

extended to near or all of the country's territory, as well as the fact that one of
the warring sides was operating on a relatively weak neterial-technological base.

3) Local wars and silitary conflicts between individual capitalist countries
or groups of capitalist countries. Such wars arose chiefly either due to unresolved
territorial questions or as a consequence of efforts by an aggressive nation to
seize new narkets, to expand its territory at the expense of other, weaker nations,
or to strengthen its strategic position in a certain part of the world.

4) Civil wars and donestic nilitary conflicts also fall within the local
category. if one applies only criteria of scale. These are arIed clashes of a
special type. we know that the class struggle in a class-antagonistic society ul-
tinately becomes a political struggle, a struggle for power. Under certain condi-
tions it aseunes the nest acute ferns and transitions to an arsed uprising by the
oppressed and exploited sasses and subsequently to a civil war, in the course of
which reactionary forces endeavor, with the aid of area, to crush revolutionary
actions by the workers and to preserve their supra-soy.

Fro- the standpoint of scaling, quantitative criteria. nilitary actions in civil
were usually do not go beyond the borders of a single country, and at the sale tine
they are distinguished by a great diversity of for-s of struggle and a changing one-
position of participants.

"...A civil war," wrote V. I. Lenin, "differs free a custonary war by an in-
neasurably greater coeplexity, uncertainty and indeterninscy of cosposition of
fighting forces involved -- by virtue of transitions from one canp to another... by
virtue of the inpossibility of drawing a line between 'coebetants' and 'nonconbetants,‘
that is. between those who are and are not in the ranks of the warring sides."2°

Frequently external forces which have a stake in the victory of certain classes
within a country intervene in a civil war. Sonetinss this is done under the banner
of bringing peace between the warring sides and defense of so-called "denocratic
freedons." During the civil war in the USSR, for sxanple, interference by external
forces ended up as naked nilitsry intervention by the capitalist powers under the
pretext of defending the "legitinate" order, but in actual fact was sined at the
restoration of capitalise. During the civil war in Spain. the fascist nations -—
Germany and Italy -- supported the insurgent reactionary forces, utilising as a
pretext the phony slogan of defending "denocratic freedons."

The period following world War II contains nany era-plea of civil wars acconpanied
by intervention by external forces. They include the civil wars in Greece (19b6-
1949), China (1966-1969), in Cuba (1959). in Angola (l96b-l976). etc.

Bourgeois ideologues, attespting to justify the aggressive actions of inperialisn
(or to diainish the negative effect of its interventionist policy). usually deny
or sisply rennin silent about the existence of an entire systen of such actions.
And yet such a systes exists and is operating. as a reflection of the general sins
of the struggle of the isperialist states against their opponents in the world
arena. The facts and all the policies of inpsrialisn in our tine attest to this.

21

FOI‘OFFIJAI.UGE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL liSE ONLY

Unification of the efforts of the imperialist nations on a class, counterrevolu-
tionary and anticommunist basis and the formation of a common-goal strategy of
world imperialism began following the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolu-
tion and the birth of the world's first socialist state. From now on. stressed V.
I. Lenin, "the mutual relations of peoples and the entire world system of nations
will be determined by the struggle of a small group of imperialist nations against
the Soviet movement and Soviet state, at the head of which stands Soviet Russia."21
Already at that time the capitalists set for themselves the aim of elaborating

“the optimal international strategy" of class struggle. This strategy crystallized
in the process of crushing armed uprisings by the proletariat, organization of
counterrevolutionary campaigns by a number of capitalist countries against the
Soviet Union, and in struggle with the forces of the national liberation movement.
On this foundation the imperialists were attempting to put together a unified auti-
communist bloc on the eve of World War II.

0f the two trends in the interrelationships of imperialist states noted by V. I.
Lenin, however -- unification on a common counterrevolutionary basis and their
separation due to the aggravation of interimperialist conflicts - the latter ad-
vanced to the forefront for a certain period of time. The imperialists were unable
to create in a practical manner a cannon anticomunist front, although in an
ideological respect it had not only existed prior to the outbreak of Horld Bar 11
but also gave evidence of its presence in the course of the war.

Following World war ll the global strategy of imperialism assumed concrete forms,
under the influence of a deepening of the general crisis of capitalism, collapse
of the bloc of fascist states and a shifting of the center of world imperialist
forces from Europe to the United States, which had assumed the role of "savior" of
the capitalist system.

As was noted at the International Conference of Communist and Uorker Parties in
1969, "in a situation of aggravation of struggle between the two world systems, the
capitalist powers... are endeavoring to unify their efforts in order to preserve

and strengthen the system of exploitation and oppression and to regain their lost
position."22

The global strategy of imperialism is a coordinated policy on the part of the im-
perialist nations, reflecting their common aspirations, goals and forms of struggle
with progressive forces in the world arena. It unites the efforts of imperialist
countries and regimes as well as those following imperialist policy in the

struggle against socialism, the revolutionary and national liberation movement.

This strategy is directed against the nations of socialism. It specifies. in
particular, several belts (strategic echelons) of encirclement around the nations of
the socialist community.

A systemic analysis in the area of international relations presupposes study of the
interaction of all elements and forces participating in international affairs, con-
sideration of crisis situations, including local military clashes, and elucidation
of their character and influence on the general process of world development.

in the contemporary era any aggravation of the international situation, especially
when it is accompanied by an armed conflict even on a small scale, signals a warning

22

IN)!‘0$TIC1AI.USEI(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the world as never before, since it affects the interests of the ecuntries not
only of a given region or continent but of a number of regions or even all con-
tinents. A local war or any other conflict on a local scale carries within it the
danger of a chain reaction. As we know, in the postwar yams imperialism often
deliberately increased tension in international relations in certain regions in
order to divert world public attention away from a region in which it was preparing
for a military action. One's attention is also drawn by the fact that the im-
perialist nations immediately increased the state of readiness of their arned
forces as soon as a revolutionary situation developed or revolutionary or democratic
reforms began in a given country. For example, this was precisely how NATO leaders
reacted to the overthrow of the military dictatorship in Greece in 1976 and to the
democratic changes in Portugal, which began in April 1976. And in both cases the
NATO countries mobilized powerful political and military forces in order to prevent
revolutionary-demcratic reforms.

The place of the system of local wars and military conflicts in world politics can
be correctly determined only if one investigates military conflicts during a speci-
fied period of tine in their entire aggregate. while at the same time bearing in
mind that they took place on different continents, separated by great distances and
differing from one another in the special conditions of the political and military-
strategic situation.

The specific features of regional military events in the first place unify them in-
to a subsystem of local wars and conflicts on a given continent or in a given region
and, secondly. point to the diversity of event elements of the overall system.

A systems analysis makes it possible to elucidate the interrelationship and inter~
dependence of local military conflicts within continents and regions and, in addi-
tion. to determine fairly accurately the place and role of each conflict in the
global strategy of imperialism and, finally, to gain an idea of the general trend
of develop-ant of the struggle between two social forces in the world arena: the
forces of war, reaction, and imperialism on the one hand, and the forces of
progress. peace and socialism on the other.

3. Concept of Local Hare: Past and Present

Throughout the course of many decades the ruling circles of capitalist countries
inalterably viewed “minor," local were as one of the radical forms of influencing
the processes of world development. And while this View remained fairly persistent,
views on the role and place of local wars in the policies and strategy of im-
perialism changed with the passage of time.

Among the many concepts and ideas placed by the bourgeoisie in the service of ex-
pansionist policy. the most persistent and widespread ones include the following:
the cult of force and nilitarism as a leading trend in the development of bourgeois
thought; race theory. closely connected with fascism, geopolitics, Halthusianism,
and with the theory of so-called "manifest destiny" (if one beamin mind American
traditions of ”philosophy of force"), the theory of'balance of power" and, finally.
anticosmunism -- an ideology which found embodiment in the policies of the capital-
ist countries following the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution.

23

FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

American military historian Admiral A. Mahan (1840-1916) provided at an earlier
date than any others, and in a very frank manner, a theoretical foundation for

the hegemonist, power pretensions of the ruling circles of the capitalist countries.
"Military strength," he wrote at the end of the 19th century, "is one of the
predominant political elasents for justification... of policy.... Conflicts in

the international arena toughen nations and foster their maturation."23 There is
nothing other than selfish national interests, argued Malian, which would move the

development of relations between countries, and there is no reason to conceal this
fact.

This apologia of force and "national interest," which is permeated by a spirit of
militarism, was most appropriate for justifying a policy of expansion, which the
major capitalist powers were vigorously commencing to implement at that time. 'ihere-
fore it is not surprising that Hahan's ideas were adopted by the ideologues of im-
perialism. For example, the cult of force and militarism was widely adopted in
Imperial Ger-any, finding expression in the writings of Moltlte, Schlieffen, and

later in the fascist literature of Germany and Italy. Today cultivation of force

and an apologia of militarism are being continued in the writings of American

philosophers and sociologists. In the opinion of American sociologists El. Morgenthau,
A. Schlesinger and H. Whiteworth, the struggle for power, for hegemony with any
means comprises the basis of societal development.

"Race theory" has for centuries influenced the forming of the bourgeois concept of
loaal wars as an alternative to wars on a world scale and as a form of a show of
force.

The ideological credo of English. Spanish, and subsequently American, German and
Japanese coionialists was that there are "civilized" and "politically undeveloped"
nations in the world. The former should assume world leadership, regardless of the
path which mst be taken to accomplish this -- the annihilation of lower races and
peoples or subjection by force of those which could not be destroyed.

At the beginning of the 20th century racist views were quite widespread in the
Anglo-fascist countries. Many philosophers and sociologists in these countries
sought to prove that the Anglo-Saxons are superior to other peoples and destined

to place all other peoples in subjection to themselves, while in the final analysis
the English language will be the language of mankind. British bourgeois sociologist
C. Hoodruff extensively utilized racist argumentation to justify imperialist ex-
pansion. Mankind. he wrote, ”requires the annihilation of poorly agapted individ-
uals by means of war" and "bloodshed to destroy exceu population." 4 The extensive
program of colonial seizures by British and 0.8. imperialisa proceeded from this.
Subsequent aggressive u.s. and British military actions against small, "un-
civilized" countries and peoples originated in race theory, frequently interwoven
with Halthusian ideas. Later fascisa, with its openly racist program of gaining
world supremacy through conquest, became closely aligned with this theory.

in the United States race theory was also uniquely reflected in the idea of
"manifest destiny." u.s. politicians in the time of the 0.5. "founding fathers"
proclsiaed the slogan that "heaven itself" had prepared for America a special role
in world affairs. This slogan became one of the ideological motifs of 0.8. foreign
policy in the era of transition by capitalism into its monopoly stage, and

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subsequently, at the threshold of World Her I, an argue-ant for justfication of
aggressive U.S. actions. The theory of America's "nanifest destiny" to becons
world leader resounded with new force when the stern clouds of World War II began
gathering over Europe. A portentous statenent in this regard was nsde in 1939 by
proninent journalist H. Lippnann. "That which Rona was to the ancient world," he

wrote, "and Great Britain was in the 19th century. Aurica shall be in the world
of the future."25

Following World Her II the course being taken by the United States along the road
of "globalisn" was consolidated in political declarations. In 1945 President ..
II. Trunan openly declared U.S. world hegenony, thus demonstrating his adherence to
the idea of "manifest destiny." "Whether we wish it or not," he stated, "we must
acknowledge that the victory we have won has placed upon the American people the
burden of responsibility for future world leadership.“26 These sane views were
shared by General D. Eisenhower, who becane president in 1952, who in his nessages
to Congress and numerous speeches declared that the United States played the
"leading role in world affairs."

As is noted by sone American authors, John Kennedy was the first true globalist in
the U.S. presidency following World War 11. his following statenent is typical:
"He shall pay any price, bear any burden, accept any difficulties, support any
friend and oppose any foe in order to ensure the success of liberty.”27 Defining
freedom as the right of the United States to control the destiny of other people,
the ideologues of U.S. isperialisn justified the idea of interference in the

internal affairs of other countries on all continents from the standpoint of
"America's higher interests."

And although subsequently, under the influence of changes in the world balance of
power, it was necessary to iapose self-restrictions in the theory and practice of
U.S. globaliss, the idea of "nanifest destiny" did not cease serving as ideological
ammunition for forming concepts of wars and so-called "counterinsurgency actions."

The ideological roots of postwar military policy and theoretical substantiation of
U.S. strategic doctrines can be found in such a philosophical concept as the theory
of "balance of power " which was extensively utilised by political leaders in
prenonopoly EnglandZé and was subsequently further developed by the ideologues of
U.S. imperialisn. The essence of this concept is that a najor power nust always
endeavor to occupy the position of "arbiter" or "balancing nation," and this will
allegedly secure for that country a doninant position in the world.

This cynical philosphical concept, which finds expression, in particular, in the
well-known political aphorisa “divide and conquer," still exerts mornous influence
on the thinking of U.S. statesmen and ideologues and on strategic planning proper.

Admiral A. Mahan also played a very inportsnt role in forning the foundations of the
theory of "balance of power." Hahan proceeded fro. the geopolitical idea that the
root conflict in the world is the clash between the interests of "asritilse" and
"continental" powers, between the so-called world island" and its "nadtine satel-
lites." In his opinion, Russia we the bulwark of world continental power. The
sea powers (Japan in the East, Great Britain and Ger-any in the Heat, and the

United States both in the East and Heat) should create a counterbalance to this

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

night, possessing superior naval forces and exerting pressure on Russia from the
flanks. Mahan recommended that the u.s. Government always maintain a "free hand,"
occupying the position of a "balancing nation." Hahan considered all local wars
and military conflicts taking place in the world merely derivative from the con-
flicts between the "world island" and "world ocean"29

The ideas of A. Hahan were further developed by another ideologue of imperialism,
Hackinder.3° He recommended, with the aim of creating a favorable "balance of
power" for the United States, transforming the sea power of the nations surrounding
the socialist countries of the Eurasian continent into "land and water" power, in
order to control the world's principal sea lines of communication and at the same
time to possess a firm foothold on the continent. In other words, he advocated
creating two belts of "containment" around the socialist camp following Horld Her
[1: a belt of "land-nnd-water" nations, that is, Germany, France, Great Britain and
other countries in the west, and the United States, India, and China in the last.
He included in the second belt of "containment" the smaller countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America, which were dependent on the major imperialist powers.

Almost simultaneOusly with Hackinder, the idea of creating an anti-Soviet'balance
of power" which was geopolitical in essence was developed by Yale University
professor N. Spykman. He intentionally transformed the Hahan and hackinder map of
the world, with Eurasia occupying a central position, into a so-called geocentric
map with the United States occupying the center, while the rest of the world com-
prised'hnnlying lands." It followed from this that the United States, in order to
enSure world hegemony, should direct all diplomatic and military efforts toward
subjugating the countries of this belt, that is, the countries of Western Europe,
the Near East, Scutheast Asia. and the Far East. "he who is master of the zone of
outlying lands dominates Eurasia, and he who dominates Eurasia controls the fate of
the world,"31 wrote N. Spykman.

in conditions of the postwar disposition of forces in the world arena, from the
very outset the geopolitical ideas of the American ideologues were perfect for the
global schemes and the entire course of foreign policy of the United States. It is

not surprising that following Horld Her 11 all 0.5. administrations made use of these
ideas.

When nuclear opposition arose as a result of achievements by the USSR in the area
of developing nuclear weapons and means of delivering them, the 0.8. Government,
endeavoring to expand maneuvering room for its policy of "balance of power,"
proceeded to establish around the Soviet Union and the other nations of the so-
cialist community an entire series of "counterbalances" under 0.8. control: the
aggressive cam-o, seam. nnzus, and name military blocs.”

If we recall the recommendations of Hackinder and Spykman, this was to a certain
degree implementation of the idea of creating a belt of "containment" (Mackinder)

or a belt of "outlying lands" (Spykman). The United States positioned its principal
military bases and contingents of all armed forces branches precisely here, and it
was precisely here that local wars and military conflicts erupted in most cases if
events failed to develop as desired by 0.5. ruling circles.

26

FOR 0F1ﬂ€lAl.lEﬂE(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which coincide in the main with the recomnendetions of Hackinder and Spykaan. also
pursued another objective -- to draw away from the United States, in case of war.

a part of the response nuclear ndssile strike. "The concept of geographic dis-
persal of strategic capabilities," wrote noted political scientists U. Kintner. R.
Strauss-hype. end A. Daigherty in 1956, "is the nost effective in the age of nuclear
weapons. The more rapidly this dispersal takes place as a result of establishment
of a global network (on land, underground. on and under the surface of the sea. as
well as in the air) of missile launchers. the more technically difficult will be
the task of putting us out of commission with a single massive strike."33

The true state of affairs as regards the concept of local wars in the global
strategy of 0.8. imperialisa is clearly evident in this reasoning. 0n the one hand

forces throughout the world, while on the other hand it pursues narrowly selfish
aims, which one of the leading 0.8. nilitary ideologues. Strauss-Hype. stated during
the war as follows: "It is in the 0.3. interest to secure a world order where there
would be only one center of power. fron which balancing and stabilizing control
would spread. with this control in the hands of the United States."3‘ In other
words, the author considered as the ideal strategic situation not a "balance of
power" per se. but absolute U.S. military supremacy in the world arena.

Prior to the rupture of the overall chain of imperialism as a result of the Great
October Socialist Revolution,the theory of "balance of power" as a working
hypothesis determined a u.s. policy of playing on conflicts within the camp of
imperialist rivals. while after 1917 it assumed a clearly marked anti-Soviet thrust.
Up to world Bar II this was expressed in an endeavor by 0.8. ruling circles to under-
mine the strength of the Soviet Union. utilizing the assault force of world im-
perialism -- the fascist states - while following Horld war II 0.8. political and
military leaders themselves continued that same line in their global strategy.

Under the influence of abrupt changes in the world balance of power. the theory of
"balance of power" received new expression in attempts to unify the efforts of
inperialisn on a worldwide scale to combat the revolutionary and national libera-
tion aovement. creating two echelons. as it were. or two belts of military en-
circlement of the USSR and the other nations of the socialist coamunity.

At different stages of postwar development 0.8. inparialiaa variously evaluated the
role of each of these echelons in the struggle for world domination. The entire
two decades of the 1940's and 1950's involved efforts to form an anti-Soviet
"balance of power" in the first echelon - among the western European powers. Ac-
cording to the terninoiogy of the acknowledged leading figures of so-called power
politics, this was a a period of establishment of centers of power on the "bridge-
head" of 0.5. inperialisa. although even during these years it did little to es-
tablish a second echelon in the "outlying lands." Beginning in the 1960's. under
the influence of deepening of the general crisis of capitalism and growth of the
economic and military potential of the nations of the socialist community and col-
lapse of the colonial system. there took place a certain reorientation in ".8.
global strategy: eaphasis was placed on the second echelon. for the most part
countries of the "third world," but without lessening efforts at maintaining the
"action readiness" of the forward echelon. This reorientation was in large aeasure
due to the fact that it was considered easier and safer to resort to a show of
force and to enployaent of force in the "outlying belt" of the world.

27
F0! OFFIGAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ideology of anticommunism and the hatred toward the revolutionary movement which
it has propagated have served and continue to serve as an ideological support and
motive force for the concept of “minor" wars of imperialism. The ideology and
politics of anticommunism assumedthe character of the principal ideological weapon
of imperialist forces following the Victory of the Great October Socialist Revolu-
tion. A hostile attitude toward the Soviet Union and its revolutionary example
were initially manifested in an endeavor to destroy the Soviet Union, unifying all
counterrevolutionary forces toward this end.

As H. A. Uilliamm, an of the founders of a new and progressive trend in 0.3.
historiography, writes. "intervention as a conscious anti-holshevik action was for
U.S. leaders a foregone conclusion within five weeks after the Bolsheviks came into
power.... The decision to intervene was dictated by their animosity toward the

radical nature of the Bolshevik Revolution. In other words. their strategy was
cOunterrevolutionary."3S

Anticommunism. anti-Sovietism and counterrevolution proved to be not a temporary
reaction by the imperialist powers to the socialist revolution in Russia and an
upsurge in the revolutionary movement evoked by it, but became the motive force of
all subsequent counterrevolutionary actions of imperialism, military interventions,
revolts, coups. and small-scale colonial wars. R. Tucker. a scholar specialising
in the history of u.s. foreign policy, states on this score: "The goals of Hilson
(the 0.5. president in 1912-1920 -- Auth.)... continued to express the essence of
U.S. foreign policy.... This did not signify a disinclination to pursue a joint
policy with the main industrial powers for the purpose of restraining the Soviet
Union and revolutionary movements in general.... These same objectives determine!
the actions of 0.5. diplomacy during and after Horld War II. The war and immediate

postwar period did not change the expansionist policy which the United States had
been pursuing for decades."36

Division of wars into “small" and "large" has been noted in bourgeois military
theory since the beginning of the 19th century. Clear views on such wars were

first stated by Clausewitz. He divided all wars into "large" and "small” by

degree of intensity of combat operations and ultimate political aims. he defined

as a "large" war a war waged at full intensity, a war aimed at crushing and defeat-
ing the enemy's army in detail, at occupying the enemy's territory and replacing the
monarch; he defined as "small" a war of attrition, with the objective of trouble-
some actions along the enemy's border, a show of force, and compelling the ad-
versary to accept terms without a full-scale battle.

Ciausewitz also assigned to the “small" war category those which included popular
partisan uprisings. He called them a result of the 19th century, as a response to
the military expansion of the first French Empire. Clausewits considered the
partisan war fought against Napoleon's army in Russia to be a vivid example of

a popular uprising. incidentally. Kutuzov also called partisan warfare a "small"
war. which successfully assists the operations of the regular army.

By its results such a war bore no comparison to a war in which regular armies per-
ticipated, although much greater forces were involved in it. Clausewits defined a

“small" war as a war in which "the results... do not correspond to the expenditure
of forces."37

28

FOI‘OFFKJAL.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he saw in a "smell" popular war one feature which in his opinion consisted in the
fact that the masses, "which armed force is unable to curb," rise up in struggle.38

Up to the end of the 19th century there was little change in the V33" on "seell"
were on the part of bourgeois military theorists after Clausewite. In writings
at the beginning of the 20th century, however, the tern "local war" began to appear
with increasing frequency when describing "small" were.

As time passed, the concept of "small," local ware underwent an evolution. At
first there was a widely held view of a "small" war as actions which support the
engage-eat or battle of a regular army: guard duty, sounted raids behind ens-ye
lines. and supporting troops actions on the flanks. These views existed in con-
nection with the fact that with the onset of winter an army's main forces would
withdraw to winter quarters, but the transport of troops end supplies, and con-
sequently guarding of supply routes would continue. During this tine individual
units would conduct combat actions with the objective of defending or disrupting
lines of co-unicatlon, as well as the objective of reconnaissance.

During the years of sharp struggle for redivision of the world, the term "expedi-
tion" began to appear frequently in the literature. Its meaning was obvious:
colonial predatory were by the major imperialist powers in Asia, Africa, and Latin
Aeerica were camouflaged under the guise of an allegedly insignificant "expedition."
Troops dispatched to seize and plunder colonies and to put down anticolonial up-
risings began to be called expeditionary forces.

In the period between wars, beginning in 1918. an atteept was made in bourgeois
military theory to compare the recent world war with ailitary conflicts of a local
scale. This attempt was reflected in the writings of military theorists in England,
France, the United States, and later Italy and Germany. The term "local war" was
extensively utilized by British ailitary theorist Liddell Bart, who noted that
local wars serve as an indicator of tension in relations between nations and can
escalate into a world war.

German ailitary theorists ”labored" a great deal over elaboration of a theory of
local were, especially when Hitler case into power. As they saw it. local military
conflicts were an alternative to world war. that is, inevitable and necessary events
since. as they claimed, a world conflagration can be avoided at the price of

"small" wars. Essentially this was nothing other than theoretical substantiation of
the widespread aggressive actions of the Bitlerite clique at that tine.

It was primarily Aeerican military theorists who were successful in galvanizing the
concept of local were following Uorld Her II.

Views on the role and place of local were in the strategy of imperialisa following
the war went through certain stages of development which were closely linked with
changes in the international situation and the evolution of military hardware.

In the first postwar period (1945-1953), ruling circles in the United States and

the other imperialist countries proceeded fro. plans calling for waging a coalition
nuclear war against the USSR and the other socialist countries. The entire sig-

nificance of the global strategy of imperialiea boiled down to a focus on employment

29

POR1OFFIJA1.USBGNVLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

of weapons of mass destruction. It received material embodiment in the creation of
military blocs and belts of encircle-en: around the perimeter of the world socialist

community and in ensuring constant readiness of army and navy to launch a surprise
first strike.

During those years the global strategy of imperialism found expression in a policy
of so-called "containment of communism" and its military equivalent -- the doctrine
of "balanced forces." This doctrine was grounded on the principle of "to each his
own" in a future war: air forces would deliver a nuclear strike against strategic
targets in the enemy's heartland, the army would conduct operations in land
theaters, while the navy would ensure supremacy on the sea and would attack marine
and coastal targets. This was not yet a military doctrine elaborated in detail,
which would specify employment of military forces in local wars. Strategic planning
and distribution of the efforts of military forces were conceived rather by spheres
of action than by types of war (world or local). According to U.S. politicians,

the doctrine contained "the embryo of theory of local were" and an appeal to begin
extensive preparations for such were. But in its embryonic state, the theory of
local wars focused on the position that they should. in the opinion of 0.8. military
theorists. prevent the spread of communist ideas, hinder liberated countries from
taking the socialist road of development. crush the national liberation movement by
force. and prevent the final collapse of the colonial system.

The postwar period running from 1956 to 1960 was marked by creation of the first
fairly fully formulated u.s. doctrine - the doctrine of "massive retaliation." It
boiled down essentially to the following: in place of "scattered" employment of
military potential. one should be prepared to launch a massive attack at a pre-
determined time and at a place advantageous to the United States. This doctrine
called for settling all international conflicts, without exception, which in one

way or another affected the interests of monopoly capital with nuclear arms. The
auth"'9 of the strategy of "massive retaliation" unequivocally stated that any

local incident could serve as grounds for a "lightning nuclear strike" if it was
considered "to affect u.s. national interests." Admiral Radford, then chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, stated that "if even one single Communist soldier crosses
the boundary with the West, the United States will immediately declare a general
nuclear war.""0 It was believed in top u.s. political and military circles that the
new doctrine would so paralyze the will of the socialist nations that they would not
respond to new expansionist actions by the u.s. Government.

In those years, characterized by a new upsurge in the national liberation movement,
the 0.5. Government's military plans were putting more and more emphasis on the
struggle against peoples fighting for their independence. In this aspect the
doctrine of "massive retaliation" was considered as a warning to the Soviet Union
not to undertake actions in support of the revolutionary and national liberation
movement. They were counting on the USSR, faced with the alternative of a general
war or acquiescence to the aggressive actions of U.S. imperialism, retreating

under U.S. pressure.

Initially U.S. allies supported the doctrine of "massive retaliation." But the
practicalities of life soon demonstrated that, in the first place, nuclear war was

too dear a price to prevent an upsurge of the revolutionary and national liberation
movement, and in the second place that this movement is a manifestation of the

30

FOR‘OFHKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFIOAL USE ONLY

..;

process of world development and not the result of the "schemes of international
cosmonism.” As critics of this doctrine stated. every time "a threat would arise
over Indochina. Lebanon. Quemoy and Hatsu, and Berlin, the administration would
either refrain from taking action or would desperately gather conventional forces
in order to control the situation with their assistance."‘1

in 1961 there began a period connected with the formation and confirmation of the
doctrine of of ”flexible response," adopted in 1967 by ell NATO masher nations.

This doctrine signified a watershed between a general nuclear missile war with the
participation of the principal adversaries and local wars on the periphery which, in
the opinion of military theorists, could be fought at safe, low levels of employ-
ment of forces. In particular, the doctrine of "flexible response" placed primary
emphasis on employment of conventional forces and weapons in local wars and counter-
insurgency operations, that is, actions against irregular forces (usually guerrillas),

leaving the strategic nuclear forces as a main reserve in case of a general nuclear
missile war.

u.s. military and political leaders executed a new reorientation in their military
plans, placing emphasis on development of "general purpose“ forces. in particular
special forces —- the so-called "Green Barets" - for conduct of counterinsurgency
operations. From a political and military standpoint. this reorientation was con-
nected chiefly with the large military-technological advances achieved by the Soviet
Union, which enabled it at this time to establish strategic missile forces for
delivering a massive response nuclear strike. In fact, prior to the appearance of
nuclear weapons and intercontinental ballistic missiles in the USSR, the question of
limitation in employment of nuclear force did not arise with 0.8. military-political
leaders. u.s. policy in any military conflict was based on the principle of
maxi-um employment of all forces. including nuclear. But when it became obvious
that the weaponry contained the potential of unlimited defeat and military conflict
could escalate into a nuclear war. which unquestionably would cause difficult-to-
predict damage to the United States, the efforts of American, and not only

American, politicians and strategists were concentrated on limiting war in space

and in weaponry employed, but without reducing the readiness of armed forces to wage
nuclear war.

The essence of the concept of local wars, which became a most important element of

the doctrine of "flexible response.” can be formulated as an endeavor by the United
States to ensure preparedness for aggression by forces and weapons. "dosed" in con-
fornity with the scale of the conflict. They were counting on making up for a

certain constraint in achieving global strategy objectives with the aid of nuclear
wes pons .

Local wars and various military conflicts were henceforth interpreted as an alter-
native and to a certain degree complement to such a dangerous form of armed violence in
Imperialism as a general nuclear war. but with retaining armed forces readiness to
fight such a war. The “AID Council resolutions of 12 December 1963 clearly stated
that a most important precondition for the conduct of a local war was the capability
to fight a general war for. without possessing this capability, it is impossible suc-
cessfully to wage local wars and achieve the stated political objectives.

31

Ft”!(lﬂﬂ(141.lﬂﬂ£(ﬂVlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Justifying their interference in military conflicts in any part of the world and
assistance to all forces opposing the revolutionary and national liberation move-
aent. U.S. leaders would point to their "military obligations." R. McNamara, for
example. secretary of defense during the J. Kennedy and L. Johnson administrations.
stated: "We need preparedness to conduct local were and counterinsurgency opera-
tions, which do not reach the scale of a general nuclear war. not so much for
defense of our own territory as to meet our obligations to other nations... pledges
made after world Her II. These agreements include the treaty on the Organization of
American States (OAS) in the "esters Hemisphere, NATO in Europe, SBAIO and ANZUS

in the Far East. He also have bilateral agreements with Korea, Japan. Taiwan, and
the Philippines."’°2

During these years the junior partners of the United States -— Great Britain, Srance,

Belgium, and Portugal -- also stepped up the struggle against the revolutionary
and national liberation movement.

Thus at the beginning of the 1960's local wars and so-called counterinsurgency
operations advanced to the forefront in the global strategy of imperialism.

At the beginning of the 1970's when new changes took place in the world balance of
power in favor of the forces of democracy and socialise. the United States and its
aggressiVu .ioc allies retained and further strengthened in their policy the role of
local wars and counterinsurgency operadons. This confirms the new concepts of em-

ploynent of military force adopted by the United States and other iaperislist na-
Lions.

One feature of contemporary capitalism lies in the fact that it adapts to the new
world situation, characterized by change in the correlation of forces and by a
certain strategic balance between the United States and the USSR. In these condi-
tions the strategy of local wars becomes, to use the expression of General Secretary
of the U.S. Communist Party 6. Hall. "a specific form of struggle by imperialism,
which has replaced the old forms and is characteristic of a historical period in
which the correlation of forces has shifted against it."43

This is perfectly reflected by the new U.S. doctrine of "credible deterrent," of-
ficially adopted by the United States in 1971. It does not essentially differ from
previous doctrines. For example. although in this doctrine the United States
arknowledges, out of considerations of self-preservation, a nuclear missile war to
he suicidal. it by no means rejects war as an implement of policy. Former U.S.
Secretary of State H. Kissinger stated in his book "Nuclear Usapons and Foreign
Policy" that “war should be utilized as an instrument of policy" and that "an in-
uoility to use force can perpetuate international disputes."“

In the doctrine of "credible deterrent" the point is not to exclude war as an in-
strument of policy but rather to reduce the degree of direct involvement of
American troops in military conflicts. As it turns out. this is the essence of the
so-called realism of the new global strategy. "One of the principal strategy aims,"

stated former U.S. Defense Secretary H. Laird, "is to prevent participation by
Americans in future Vietnams."‘5

The changes which have taken place in the global strategy of U.S. imperialism have
occurred under the direct influence of Nixon's "Guam Doctrine.”"6 a component

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY

element (and a particular instance) of which was the progran of so-called'Vietnamiss-
tion" of the war in Indochina. This prograa was considered at the time as an ex-
periment which can have far-reaching consequences for the struggle against the

revolutionary and national liberation movement not only in Asia but on other eon-
tinents as well.

The objectives pursued by the 0.5. Government in proclaiming the Guaa Doctrine were
concrete:

1. To establish. with "military aid" to local reactionary and proimparialist
regimes (Israel, Thailand, South Korea, the Saigon regime, etc), hastions of
defense of U.S. interests in Asia, the Near East, Africa and Latin America, which
would become bridgeheads for advancing the struggle against countries which are
pursuing an independent policy, and against patriotic forces of national liberation.
In each region of the world the United States should have, of its "friends and
allies," a key figure on whom one could rely in all things.

2. Shift the aain burden of bloody ground operations in local were and oili-
tary conflicts to the troops of its ”friends and allies" ("Asians against Asians,"
'hfricans against Africans"). giving them military-technical assistance and providing
vigorous support with 0.5. air and sea forces. as well as land forces if necessary.

The doctrine of "credible deterrent" reflects a certain revision by the 0.8.
Government of its views on the previously operating principle of "automatic in-
volvement" .: the United States in any local wars and conflicts. 0.8. military and
political leaders reached the conclusion that armed intervention should be carried
out with the least risk for the United States, in order not to repeat the bitter
experience of the Vietnam adventure and other aggressive actions.

The political strategy of the new administration of J. Carter. who assumed the
presidency in 1977, was stated fairly clearly. as regards that part which applied
to the world's so-called peripheral regions. The J. Carter administration con-
siders it essential to turn to the ”third world," actively to interfere in the
affairs of small countries, without excluding the possibility of employing military
force. This was stated time and again both by Carter and by his closest political
and military advisers. The Carter Administration established the interventionist
"Rapid Deployment Force" for arsed intervention in the affairs of sovereign nations.
Carter and his supporters justified and continue to justify openly repressive
actions in the world arena, pointing to a non-existent "Soviet threat" and the
necessity of defending "spheres of vital U.S. interests." Precisely these
"arguments" were used by the Carter Administration in conducting aggressive actions
against the people of Iran, which overthrew the despotic regime of the Shah in
February 1979, and in inciting armed intervention into the affairs of democratic
Afghanistan, which took the road of progressive reforms following the 1978 April
Revolution. The u.s. Government is continuing to support in various parts of the
world dictator, puppet regimes such as that of Pinochet. murderer of the Chilean
people, Egyptian president Sadat, etc. This is nothing other than an attempt to
continue the expansionist foreign policy under new conditions and to step up the

activities of reactionary pro-imperialist forces in the countries of Asia, Africa
and Latin America.

33

FOIiOFﬂKJAl.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In August 1980 the Carter Administration added to the doctrine of "credible de-
terrcnt" the so~callcd "new nuclear strategy." which calls for fighting a "limited"
nuclear war. This strategy essentially boils down to making the very idea of
nuclear war more acceptable to public opinion. This same objective is pursued

by arguments about "limited? "partial" employment of nuclear weapons, which have
nothing in comaon with reality and merely serve to delude people. In actual

fact the hegemonist aspirations of 0.8. ruling circles stand behind this new

strategy.
a a a

The entirety of postwar history shows that the imperialist nations have sought.

by gaining military-technical superiority over the socialist nations, to extend
the limits of "attainability" of foreign policy objectives with the aid of means
of military coercion. The revolution in weaponry, which became obvious as a re-
sult of the development of atomic and thermonuclear weapons. at first seemed to
aggressive imperialist circles to be that line beyond which lies embodiment of the
dream of creating an "absolute force? and, consequently. the attainability of any
hegemonistic goals. But the military-technological development of the imperialist
countries has not been taking place in a vacuum, but in a world in which a world
socialist system exists. It has been accompanied by the forced growth of the
military might of the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries, commensurate
with the interests of security of the socialist community. As a result, the
relative possibility of enployment of military force with impunity (or with
'acceptable losses") is steadily diminishing.

An analysis of the change in the place and role of local wars in the global
strategy of imperialism indicates that the basic ideological premises on which
the policy of the major imperialist powers toward small enuntriea and peoples was
traditionally constructed have remained unchanged. Revision of certain points of
strategy in the struggle against the revolutionary and national liberation move-
ment applied only to the methods and forms of implementation of this policy.

FOOTNOTES
1. K. Marks and P. £ngel's,"$och." [writings], Vol 20, p 166.
2. Ibid.. Vol 36, p 258.
3. Ibid., Vol 36, p 531.

a. F. Engels called the Crimean "at (1853-1856) the most vivid example of a war of
this type. The British press at the time appraised the limitedness of the
results of this war as follows: ”He lost 20,000 men but did not conquer suf-
ficient land to dig 20,000 graves" (cited in B. Brodi, "Strategiya v vek
raketnogo oruzhiya" [Strategy in the Age of Missile Arms]. translated from
English, Moscow. 1951, p 285). The press reflected the attitudes of certain
segments of British society, which felt that it was better to negotiate an
acceptable peace with Russia than to continue military operations with the in-
significant success they had achieved up to that time.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

16.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
210.
25.
26.

27.

Ml OFFICIAL [SE ONLY

Marks and angel's, op. cit., Vol 29, p 2l2.

V. I. Lenin, ”Pain. sobr. each." (Couplete Harte]. Vol 26, p 22‘.
Ibid., V01 36, p 1.8.

Ibid., V01 30. p 132.

lb“.

Ibid.. V01 26, p 316.

Ibid., V01 30, p 115.

Ibid.. p 262.

See "Konunisticheskiy Internatsional. Krotkiy ietorichenkiy ocherlt" [The
Communist International. A Concise Historical Sketch]. Moscow, 1969, p 265.

"Ko-nmisticheskiy Internatsional v dohnentakh, 1919-1932" [the mist
International in Docuents, I9l9-l932], Moscow, 1933, p 702.

'ﬁiezhdunarodnoye Soveshchsniye komniaticheakikh i rebochikh portly. bounty
i uteriely" [Internstional Conference of (Io-mist and Harbor Pertiee.
Docunents and Haterials], p 288.

ma” p 317.

Lenin. op. cit.. Vol 36, p 292.

Ibid., V01 38, p 337.

1...... Vol 69, pp 369-370.

Ibid., Vol 13, pp 72-73.

Ibid., V01 41, p 252.

'Mezhdunsrodnoye...," op. cit.. p 287.

A. Hehsn, "The Interest of Anerica in Sea Power," Boston, 1897. p 171.
C. Hoodrnff. "Expansion of laces," Nev York. 1909. pp 5. 8.

LIFE, 5 June 1939.

See u. Foster. "Ocherk politicheakoy ietorii Aneriki" [Sketch of Anetican
Political history], Moscow. 1953. p 676.

"Insugural Addresses of Presidents of the USA,” 1961, p 267.

35

mmusnouu
28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY

Beginning in the first half of the 16th century, England. resorting to initiat-
ing wars and diplomatic maneuvers. aggressively pursued s policy of "balance of
power" in Europe and throughout the world. Exploiting conflicts among its rivals
and rreuiing endless preuatts for conflicts in various parts of the world, British
diplomacy and strategy aimed at world hegemony. The heyday of this policy co-
incided with the years of might of Britain's colonial empire. Prominent
statesman Lord Palmerston was considered its most vigorous champion. Palmer-
ston liked to repeat: "we have no eternal allies or eternal enemies, but merely
permanent interests."

These ideas were developed by Hahan in two books: "Neobkhodimost' Amsriki v
morskoy moshchi" [America's Need of Sea Power]. 1897. and "Problems Azii"
[The Asia Problem]. 1900.

Hackinder (1861-1967) was born an Englishman. In the 19b0's he moved to the
United States, where he revised his geopolitical ideas. which had originally
been formed applicable to Great Britain. in a spirit to the liking of the
United States. Hackinder constructed his schemes of a postwar anti-Soviet
“balance of power" during the war years and failed to figure that two states
would be formed on the territory of Germany and that after the war a great

many countries would fall out of the orbit of imperialist influence. Never-
theless Hackinder's ideas were not forgotten when creating the network of mili-
tary bases and blocs which surrounded the Soviet Union and other socialist
countries in a solid ring of encirclemant.

Spykman (1870-1966) wrote two books on this subject: "Amerikanshaya strategiya
v mlrovoy politike" [American Strategy in Peacetime Policy] (1942) and "The
Geography of the Peace" (1964). In the letter he wrote: "As long as the cen-
ter of world power was in Europe... a Eurocentric map was quite satisfactory.
with the beginning of the 20th century. however, independent sources of power
arose. challenging Europe as the sole foundation of world politics.... A
geocentric map with the United States in the center today gives a clearer pic-
ture of its position both in respect to Europe and the Par East. Today the
United States is a continental country linked by railroads and the Panama
Canal, so that both coasts enjoy easy access to both sides of the Eurasian
continent. via the Atlantic and Pacific oceans." N. Spykman. "The Geography
of Peace." New York. 1946, p 16.

CENTO (the former Baghdad Pact) was originally a “mutual cooperation pact be-
tween Iraq and Turkey." signed in Baghdad on 26 February 1955. The following
countries were added in 1955: Great Britain in March. Pakistan in October. and
Iran in November. Iraq left the pact in “arch 1959. The CENTO bloc collapsed
following the victory of the people's revolution in Iran (1979).

SEATO -- "Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" - a treaty signed in Manila on
9 August 1954 by eight countries: the United States. Great Britain, France.
Australia. New Zealand, Thailand. the Philippines. and Pakistan. In September
1975 a meeting of the SEATO Council in Hashington announced curtailment of the
activities of this bloc.

ANZUS -- "Pacific Security Pact" -- signed on 9 January 1951 by Australia.
New Zealand. and the United States.

36

FOR OFFICIAI.Iﬂ5lI(NVLY
33.

35.

36.

37 .
38.
39.

60.
41.
102.

103.

105.

66.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ASPAC -- "Asian-Pacific Council" - a regional political alliance forned in
June 1966. “embers included Australia, Nev Zealand, Japan. Thailand, Malaysia,
the Philippines, South Vietnan (up to 1975), Taiwan, and South Korea. Malaysia
left the organization in March 1973.

H. Kintner, R. Strausz-Ilype, and A. Daigherty, "Protracted Conflict," )lev York,
1956. pp 127-128.

R. Streuez-Bype, "Geopolitics. The Struggle for Space and Power," Rec York,
19102, p 196.

V. Vil'yane, "U.S. Intervention in Russia," IS'l'ORIYA 8883, lo 6, 1966, p 173.

R. Tucker, "The Radical Left and mrican Foreign Policy," Hashington,
1974. p 32.

K. Klauzovits, “0 voyne" [On Her], Hoecov, 1932, p 266.

Ibid., p 269.

The Military Encyclopedia published by Sytin in 1913-1914 lists in the bibli-
ography of the article "Snell Her" works published in the 19th century on this
aubject. including Decker'e "The Snell War in Light of the tier of the Future"
(Berlin, 1822). "Malaya voyna i ucheniye 0 boys" [The Snell Her and Teaching on
Conbat] by Valentini (Saint Petersburg, 1811), Ruester'e "Doctrine of the

Snell Her" (Zurich, 1866), end Huddern's "The Small Her and Transport Coman-
icetione Service" (Berlin, 1899-1906).

A. Schlesinger .11., "A Thousand Days," New York, 1965, p 289.

Ibid.
Cited in VOYBNNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZBUBIAL, llo 4, 1975, p 91.

6. Hall, "New Phenonena and Problem of luperialisn," 1’30ma MIRA I SO'ISIA-
um. No 12, 1970, p 70.

ll. Kissinger, ”Nuclear Ueapona and Foreign Policy," New York, 1957, p 6.
comments DIGEST, Heehington, 1971, p 2.

0.8. foreign policy doctrine set forth by President I. Nixon in a speech on
Guen on 26 July 1969.

Chapter 1V0. HISTORICAL PATTBRRS 0? IMBWTIONSHIP m LOCAL
AND WILD HARS

tit

Prior to both world were, local were and military conflicte served as an indicator
of the gradual aggravation of the international situation and the creation of

37

MOI-'FIGALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military-political crises. and contributed to the final distribution of political
and military forces. Since these regulators of relations between imperialist na-
tions. which were limited in form, could not resolve the conflicts inherent in

imperialism but on the contrary aggravated then to an even greater extent, they
only fostered initiation of the world wars.

The aggressive imperialist nations, which were embracing a policy of gaining
world supremacy by conquest, and consequently a policy of unleashing a world war,
utilized local wars and military conflicts as an instrument with the aid of which
they would test the economic and military strength of the opposing side, its
mobilization capabilities, and level of development of its armed forces and art
of warfare. The process of "testing" began long before the outbreak of the world
wars. The knots of those conflicts. which subsequently became dangerous world-war
focal points, were tied in individual local clashes on various continents, at

different times. and seemingly without any direct relationship to the future
world couflagration.

In addition, local wars and military conflicts, both before world Her I and II,
were utilized by the imperialist powers as an instnnnent for putting together
hostile coalitions. These processes occurred differently at different times.
Antagonistic coalitions were in the forming process during the 28 years preceding
world liar I, gradually acquiring new members and from time to time losing members.
The disposition of forces in the world arena did not take shape until after the
Second Balkan War. and became fully defined in the cOurse of the first two years of
world war I.

The Great October Socialist Revolution engendered new historical conditions:
alongside conflicts between the imperialist powers and their groupings, a decisive
factor of world politics came into effect - the root conflict of the contemporary
era between the two opposing social systems. The first five years of the postwar
period brought total collapse of the old coalitions, while the succeeding 10

years contained a series of local wars and military conflicts aimed at crushing

the national liberation movement, under the cover of which the imperialist states
were hannering together small blocs against the Soviet Union. A few years later im-
perialism shifted to direct local armed attacks on the Soviet Union.

Alonside this, under the effect of the law of nonuniformity of development of
capitalism and aggravation of interimperialist conflicts, there was taking place a
gradual process of formation of two opposing imperialist military blocs, aimed at
seizing world hegemony. This process included, as an inevitable stage, new local
wars and military conflicts, initiated in nest cases by fascist, nilitarist states
in the Nest and East. These local military clashes (the Austrian Anschluss,
fascist Germany's seizure of the Sudetenland and Czechoslovakia, the Japanese in-
vasion of China, the war between Italy and Ethiopia, etc) played the role of
catalyst in the final distribution of the forces of imperialism between the two op-
posing military blocs. After the bloc of aggressive nations (Germany, Italy,
Japan) was established, an alliance of opposing imperialist powers - Great Britain,
France, and Poland -- formed under the direct influence of the military actions of
fascist Germany. Up to that moment the Western powers had been continuously at-
tempting to establish a united front of imperialism against the USSR.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Anglo-French-Polish alliance, however, proved to be so weak that it collapsed
under the first blows dealt by fascist Germany in 19100. An antifascist coalition
began to form after Germany attacked the USSR.

The experience of history attests to the fact that local wars and military conflicts
were deliberately initiated by imperialist powers for the purpose of utilizing them
as proving grounds to test new weapons and modes of conduct of military operations
prior to starting a "large" war. In world Her I such new innovations as automatic
weapons, radios, airplanes, and tanks in the area of military hardware, and con-
tinuous fronts and army operations in the area of modes of warfare were extensively
utilized. and this happened in large measure because these "innovations" had passed
the "test of battle" in the Boer war, the Russo-Japanese Her, and the Balkan wars.
In like aanner, the element of offensive surprise, massing of tanks and aircraft,
methods of total war and many other items in the art of warfare characterizing

World War II were tested in local armed conflicts prior to the outbreak of the world
war.

If we coapare the number of local-scale armed conflicts which took place prior to
world Her 11 and in the period between were, one readily notes an increase not only
in their total number but their scope as well.

Henifested in this was the incipient process of globalization of the strategy of im-
perialism. The duration of local were reached three years or more, and armies
numbering in the millions took part in the battles, armies equipped with all

modern military hardware. Fronts extended 1500-2000 kilometers, and the warring
sides would sustain enormous losses.

Forming as a counterbalance to the global strategy of imperialism was a strategy of
antiiaperiaiist, antifascist struggle, a struggle for peace and social liberation,
which played a major role in the course and outcome of Horld Her 11.

Following World War 11, local wars and military conflicts unleashed by the forces
of imperialism and international reaction placed the world time and again on the
brink of a thermonuclear catastrophe. Occurring in various regions, they continue
today forming dangerous focal points of tension. They create a situation of con-
stant military danger. which the imperialist powers utilise as a means of holding in
check the revolutionary and national liberation struggle of peoples.

Part II. LOCAL BARS OF THE CONTDQORARY m: PRACTICAL MIMIC! AND LBSSGIS

Chapter Three. LOCAL WARS IN ASIA

ttﬁ

Following the rout of Japan's Kwantung Army by the Soviet Armed Forces in August-
September 1945 and the surrender of imperialist Japan, the countries of Asia became
a zone of local wars and military conflicts initiated by the imperialist powers
with the aim of crushing the extensive national liberation movement and preserving
the colonial system.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USC ONLY
FOI.OFF1C1AI.USE(NNLY

The United States seized the role of leader among the imperialist powers in the
struggle against national-patriotic forces. Initially the program of expansion of
0.5. imperialism in Asia included China. When this program failed, 0.8. strategy
was reoriented toward more aggressive penetration of other countries. A
characteristic feature of this reorientation was its focus against the USSR and
the socialist countries in Asia.

The shift executed in the foreign policy of China's ruling clique toward anti-
Sovietism and hegemoniss and the fact that this policy precisely coincided with

the position of the east extreme reaction throughout the world seriously complicated
the situation on the Asian continent. The policy of the Beijing leaders, which is
openly directed against the majority of socialist countries, has essentially be-
come an important reserve of imperialism in the struggle against revolutionary and
national liberation forces. This was attested by acts of arsed provocation by
China on the border with the Socialist lipuhhcchienus, which occurred with increasing
frequency in the latter half of the 1970's, and subsequently. in February-March
1979. escalated into an aggressive war against the SRV, andhostile actions at this
same time by the pro-Beijing Kampuchea regime against Vietnam, incited by China,
uncu.the people overthrew this regime in January 1979, as well as acts of provoca-

tion directed against the Lao People's Desocratic Republic. Burns. and a number of
other countries.

in recent years the imperialists have begun nore frequently resorting in Asia to a
so-called tactic of "peaceful incursion" or "operation to stabilise the situation,"
which in actual fact means situation destabilization. The term ”peaceful incursion”
is defined in such a manner that it can justify interference by the imperialists in
the internal affairs of a given country under the pretext of rendering assistance
and establishing "law and order," while in actual fact the purpose is to crush
national liberation forces.

Pieter Keunemﬂn. general secretary of the Central Colmittee of the Communist Party
of Sri Lanka, noted in his speech at the 25th CPSU Congress that "u.s. imperialism...
in league with various internal reactionary forces... is seeking to carry out a
policy of 'destabilization' and overthrow of objectionable govern-ants in many
countries of this region. It seeks to set the countries of this region against each
other and thus... to reverse positive trends toward detente and the development of
regional cooperation which have been manifested in recent years."*

The essence of the "New Pacific Doctrine” of the United States, proclaimed by the
0.5. President on 7 December 1975 in Honolulu, consists in 0.3. military and eco-
nomic aid to reactionary regimes being declared the principal factor asking it
possible to achieve a "balance" of power, while close cooperation with Japan

is considered the cornerstone of 0.5. strategy in the Pacific. The essence of this

doctrine is expressed in the fact of supporting the regiae in power in South Korea
and maintaining American troops there, as well as military assistance to such
Southeast Asian countries as Thailand, the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia. and
Singapore. An important place in this doctrine is assigned to noraslisation of
0.5. relations with China and drawing China into a so-called "new structure of
peace in Asia," based on maintaining the position of 0.8. imperialism in the Far

* PRAVDA, 1 March 1976.

$0

FOR‘OFFNJA1.USE(N‘LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

East. The U.S. administration is presently seeking to make Japan an accoqlice in
the adventures of 0.8. imperialism in the user last as well, while China's rulers
have moved toward rapprochement with Japan. Sasthing in the order of a triple
alliance on an anti-Soviet foundation is being formed.

Aaerica’s ”New Pacific Doctrine" was born as a result of failure of the strategic
concepts grounded on the eqloyment of military force in Asia. The were in
Korea and Indochina have demonstrated that today. when the world thy of
socialist nations has taken on the character of a decisive factor in history,
peoples fighting for their freedom and independence and supported by the nations
of the world socialist system. and the USSR in particular. cannot be defeated.

Chapter Four. LOCAL WARS IN THE sun can

ﬁiﬁ

The ideologues of imperialisn seek to portray local wars and military conflicts in
the Near East as clashes between Arabs and Jews, between the population professing
Islam and the population which adheres to the Judaic faith. In actual fact. how-
ever. these were were and conflicts between the forces of the national liberation
movement of the Arab East and international imperialism and its heathen in this
region of the world.

Up to the mid—1950's Great Britain and trance. which were endeavoring to hold the
countries of the Arab East in a position of dependence, were primarily to blame for
local wars and military conflicts in the Near East. Following the failure of the
Anglo-French-Israeli aggression against Egypt in 1956, their place was taken by the
United States. Initially the United States sttemted to place the Arab countries
in subjection by means of dictate and military force, but it soon saw that this
tactic was fruitless. Defeated in its direct assault, the United Stems proceeded
along the path of neocolonialism and support of reactionary regimes. "ban this
path also proved bankrupt, the United States placed its stake on Israel, as the
principal striking force in the struggle against the Arab countries.

U.S. imperialism pursues an openly neocolonialiat policy in the Near East. First
and foremost it finances and arms Israel as defender of the "values" of western
civilization, "as the best, most successful. most undamanding ally the Best could
ever hope to have."* 0n the other hand, the United States seeks to draw the
governments of Arab countries over to its side with money and minor concessions,
supports reactionary forces, and incites conflicts among the Arabs, setting then
against each other and endeavoring to dominate this important region.

In contrast to local wars on other continents. in the Near last they have as a rule
been fought by regular forces armed with modern combat equipment and weapons. For
this reason they are the object of close study by military theorists. The ex-
perience of military operations in the Near East has strongly influenced the orga-
nisational development and structure of the armed forces of the principal

 

'1 "Protiv sionizms i israil'skoy agreesii" [Agath Zionism and Israeli Aggression].
Moscow, 1976. page 169.

101

FOR Ol-TICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0‘51CLAL.USEIDNLX

capitalist powers, development of the art of warfare, and has greatly promoted
improvement of combat equipment and weapons.

Chapter Five. LOCAL HARS IN AFRICA

ttt

The national liberation movement in Africa has achieved historic success in the
years since world Her 11. Dozens of African nations have gained their independence.
The peoples of the liberated African countries have made enormous achievements in
strengthening industry, agriculture and culture. The ideas of scientific socialism
have spread throughout Africa.

The fact that the national liberation struggle of the African peoples was success-
ful was a consequence of changes in the world balance of power in favor of
democracy and social progress, the nest important of which was establishment of the
camp of socialist nations and increase in its economic and military night.

The history of Africa's postwar development attests to the failure of the colonial
policy of imperialism and all its doctrines and concepts pertaining to preserving
colonialism in its new variations.

The position of imperialism on the African continent is still strong, however-
Honopoly capital still holds commanding heights in the economy of a number of
African countries. Continuously renewing the arsenal of forms and methods of neo-
coloniaiism. the imperialist powers continue to influence the policies of a number
of African countries.ln addition, attempts continue to be made to draw African
countries into aggressive imperialist blocs, to separate them and kindle hatred
between them. The strategic planning agencies of the NATO countries assign to the
African continent an important role in global strategy. Positioned in the im—
mediate vicinity of Europe, Africa and the surrOunding sea-lanes and islands are
considered to be the innermost strategic rear area in the zone of responsibility
of the 0.5. military on the European and African continents. Employment of mili-
tary force continues to be considered one of the principal means of strengthening
neocoiunialist positions in Africa. But under the now, changed conditions, more
thorough preparations are made for aggressive actions, in order to execute then
quickly and to present the world community with a fait accompli. For this purpose
the United States has recently formed special mobile "strike forces" that can be
quickly dispatched to any conflict area.

The imperialist powers and monopolies are seeking to force upon the young African
countries an economic, political and military alliance under the banner of rabid
unti-Sovictism and anticommunism. They pursue two objectives: the first is to
frighten the developing countries with the myth of a "Communist threat," while the
second is to obtain from the governments of the African countries greater op—
portunities for ventures by foreign capital and for establishment of military bases.

A distinctive feature of the situation in Southern Africa is the steadily growing
national liberation struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe, the Republic of South
Africa, and Namibia. The racist regimes, supported by international imperialism,

62

FOR OFFICIAL.US£GDNLY
a policy of apartheid and ruthless crushing of any and all manifestations of the
liberation sovement of the African people. Ruling circles of the imperialist powers
view Southern Africa not only as an area of application of capital and source of

superprofits, but also attach great strategic importance to Southern Africa in is-
plesentation of their interventionist policy.

Local wars on the African continent differed appreciably fron wars in the hear East.
In the Near East were were fought as a rule by regular troops on both sides. arsed
with sodern weapons and combat equipment, while African peoples which took the path
of arsed struggle against the colonialists established their armies in the course of
war, under conditions of a severe shortage of weapons and qualified cossnuad personnel.
The Algerian National Liberation Front possessed the largest arsed forces, but even
they did not total more than 130,000 sen. The nuserical strength of the military
forces of the colonial powers was also relatively small, although they were double

or triple the forces of the insurgents. The French army brought in to fight the war
in Algeria was an exception: it totaled as nanv as 882,000 men.

In the Near East the principal role of the arsed forces of the Arab countries con-
sisted in repelling external aggression and liberation of Arab lands fros the
colonialists. The Arab countries sought to achieve this goal by defeating the
enesy's forces on the battlefield. The objectives of the arsed struggle of the
peoples of Africa were of a different nature. Since the colonielists enjoyed a
clear superiority in personnel and weapons. these goals consisted not so such in
defeating the enemy's forces - this would have been an impossible task - as in
actions aimed at forcing the colonial powers to leave Africa. Guerrilla actions
were the principal form of arsed struggle by the insurgents. Guerrilla tactics.
however. adopted many aspects of operations by regular troops, particularly planning
of operations and tactics of cosbined-arss cosbat. Mobile defense was the principal
type of defense by the insurgent forces. Static defense was employed only when
defending bases and important base areas.

The national liberation struggle of African peoples against the colonialista has
enriched the art of warfare of the military organizations of oppressed peoples with

new sethods and techniques of guerrilla warfare end has raised it to a new and
higher level.

Chapter Six. LOCAL "ABS IN LATIN AMERICA

tit

The historic victories of the Soviet Union in ﬂorid Her 11 and the radical changes
in the world balance of power which took place in the postwar years exerted decisive

influence on developsent of the national liberation sovement in Latin America. The
sntiinperialist struggle took on a general character. The worker masses and all

progressive forces in the region vigorously championed the cause of complete na-
tional independence and social progress for their countries. What had until recent-

ly been a relatively firm strategic rear area of 0.8. isperialiss and a very is-
portant source of raw sateriala and cheap labor was transformed into one of the
world's blazing continents. There occurred further consolidation of all progressive,

b3

FOIlNﬂﬂCIAI.UBE¢NNLY
FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY

patriotic forces of the region. The general development trend of revolutionary
events on this continent corresponded on the whole to the general direction of world
history, the principal content of which is a transition fro. capitalism to social-
ism. An important milestone in this process was the victory of the Cuban revolution.
which demonstrated that Latin America is also taking the highroad of the forward
movement of all mankind which was opened up by the Great October Revolution.

In the face of these events, U.S. imperialist circles were forced to revise their
policies time and again and to alter their strategic plans regarding the Latin
American countries, at one time establishing an "Alliance for Progress,” at
another tine engaging in open intervention, and at another time taking direct part
in reactionary military coups. They counted prisarily on military force and die-
tator regimes. The continent was enmeshed by various U.S. bases. Alaost con-

tinuous military clashes between patriotic forces and the forces of reaction were
taking place in one area or another.

An important feature of local wars and military conflicts in Latin America was the
fact that they were small in scale. There were no large, protracted battles such
as in Asia and the Near East, and the opposing sides did not employ large numbers
of tanks and aircraft. Military operations, however, were of a savage character.
Progressive forces fought united, under the direction of Coamunist and worker
parties, and offered fierce resistance to reaction. A wealth of experience was
gained in the conduct of military actions in various areas, on jungled mountain
terrain. in urban and rural localities. As a rule the patriotic forces consisted
chiefly of ground troops armed with light weapons. Guerrilla actions and street
fighting in built-up areas constituted important for-s of armed struggle. In the
course of the struggle, Latin American patriots employed both attack and defense.
In the majority of countries, however, their tactics boiled down to defensive en-
gagenents and counterattacks. Progressive forces in the armies of the Latin
American countries frequently made cos-on cause with the insurgents.

The revolutionary process on the Latin American continent has entered a new
phase. Progressive, patriotic forces are joining into a united front in the
struggle against the doainance of U.S. imperialism and the local oligarchy. The

proletariat, led by Communist and worker parties, matches in the vanguard of the
struggle.

Chapter Seven. LESSONS OF LOCAL vAns

l. Military-Political and Strategic Lessons of Local Wars

The entire history of local wars initiated by the imperialist bourgeoisie attests
to the bankruptcy of the idea of counting on force as a means of achieving political
objectives. This is the first and most iaportent practical lesson learned from

"minor wars." Preparing for and undertaking local wars, imperialism has sought to
reestablish previously lost positions in some region of the world. or at least to

prevent narrowing of the sphere of its political and economic dominion. For the
most part, however. the results of local wars have thwarted these plans. This
constitutes irrefutable proof of the failure of the strategy of local wars.

4‘

FINI(Nﬂﬂ(]Al.USE(NHLY
FOI.OFF1C1A1.USEGDNLY

Today the ideologues of inperialisn can no longer call the national liberation
struggle a conspiracy by a narrow group of revolutionaries, as they frequently did
in the past. The broad nasees have been drawn into the struggle, representing
various segnents of the population, which forces the aggressors to wage war not so
such against arned forces as against the entire people. The history of our tine
has shattered hopes of vanquishing a people fighting for its independence and in

addition bolstered by the cosprehensive assistance and support of progressive
forces.

Experience has shown that capitalist powers, enbarking upon outright aggression,
have frequently been forced to linit the scope of enploysent of their arned forces
and weapons in order not to evoke a large international response. The political,
econoaic and nilitary night of the socialist countries, and particularly the
nuclear aiseile night of the Soviet Union, has been a restraining factor here.

A certain role in the collapse of the strategy of local wars was played by conflicts
within the inperialist casp. and occasionally the outright refusal by u.s. partners
to accept responsibility for the actions of the "world's police-an." “any countries
which initially had willingly supported a given act of U.8. expansion and had taken
part in local were, subsequently refused altogether or took part only symbolically,
as was the case, for era-pie. during the war in Korea. TheUhitedStates was also
unable to put together a genuinely united counterrevolutionary front during the

war in Vietnan. The principal U.S. partners, using various excuses, avoided

direct participation in this dirty adventure.

Sole snail capitalist countries, refusing to support aggressive policies, gave up
their sesbership in inperiaiist blocs. Deep conflicts paralyzed ASPAC. Malaysia

declared its withdrawal fronthepect on 12 March 1973. The SBAIO bloc has been
virtually inactive since 1975.

Collapse of the strategy of local wars was lost appreciably prosoted by conflicts
appearing between major inperiaiist countries. In 1956 the United States did not
support Great britain and France. its NATO allies -- in their aggression against
Egypt, since the United States wished to weaken the position of these countries

in that region. Direct clashes between the interests of nonopoly capital of a nun-
ber of countries occurred during local wars in the Near East and Cuba. In 1961,

for exanple, najor Latin Anerican countries refused to support the aggression against

Cuba organized by 0.8. ruling circles. Nor did Great Britain and other capitalist
countries support this aggression.

At the sane tine events of recent years indicate that, in spite of growing difficul-
ties in utilizing nilitary force to achieve political sins, nilitarist circles in
inperialist nations are by no neans rejecting the concept of local wars, but on the
contrary are galvanizing it. Forced to close down nilitary bases in one country,
they seek to establish bases in others and lake efforts to stabilise existing
ailitsry blocs and to create new ones. U.S. strategic planners consider it essen-
tial to establish new bases on sparsely-populated islands located near zones of
national liberation struggle. Plans to establish new U.S. siiitary bases on

islands in the lndian and Pacific oceans, in the Persian Gulf and in South Africa
are being carried out in confornity with this "insular" strategy.

05

FOR‘OFFHJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Also indicative is the fact that there has been noted in the global strategy of im-
perialism a trend toward establishing regional alliances and blocs. In this way
militarist circles in the imperialist countries are attempting to bind together both
their loyal allies and puppet regimes and countries pursuing a noncapitalist road

of development, seeking to profit on the desire of the peoples of developing
countries for regional cooperation.

it has become typical of the policy of imperialist circles to give any aggression
the appearance of a "legitimate" action. In order to conceal from the working
people of their countries and the world community the predatory, reactionary aims
of local wars, the thesis is propagated that armed intervention by the imperialist
powers in the internal affairs of sovereign nations is at the request of "legitimate"
governments to "protect" these countries from "Communist aggression" or for
”protection" of the white population. Great Britain and France attempted to
justify the war against Egypt in 1956 by the necessity of protecting "freedom" of
navigation through the Suez Canal, which in actuality nobody was threatening.
Preparations for and execution of aggression against the Congo were under the
pretext of the necessity of "protecting" the white population. The United States
camouflaged its intervention in the affairs of Vietnam and Angola with a slogan of
struggle against the intrigues of international co-nnism.

The global strategy of imperialism, if one takes into consideration the entire

system of local wars and military conflicts. has today taken on certain specific
features.

The first feature to which one should direct attention is change in the nature of
the strategy in regard to the spatial extent of wars and military conflicts. He
know that military operations in Horld Her 11 anon-passed thus continents and vast
expanses of ocean. Strategic planning was conducted on the scale of the land or

sea theater: European. Asimm.African, Atlantic, and Pacific. But coalition planning
was just beginning to incorporate individual elements of coordinating military
operations both by time and theaters.

The postwar strategy of imperialism proceeded and continues to proceed from the
position that we are operating in a "single world strategic theater." 0.8. mili-
tary strategy prescribes, in case of a world war. simultaneous conduct of military
operations on the inhabited continents. on the vast ocean expenses, and in the
aerospace environment. That part of military strategy which should ensure seizing
and holding strategic hridgeheads on the various continents is implemented in a
practical manner thrOugh local wars and military conflicts. It is not mere happen-
stance that the system of local wars and military conflicts was coordinated with
the network of military bases on foreign soil and thasystem of military blocs.

Globalization of the strategy of imperialism in the postwar period is indicated by
the fact that from 1965 through 1971 seven blocs were formed on the European con-
tinent. in the Mediterranean Basin and in Asia, the majority of which were military
alliances directed against the socialist countries. Countries drawn into military
aggressive blocs, in addition to the majority of European capitalist countries, in-
cluded Turkey, Australia. New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines, Pakistan, Iraq,
Iran, South Korea, South Vietnam, Indonesia. Malaysia, Singapore, and Taiwan. The
forming of a given bloc was accompanied by the construction of naval and air

66

IND! 0FI1CJAI.USI:CHVLY
FOR OFF‘CIAL USE ONLV

bases on the soil of bloc newer countries. stockpiling of supplies, and deploy-est
of forces representing all the arsed services, M and control agencies. and con-
nunications centers. In the final analysis world inerialisn succeeded in deploying
sore than 2200 nilitary bases on foreign soil. If one considers the fact that a
large nutter of reconnaissance satellites launched by the United States are con-
tinuously circling the planet and that surface warships and nuclear sub-arines are
constantly on petrol in the oceans and sees. in a full state of readiness, it beconss
obvious that the global strategy of i-perialise has seer-ed the character of a

bloc strategy based on naintaining an enomus war nachine in a constant state of
conbat readiness.

This proeotes the creation of an exceptionally explosive situation in easy of the
world's regions, whereby involvement of one comtry in a war can draw the renaining
neabers of the blocs into that war. As practical experience has shown, it is
precisely the bloc strategy of inperialiea which is the principal cause of oc-
currence of focal points of tension in a given region.

Additional evidence of further globalisation of the strategy of i-perialien is

provided by changes in the character of its links with the naterial foundation which
supports it, including a contingent of mobilised nanpower resources.

He knew that the said principle of a national strategy is reliance on one's own
resources, on the potential capabilities of one's own country, national arsed
forces. national naterial and nsnpower resources. a nuaber of neasures of a aili-
tary-econonic nature would usually be carried out only on the outbreak of war:
shifting industry to war production, a sharp increase in the nilitary budget. nobil-
iration and deploynent of troops to wartine strength levels, organisation of con-
nand. control and connunications. Concentration of operational-strategic forces in
the designated areas was the concluding action.

In present-day conditions the situation regarding adjust-ant of the eaterial
foundation to the strategy of inperialien has radically changed. One can state
that a large part of the neasuree signifying establishnent of this foundation have
already been carried out in peacetine. The lion's share of the ailitary-ewnonic
potential of the capitalist world, which is integrated through various econonic
associations and alliances such as the "Conan Market," "Euroaton." the European
Coal and Steel Cos-unity. etc, is utilised in the interests of continuous readiness
for war. Planners count nost heavily on creating so-cslled “prewar readiness
potential." Arm, equipaent and anunition (including nuclear) are stockpiled in
the probable theaters of war and in the vicinity of potential conflict areas. In
addition, deployment of ground, naval and air forces, equipped with the latest
weapons and conbat hardware, which are regularly replaced by even are sophisticated
equipnent, has already been comleted within the franeworh of the inerialist aili-
tary blocs.

The theaters in which nilitary forces of the bloc allies have been deployed have
been prepared fron an engineering respect, contain a developed road network and a
smoothly functioning conunications and control systen. If one considers the fact
that joint forces are operating within the aggressive NATO bloc, air defense is
carried out according to a uniforn plan, and ieperielist bloc troops are in a con-
tinuous state of conbat readiness, the possibility of their i-ediate engegenent
will becone obvious.

67
MI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the process of development of the global strategy of imperialism, there was also
occui¥ing globalization of the armed forces control system of the aggressive nations.
The development and improvement of this system are inseparable from the forming of

signaled the beginning of transition to a global system of leadership. Permanently
operating political and military forces control agencies as well as corresponding
rear services management and troop combat training elements were set up within the
framework of this bloc, the first since Uorld Her 11.

With establishment of the North Atlantic alliance (NATO) in 1949, the movement of
the imperialist countries toward globalization of strategic leadership became even
more distnrt. The global aspirations of NATO military and political leaders also
determined the structure of the armed forces control system. It contained military-
political agencies engaged in coordination of political, ideological, scientific-
technicsl and military tasks proper. Implementation of aggressive schemes and plans
is handled through the permanent council and military planning committee. Followb
ing are the implementers of these plans: the joint strategic planning staff,

supreme commanders. Europe and Atlantic, Northern Europe, Central Europe, and
Southern Europe theater commands, western and Eastern Atlantic and English Channel
commands, and Atlantic strike forces command.

The presently existing structure of top-level NAIO military agencies enables the
coalition's political and military leadership immediately to initiate military opera-
tions on land, on the sea and in the air, without executing special deployment of
coalition forces. The entire strategic command and control system is supported by
high-speed multichannel communications, with extensive employment of wire, radio and
satellite communications links.

As new blocs were formed. the system of mutual communications between them and NAJO
was also expanded, which led to completion of globalisation of armed forces strategic
leadership and control. Key positions in this system are concentrated in the hands
of NATO military-political leaders and, through them, in the hands of the Pentagon.
Attesting to this is the principle of division of the world among bloc partners into
so-called "zones of responsibility." According to the existing "cut," the 0.3.

"zone of responsibility " includes the following: the European and African con- _
tinents, Central and South America, Asia. the Pacific and Atlantic. that is, the
principal regions of the world.

well as the character of combat operations of the opposing sides were distinguished
by a great diversity, which depended on such factors as aims of aggression, relative
strengths of the opposing sides, specific features of the theater, the general mili-
tary-political and strategic situation at the outbreak of war, the operational-
strategic and political significance of the region in which local wars erupted.

Among the diversity of modes of initiation of local were, however, one can die-
tinguish the most typical:

FOR OFFNJAI.USEiMVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1956, the 0.8. aggression against Lebanon and British egreseion against Jordan in
1958, Belgian agression against the Congo in 1960, Israeli aggression against the
Arab countries in 1967, etc);

b) utilization of reactionary puppet regines and dependent countries with
subsequent armed intervention by major imperialist powers (the war in lorsa in 1950,
the war in South Vietnan in 1966);

c) attack on a sovereign country by reactionary forces which had been trained
and prepared by najor inperialist nations on their own soil or on the territory of
adjacent countries (the attack on Cuba in 1961, aggression against Guatemala in
1954. agath lionduras in 1956, etc);

d) initiation of local wars and nilitary conflicts by the colonial military
forces of imperialist powers (wars by the British colonialists in than in 1971. by
the French in Algeria in 1954. by the Portuguese in Angola in 1976).

wars, and nilitary conflicts to a certain degree. can be divided into two groups
according to character of nilitary operations. The first group includes those

were in which regular military forces tool: part on both sides, and the geographic
conditions of the theater permitted the employ-ant of large nasses of troops and all
types of arms and equipnent (the wars in Algeria andxorea. the Arab-Israeli were).

A clearly marked front existed in such wars. Military actions were conducted in
the for- of operations and engagements, characteristic of so-called "civilised"
theaters, while in content and character they were ainilar to the operations and
engage-eats of World war II.

The second group of local were is characterized by the fact that military opera-
tions took place in the specific conditions of the theater (jungle, rice paddies.
desert). Regular military forces of the aggressor took part in them, while as a
rule irregular units and guerrilla detect-eats took part on the side of the victins
of aggression (wars in Burns and the countries of Indochina). Continuous fronts
and clearly marked force growings were lacking in such wars. Theater conditions
excluded the conduct of conbat operations by large combined units and fornationa.
Tactical-echelon units usually took part in the fighting, and conbat operations
were initiated and conducted simltaneously in easy sectors scattered over a vast
territory. Actions on the part of the aggressor were characterized by attenpts to
nount a broad offensive with employ-sot of all combat arts and naval forces. and on
the side of the resistance forces -- by surprise raids on enany installations, ex-
tensive naneuver of forces. etc.

Quantitative and qualitative (in the sense of sophistication of equip-eat) superiority
of the forces of the aggressors left an iqrint on the art of warfare of the people's
liberation armies. In connection with this. reliance on the masses and a combining

of content actions by regular troops with organisation of a struggle against the
interventionists by all the people were distinctive features of the strategy of
people's liberation arnies.

The experience of local wars and nilitary conflicts attests to the fact that the
aggressors employed the personnel and equip-ant of all arnsd services for their ini-

tiation and conduct. The role and percentage share of each of these, however.
differed from one war to another; they varied in relation to the conditions of the

09

FOR OFFICIAL l8! ONLY
IN)! OF?1C]A1.USIZ(HNLY

theaters. the level of military technological advance achieved in the given period,
and assimilation of previously acquired combat experience. In the first postwar
decade. for example, employment of the various armed services was based for the most
part on the experience of Horld Us: 11. During this period the principal role in
accomplishing the missions and objectives of local wars was assigned to ground
troops. Subsequently as well, the experience of Horld Har II was utilised in local
wars, but taking postwar combat experience into account. Air, naval, and air
defense forces assumed much greater importance.

In any given local war, the role of a given branch of the armed forces would be
determined by the specific operational—strategic missions being performed by the
armed forces. During the U.S. aggression in South Vietnam, for example, defeat of
the People's Liberation Armed Forces, seizure and holding of specified areas were
considered the principal mission of U.S. forces. Air, naval, and ground forces took
part in carrying out this mission. The principal role, however, was played by ground
forces, which bore the brunt of the effort to seize and hold major installations and
areas .

The United States pursued a different objective in aggressive actions against the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The objective was to undermine the military-eco-
nomic potential of the DRV, the morale of the people and army, and thus to force the
DRV to stop assisting the patriots of South Vietnam. U. 8. military leaders
figured that they would be able to accomplish these missions not in a-"contact" war,
that is, not in close contact with the enemy, but by bombing major installations,

as well as by means of a sea and air blockade of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
and naval shelling of its coastal areas. Therefore the United States employed
primarily air and naval forces in the aggression against the DRV. This country
sustained enormous damage as a result of the blockade and bombardment, but the
aggressor failed to achieve his objective.

The experience of local wars, in the opinion of Hestern experts, attests to enhance-
ment of the role of air defense forces, which is due in particular to the fact that
the capabilities of air defense weapons have_incressed sharply. They believe that
antiaircraft missiles have become the principal means of combating hostile aircraft.
They displayed a high degree of effectiveness in the Arab-Israeli War of 1973. Mili-
tary experts claim that skillful employment of antiaircraft missile systems made it
possible to thwart the plans of Israel's military leaders to gain air supremacy.

In this war neither side's air forces were able to penetrate air defense.

Foreign military experts note that a wealth of experience in electronic warfare has
been acquired in local wars. Electronic warfare was conducted by all branches of
the armed forces, but especially aggressively by air defense forces against hostile
aircraft. Foreign experts claim that this is because modern air defense systems
are equipped with numerous and diversified radio electronic devices which detect air
targets, provide target designation and control functions for antiaircreft missile
systems and fighters, that is, provide the capability to combat hostile air forces
in a highly effective manner. Foreign experts believe that the high degree of com—
bat effectiveness of sntiaircraft missile systems has compelled the air forces of
several countries, and the United States in particular, to equip all aircraft with
electronic countermeasures gear and to increase equipping of naval forces with such
gear. As of the end of 1967, for example, more than half of U.S. tactical and

50

INDI1OFFICIAL.USI:(HVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carrier-based aircraft were equipped with 20! gear. In the Arab-Israeli liar of
1973 approximately 30 percent of Israeli aircraft carried electronic detection and
jauing gear.

Klectronic warfare included. on the one hand. measures aimed at jl-Ilng enemy radio
electronic gear, and on the other hand -- protection of radioelectronic equipment
and secure-eat of its operation in the nost complex conditions of electronic warfare.
All known aethods and leans of conduct of electronic warfare have been employed in
local wars. Air and naval forces have aployed detection and 1-ing gear, decoy

ground electronic warfare units and subunits were also employed in the Arab-Israeli
wars of 1967 and 1973. The electronic gear of these unite and subunits enabled then
to deter-ine the location of radar sites, co-and and control facilities, antiair-
craft niasile system positions, and seriously to heger their operations. Utilising

jauing activities was provided by leans of communications security and counter-
aeaauree, which diminished the effectiveness of je-ing and prevented antiradar
nissiles from homing to the target.

period of tine the operation of radioelectronic equipnent. reducing radiated power,
utilizing several different frequencies. resiting radio electronic facilities, etc.
Maintaining radio silence was also practiced. Antiaircraft missile systole were
protected in a masher of cases by switching on radars only just prior to firing mis-
siles. But this proved possible only with a sharp reduction of time to transmit
information on the coordinates of air targets fron early-warning radars.

Protection of radioelectronic facilities included operating at spaced frequencies,
combined utilization of various equip-ant. etc. According to information in the

foreign press,2 for exaaple. radio electronic equipment of the air defense syste-
of Egypt and Syria achieved a high degree of 1mm; resistance in the war in the

as a whole is inpossible without the conduct of electronic warfare. This con-
clueion confirms, for example, the fact that any Israeli pilots refuse! to fly con-
bat niesions without ECU gear.

In the opinion of foreign nilitary experts, employ-ant of electronic warfare
equipment is becoming one of the nest ilpoi’tant elenents of preparing for and
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conducting combat Operations. It is not mere happenatance that many countries, and
the United States in particular, are modernizing existing and developing new
electronic warfare equipment on the basis of the experience of local wars; iamense
funds are being spent on this effort. It was noted in the foreign press. for
example, that since 1969 the United States has been spending 1:00 million dollars a
year on development and manufacture of electronic countermeasures gear, with annual
expenditures increasing to 600 million dollars beginning in 1975. 0.8. military
leaders claim that such expenditures are repaid many times over by reducing combat
equipment losses as a result of employment of electronic warfare gear.

important lessons learned from local wars and military conflicts include acknowl-
edgement of the enhanced role of the morale factor in the course and outcome of
military operations. One can see in the example of many were how the military tach-
nological Superiority of the armies of the imperialist aggressors was in the final
analysis reduced to zero by the moral-political superiority of the national libera-
tion and patriotic forces. supported by their peoples and offered strong sympathy
and comprehensive aid by the nations of the socialist eoamunity and all progressive
forces. This is a general rule which was long ago proven by the founders of
Marxism-Leninism: conviction in the justice of the aims of a war or military con-
flict unites nations which rise up in struggle for their liberation or defend
their independence, and cements the morale of the troops.

As a rule present-day local wars are not declared but arise as a result of a

direct surprise attack by a large imperialist power on a small country or develop
out of a little-significant military conflict or clash between domestic antagonistic
forces, with subsequent foreign intervention by the mobilized armies of imperialist
nations or their satellites. Advance preparedness, the element of surprise in
initiating military operations, and substantial military-technical superiority
initially give the aggressor an appreciable military advantage and sometimes

throw confusion into the ranks of the liberation forces, which result in consider-
able casualties and withdrawal deep into the heartland. The potential moral
superiority of the liberation forces is not yet able to come into effect at this
stage. But as confusion is overcome, as forces are united and the masses are
politically aobilized for the struggle against the enemy, and with increased moral
and material support and assistance from the outside, patriotic liberation forces
become more confident of victory and gain strengthened awareness of the annuity
of their interests with those of all antiimperialist, progressive forces of the
present day. Thus the moral fatter takes on important significance in military
operations. '

As is indicated by the experience of local wars and military conflicts, liberation
forces clash in combat with forces whose morale is generally low, and which
declines catsstroph ically at the very first major combat setback. According to the
experience of the war in Korea, in Vietnam and other 0.8. interventionist actions,
one can see how low was the morale of 0.8. armed forces personnel. The soldiers
lacked a true understanding of the reasons for, the aims and consequences of the
war. And assessment of the moral qualities of the 0.8. servicemen indicated that
he was an enterprising specialist with a highly developed technical practicality
and mercantile interests. He had blind faith in his military-technical superiority
and was unable to stand up under the protracted stresses of a combat situation.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY

As was indicated by the experience of wars in the Congo, Angola and elsewhere, in-
terventionist forces contained many mercenaries, consisting of declasse elements

and professional killers. Financial reward was their principal incentive determin-
ing conduct in battle.

Liberation forces possessed unquestioned advantages in combat against a morally
weak adversary who had invaded a foreign country since, fighting for a just cause,
they were also fighting on their own native soil, were better adapted to local con-
ditions and, most important, were always supported by their own people. Guerrilla
warfare, grounded on moral support by the local population, took on a truly popular

character The interventioniats could not apply any effective measures against
this form of struggle by patriotic forces.

Thus the experience of local wars and military conflicts teaches that the moral
factor is one of the most important factors affecting the course and outcome of mili-
tary operations. Expressing the general law of dependence of success and defeat on

the morale of the fighting masses. it became a factor in the victory of the libera-
tion forces.

2. Experience in Combat Employment of Ground Forces

Practical experience of initiation and conduct of local wars and military conflicts
indicates that ground forces bore the brunt of the efforts to achieve objectives and
accomplish the operational-strategic missions of military operations. In the armed
forces of aggressive imperialist nations, ground forces comprised from 75 to 90 per-
cent of the total forces involved in various wars. The armies of countries which
were the victims of aggression frequently consisted exclusively of ground forces.

Infantry (motorized infantry) and armored combined units and units comprised the
core of aggressor ground forces. Airborne and marine combined units and units were
also extensively employed in land operations. The ground forces of countries which

were victims of aggression usually consisted of infantry combined units. units, and
subunits.

A characteristic feature of aggressor ground forces was an extremely diversified na-
tional makeup and differing level of technical equipment. This is due to the fact
that frequently not one but several countries fought on the side of the aggressor,
with each country providing far from equal forces. In the war in Korea. for
example. 0.5. and South Korean forces totaled dozens of divisions, while the other
countries which took part in the war against the Democratic People's Republic of

Korea sent only symbolic forces (a company or battalion) to the theater of opera-
tions.

The ground forces of the major imperialist states (France in Algeria and the United
States in Korea and Vietnam) consisted of regular army combined-arms large units.
These combined units formed the core of the main force groupings in carrying out

strategic and operational missions. As regards independent units and subunits and
various improvised detachments. they would be employed by the aggressor either as
auxiliary forces or as sources for regular troop replacements.

53

FOI¢0FFIJAI.USE(NVLY
IN3R 0FFICIAL.US£<DNLY

lbe ground forces of dependent countries or the troops of native armies used by the
aggressor had an organization and equip-eat differing from the regular forces of

the hone countries. The South Korean army and the Algerian colonial troops, for
example. in spite of the fact that they were arnad by the United States and France
and trained by their military specialists. were substantially inferior to the troops

of the home countries as regards quality of weapons, combat equipment, and the
combat efficiency of personnel.

In some local wars the aggressors resorted to mobilization of antipopular, reaction-
ary forces of the attacked countries. ﬁligree, white mercenaries and local

reactionary eleaents were utilized, for example, for aggression against Cuba, Burma,
Laos. the Congo. and Angola.

Various missions would be assigned to ground forces in local wars and military
conflicts. The most typical of these are the following:

defeat enemy ground forces;

seize and hold important areas, installations and administrative-political
centers;

participation in assault landing or antilanding operations.

Methods of carrying not these missions depended on the specific geographic conditions
of the theaters of operations and the state of the ground forces proper.

If the theater permitted employment of ground forces in large foraations, and the
arned forces of the opposing sides consisted for the most part of regular units, as
was the case in the wars in Korea and the Near East. for example, combat operations
would be conducted in the form of engage-ants and operations in conventional con-
figuration. In these cases there would be a clearly defined colbat front. Opera-
tional formations. as well as combined units, units and subunits would be assigned
zones of responsibility and would have a "traditional" tactical order of battle.

In wars in difficult-access theaters and in combat against partisan detachments, the
aggressor would be forced to employ his ground troops as independent combined units,
units, and even subunits. The engagements and battles which ground troops fought in
dose cases would assume the character of actions by an army of occupation. There
was actually no battle line. Combat actions would flare up at separate points
simultaneously or sequentially, over a substantial portion of a country or through-
out its territory. Ground troops actions in difficult-access theaters were
frequently of a search-and-destroy character. Ground troops would conduct operations
and combat actions with the objective, depending on the assigned missions, either of
finding and destroying liberation forces. forcing then out of areas they were oc-
cupying, or sealing off the combat area fron an influx of troops from elsewhere.

in addition to this indicative of 0.8. ground forces was participation in a so-
called "other war,"5 the objectives of which would be formulated in specifically
drafted programs. Following were characteristic of "another war": so-called
"pacification," which pursued the aim of intimidating the bulk of the population
with violence and threata,and bribing an unstable sag-eat of the population over to

5‘

FOR OFFICIAI.USE(HVLY
FOR OFFIGAL USE ONLY

the U.S. side; implementation of programs_calling for the conduct of special opera-
tions aimed at killing patriotic forces military, political and administrative
cadres; implementation of an "open arms" program. which included an aggregate of

measures to draw traitors, prisoners and defectors over to the side of the
aggressor.

The experience of local wars attests to the fact that the actions of aggressor
ground forces in the conduct of "another war" were distinguished by large scope and

savage cruelty toward the population, with the aggressor deliberately deceiving the
public regarding the course of events.

Characteristic of the offensive operations of people's liberation armies were
thorough preparation of conditions for attack, swiftness of actions and the element
of surprise. seizure of enemy weapons and combat equipment, followed by withdrawal
to friendly bases of operations. Attacks would be launched for the most part at
night. frequently without preliminary bombardnent. with surprise attacks on enemy
garrisons, national liberation forces would keep the enemy in a constant state of
tension.

National liberation armies displayed a high degree of sctiveness and mobility in
the defense. Constant harrasaing fire and frequent counterettscks were a
characteristic feature of defensive actions by patriotic forces.

Instructive conclusions on the employment of tunnels in the defense proceed from
the experience of the wars in Korea and Vietnam. Tunnels would be constructed in
conformity with the overall defense plan and would be coordinated with the overall
defensive systes. Indirect fire positions and shelters for personnel and equip-
ment would be set up in tunnels. Tactics of tunnel warfare. in conditions of
aggressor air supremacy, where the aggressor extensively employs napalm. proved
highly effective. in the opinion of Hestern experts.

In the course of local wars people's liberation armies amassed a wealth of ex-
perience in organization and conduct of anti-landing defense of a sescoast. Anti-
landing defense would be carried out as a rule in conditions of overwhelming enemy
force superiority on the sea and in the air; although most frequently unable to
prevent the landing. these defensive efforts did hinder the enemy's actions.

In the majority of local wars the objectives of the operation and engagement would
be achieved by the joint efforts of all ground forces combat arms. Artillery was

a most important means of enemy neutralization by fire. Even in the war in Korea
and the Arab-Israeli wars, in spite of the massive employment of air, artillery
remained a means of supporting infantry and tanks both in the attack and in the
defense. In conditions of forested mountain and jungle terrain. howitzer and mortar

fire proved most effective. while in operations on open terrain gun artillery, and
especially antitank guided aissiles, assumed a primary role.

In the opinion of foreign experts. self-propelled artillery was highly effective
in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. They concluded that this war once again confirmed
that self-propelled artillery possesses greater nobility than tractor-drawn artille-
ry. which makes it harder for the enemy to scout it out and engage it. This same
experience. however, also attests to the fact that a self-propelled gun loses its

55

FOR OITNCJA1.USI|NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mobility upon taking chassis damage. In this case a self-propelled gun would either
be destroyed or withdrawn from combat.

The Arab-Israeli wars, especiallythel973 war, confirmed the great effectiveness of
antitank guided missiles. They penetrated the armor of all types of tanks employed
in the war. In the opinion of Western experts. ATOM“ were superior in combat ef-
fectiveness to all other antitank weapons. It was calculated that ATGH accounted
for 50 percent of all Israeli tanks destroyed on the Egyptian front, although

ATGH comprised only ll percent of Egypt's antitank weapons.

Tactical missiles with conventional warheads were first employed in the 1973 Arab-
Israeli War. Foreign military observers note their high degree of effectiveness.
especially against targets occupying a certain area deep in the defenses, and
against large targets on the battlefield.

in spite of the fact that in many local wars combat operations took place on ad-
verse terrain, the view is that armored forces were widely employed and played a
very important role in the outcome of battles. Most frequently they were employed
in small groups in coordination with infantry (motorized infantry) as infantry
close support in the attack. In the defense tanks were employed to engage the tanks
of the opposing side and were the principal force in mounting counterattacks.

Tank troops were employed in large groups on terrain suited for tank operations.
Particularly large tank groups were employed in the 1973 Arab-Israeli war. Precise-
ly this convinces many that the greatest effectiveness of actions was achieved with
the massive employment of tanks for swift offensive exploitation on the main axis
of advance and the mounting of determined counterettscks and counterthrusts in the
defense.

The view is that this same war demonstrated particularly forcefully the dependence
of combat employment of tanks on the ability of the command and staffs to control
units and combined units and on the combat proficiency of personnel. The Israeli
military command would usually form operations groups, for attacking on the main
axis of advance, consisting of 3-4 armored and 1-2 mechanized brigades, 6-8 self-
propclled artillery battalions, an ATOM battalion, air defense and engineer units
and subunits. All infantry employed in these groups would be transported by
armored personnel carriers. and only occasionally would ride tanks in the assault.
This composition of operations groups ensured their independence in combat as well
as smooth teamwork and coordination between combined units and units within opera-
tions groups. as well as with air and air defense forces, while the presence of
self—propelled artillery in these grOups made it possible to carry out offensive
exploitation at a rapid pace and to achieve the stated objectives.

Alongside massive employment of tanks, the Israeli military col-send extensively em—
ploycd (in particular, on the west bank of the Suez Canal) small tank groups (up

to a company) reinforced by motorized infantry subunits and ATOM mounted on ar-
mored personnel carriers for independent actions. Artillery representatives would
be assigned to the groups for adjustment of fire. and forward air controllers to
guide aircraft to the target.

Tank troops were less effectively utilized in the armies of the Arab countries, in
the opinion of foreign military observers. They note that the reason for this was

56

FOR OFFICIAL.USE10NLM
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

substantial miscalculations by the military command in employment of tank forces

both at the operational and tactical level: tank forces would not be concentrated
for swift. deep offensive exploitation on the main axis of advance, but would be

dispersed to operate together with infantry along the entire offensive frontage.

Essentially tank divisions would be assigned to infantry divisions as independent
brigades and battalions and would be employed in the attack echelon to penetrate

fortified positions. but not for deep offensive exploitation.

Helicopters were first employed and underwent extensive development in local were
initiated by the imperialists following world war 11. Originally employed as
transport vehicles. they were subsequently transformed into a potent weapon.

In the opinion of experts, helicopters are capable of performing diversified combat
missions and give nobility to ground troops combat actions. This made it possible,
especially on adverse terrain. to accomplish rapid troop redeployment and rapidly
to negotiate natural and man-made obstacles. Airmobile operations (engagements),

for example, were the principal mode of combat actions by 0.8. ground forces in
Vietnam.

In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, helicopters armed with ATGH were extensively employed
for close support of ground troops. In the opinion of foreign military experts,
helicopters arsed with antitank guided missiles proved to be a highly effective
means of combating tanks and antitank weapons. The great effectiveness of combat
actions by helicopters employing ATCH as fire support weapons was achieved, they con-
cluded, by their sudden and surprise appearance over the battlefield and the fact
that they remained there only briefly.

The experience of local were confirmed for ground forces the role of principal armed
forces branch in combat operations. revealing both the strong and weak points of
this military service.

Strong points, in the estimate of foreign experts, were as follows: high mobility of
combined units and units in conducting combat operations on difficult-access terrain;
saturation of combined units and units with weapons; capability of ground troops to
respond swiftly to sudden, unexpected situation changes; capability of rapid
replacement of obsolete weapons and combat equipment with improved models in the
course of a war.

Western experts consider as weak points the low level of preparedness of ground
troops for night combat; fear of close combat and a high degree of sensitivity to
casualties; a high degree of combined unit and unit dependence on fire support, and
the inability of motorized infantry (infantry) to operate independently. The ex-
perience of the fighting in Korea, Vietnam and the Near East indicates that with in-
adequate support by artillery, air and tanks, infantry usually would sharply
diminish its activeness or cease combat actions.

The leading role and high percentage share of ground troops in overall armed forces
strength compelled ruling circles and military leaders in the imperialist nations to
devote greater attention to their further development in a qualitative respect.

57

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR 0FFKﬂAl.US£I3NLY

According to the general conclusion, the principles and modes of employment of
ground forces in local wars did not undergo radical changes in comparison with

their combat employment in world War 11. At the same time local were essentially
served as a proving gr0und, where the organizational structure and combat
proficiency of personnel, forms and modes of combat operations were tested alongside
new models of weapons and combat equipment.

The specific features of theaters dictated a given organization and degree of tech-
nical equipment of ground forces. Most frequently the organization of divisions

was too cumbersome, and they possessed inadequate mobility. Therefore, as is noted
in the foreign press, the general direction of measures to improve organizational
structure was the "freeing" of ground troops combined units from organic units
hampering maneuver on the battlefield, alongside heavier saturation with weapons.

A single aim was pursued -- to improve ground troops combat employment capabilities,
particularly their mobility. Taking into account the experience of the war in
Korea, for example, and foreaeeing future aggression in Vietnam, 0.5. military
leaders removed Honest John rockets and some tank battalions from infantry divisions.
Motorized infantry battalions mounted on armored personnel carriers were incorporated
into the division in place of the removed tank battalions. The number of airborne
battalions and companies was increased in the ground forces.

The experience of the war in Vietnam showed, however, that partial changes in the
organizational structure of ground forces combined units cannot fully solve the
problem of increasing their mobility. In 1965 the United States created a division
of a new type -- airmobile. It contained 3 airborne battalions, 6 infantry (sir-
mobile) battalions, 3 battalions of 105 mm howitzers, an army aviation group (628
helicopters and 6 fixed-wing aircraft), plus other special units and subunits. The
division's numerical strength ran to 16,000 men.

Replacing heavy weapons and equipment with lighter models, the American reduced
(in comparison with an infantry division) by one third the total weight of weapons

of the airmobile division, which now could be airlifted by organic helicopters from
one area to another in three trips.

The airmobile troops which were created during the aggression in Vietnam were ini-
tially considered highly promising. After some time, however, “.8. military circles
reached the conclusion that although airmobile coabined units are in fact effective
as regards mobility, requisite for waging antiguerrills warfare on difficult-access
terrain, and with an adversary who is significantly inferior in war-fighting
capability, but they are highly vulnerable when employed against an adversary with
an equal degree of technical equipment.

The process of improving weapons and combat equipment continued in the United States
and a number of other imperialist countries, on the basis of the experience of

local wars. Considerable attention was devoted to reducing the weight of artillery
systems and mortars, increasing their operational reliability in adverse climatic
conditions, simplification of design and construction, higher rate of fire, and a
large basic combat load. Improvement of armored equipment proceeded in the direc-
tion of increasing weapon firepower, improving conditions of delivering fire, im-
proving cross-country performance, maneuverability and extending range.

58

FOR 0FFNJAI.USE(MVLY
H)! OFHCIAL USE ONLY

Failure of the plans of local wars, permanent aggravation of internal economic and
social problens, and revision of some strategic views pertaining to the forms and
degree of direct U.S. participation in armed conflicts led to a change in views on
further modernization and the very system of teoymant of ground forces. In the
opinion of 0.8. military experts. an army should be highly nobile. They believe that
ground forces combined units and unite should be deployed in such areas and at such

a distance from potential focal points of military conflict that they can intervene
in events at any time.

The experience of local wars demonstrated as early as the 1950's that ground troops,
by virtue of the fan: that they are dispersed about overseas territories and possess
insufficient mobility, are unable successfully to carry out unexpectedly arising
coahat missions in given theaters of operations. lherefore special-role forces
were established in a number of capitalist countries. In the United States, for
example, a special strategic army corps was formed in 1958. Initially this corps
consisted of ground troops combined units and units. In 1961 the United States es-
tablished a strike co-and (subsequently redesignated "readiness forces" co-and).
which included an army and an airborne corps, as well as a tactical air Md.

The "readiness forces" were placed directly under the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In
the opinion of the 0.8. Defense Department, they are capable of i-ediate redeploy-
nent to any region and of conducting combat operations in any theater and against
any adversary. Personnel of the "readiness forces" coﬁat units have three different
sets of weapons and gear. each of which is designed for combat in specific regions
and conditions. Airlift and sealift capability is specified for transporting these
troops to any theater of war. Following the u.s. example. special forces were es-
tablished at various tines in Belgiu, Holland, Spain, and Portugal.

The experience of local wars has exerted and continues to exert considerable in-
fluence on development of the theory of coth employment of ground forces. It con-
f irned that offense continues to be the principal type of military operation. The
following remain as the most important principles of offense: decisive nassing of
nen and weapons on the main axis of advance; the element of surprise in cos-encing
combat actions; reliable suppression and neutralization of the enemy's defense with
artillery fire and airstrikes; penetration of a deliberate enemy defense on a broad
frontage and at a rapid pace (the brunt of the effort to penetrate prepared
defensive positions is borne by notarized infantry (rifle) combined units, while
enployment of tank troops is specified for swift, deep offensive exploitation);
sealing off the combat area tron an inflow of defending force reserves; reliable
protection of troops against air attack. In the opinion of foreign military experts.
a new element in the organization of ground forces is the establisInent of small
tank groups (5-10 tanks), and in operations -- esployment of such small tank groups
reinforced by notarized infantry. These groups would advance ahead of the main
forces. with the mission of probing for weak points in the enemy's defense. In ad-
dition, a spot inportant mission of tank groups. working jointly with helicopter
tactical assault forces, was the destruction of antisircraft guided missile sites.

A new element in the operations of tank subunits. in their opinion, was the

frequent enploynent of tank battalions, reinforced by A101. as antitank screens.

In the opinion of western experts. a characteristic feature of engagements fought by
ground forces on diff icult-access terrain is independent actions by small subunits.
The success of combined units and units would frequently be dependent on the results

59

momcuuuseowtv
FOI:OFTWC1AI.USEIDNLY

of actions by battalions, companies, and even platoons. Tactical training of small

subunits. in the opinion of the experts. remains an extremely important precondition
for success.

A wealth of experience in employment of helicopters has been amassed in local were
(this applies particularly to the war in Vietnam). Foreign experts are of the
opinion that helicopters constitute promising army aviation unit armament. They are
survivable in a combat situation, especially when employed during hours of darkness
and at low altitudes. Helicopters extend the "combat radius”of infantry, give it
high mobility, and enable the command successfully to resolve problems of concentrat-
ing personnel and weapons in decisive sectors, capturing advantageous positions,
localizing penetration, and mounting counterattecks and counterthrusts.

At the same time experts note that the greatest effect from the combat employment of
helicopters was obtained in local were against countries the armed forces of which
either possessed no modern air defense weapons at all or only in limited quantities.

It is also noted that the success of combat operations depends to an even greater
degree than in the past on firmness and flexibility of control of personnel and
weapons. The nature of modern combat operations imposes high demands on stability

and efficiency of troop control agencies and on the reliability of weapons and
weapon control systems.

Thus the experience of local wars exerts considerable influence on development of
the grOund forces of capitalist countries. A most important demand has been made of
them -- the capability to utilize all spheres dsction: land, sea, and air. This
demand is implemented in the establishment of airmobile and amphibious units,
special-role forces, and organizational improvement of marine units.

3. Experience in Combat Employment of Air Forces and Air Defense

Employment of substantial air forces in the course of local were affected the en-

tire process of combat, the character and end results of ground, sea and air opera-
tions.

Profound qualitative changes connected with converting air forces over to jet equip-
ment took place after world War II in the air forces of all the major capitalist
countries. Air-force capabilities also increased with adoption of new weapons:
guided missiles and bombs, improved cannon armament systems, napalm and, in addition,
equipping aircraft with qualitatively new navigation and aiming equipment.

Fundamentally new weapons, missile weapons in particular, were rapidly developing in
parallel with aviation. Rapid advances in rocketry resulted in aviation ceasing to

enjoy a monopoly status in nuclear weapons delivery. Rockets took away from avia-
tion some of its previous important missions.

There still remain in land and sea theaters, however (both on the battlefield and in
the operational and strategic rear areas), a substantial number of targets which
aircraft alone are capable of detecting and destroying with a high degree of ef-

ficiency. Therefore air forces continue to play an important role in combat opera-
tions with employment of conventional weapons, which is characteristic of local wars.

60

F0! 0511C1AI.US£|DN1N
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is not nere happenstance that the air forces of the leading capitalist countries -
instigators of and also frequently direct participants in local wars - continue to
be naintained at a fairly high level, both in a quantitative and qualitative

respect. The status of the 0.8. military aircraft industry is indicative, with
tactical and arny aviation occupying a predoninant position. As of the end of

1975, for example. the total number of fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft eaployed
in the 0.8. nilitary totaled 9,500. The bulk of these were the latest nodels of
strategic bombers, fighter-bombers, fighters. transports, reconnaissance aircraft,
and army aviation helicopters.5

Expenditures on development of the new B-l supersonic strategic bomber speak
eloquently of the attention which 0.8. ruling circles are devoting to improvement of
offensive weapons. By 1976 total expenditures on this bonber had reached 20 billion
dollars. In addition to the prime contractor, lockwell International, approxinetely
5,000 other subcontractor fires are involved in the project, while the total nulber
of jobs involved exceeds 190.0006.

The joint air forces of the various imperialist nilitary blocs constitute a great
threat to peace and the security of peoples. NATO air forces total 2,850-2,900 con-
bat aircraft. approximately 1,000 antiaircraft missile launchers, and a substantial
nuber of operational-tactical nisailes.7

The military-political leaders of the aggressive blocs aaintain in a state of readi-
ness an extensive network of air bases in various parts of the world.

The experience of the wars in Korea, in Vietnae, and the Near East indicates that
aggressive nations would as a rule conduct cosbat operations with air superiority
over theairforces of the countries which were the victiss of aggression. for the
attack on the Denocratic People's Republic of Korea, for example, the 0.3. ailitary
concentrated on the territory of South Korea and at adjacent locations a large part
of its air forces in the Far Eastern zone, which totaled 1,172 aircraft when the
war began.8 At this tine the Democratic People's Republic of Korea possessed only
150 obsolete aircraft, which did not represent a substantial combat force.9 As the
war progressed, 0.5. leaders increased their air strength, and by the end of 1953
the fighting strength of 0.8. air forces totaled 2,600 aircraft. 0 They were
opposed by approximately 700 aircraft, mostly fighters, of the Denocratic People's
Republic of Korea and the Chinese People's Volunteers.11

The difference in relative strength was equally striking during the war in Vietnam.
In August 1964, for exanple. there were approxinetely 680 combat and auxiliary air-
craft at 0.5. air bases in the coahat zone, while two and a half years later 0.8.
air strength had increased to 2,000 aircraft. During this same period the number
of helicopters increased from 300 to 2,600.12 And yet the patriots of South
Vietnam had no aircraft whatsoever. while the Denocratic Republic of Vietnan pos-
sessed a liaited number of fighter aircraft.

In the aggression against Egypt in 1956, Great Britain, France and Israel employed
approxinately 900 aircraft, against which Egypt could put only 360.

Thus during local wars in Vietnam, Korea, and Egypt (1956), the air forces of the
aggressors enjoyed a clear superiority over those of the countries which were the

61

FOIINHﬂCthIEEUONLY
FOR 0931(1Al.US£40NLN

victim of aggression. There were exceptions, however. The Israeli aggression
against the Arab coantries in 1967, for example, began with Israel's air forces
totaling 320 aircraft, while the Arab countries possessed approximately 630.13

The great inequality in forces between the opposing sides affected the principles

of employment of air forces in local wars. Hhile the aggressive nations, taking
advantage of their absolute air supremacy, could assign their air forces diversified
missions and conduct aggressive combat operations on a large scale, the victims of

aggression were compelled to concentrate the efforts of their air forces chiefly
on air defense.

One can judge from the war in Korea the enormous influence exerted by air actions
on the development of events in local wars. The 1950 counteroffensive by the forces
of the Korean People's Army, for example, which began successfully, did not end in
the defeat of the enemy in detail on the Pusan beachheed chiefly due to strong op-
position by 0.5. air forces, which at the time enjoyed air superiority. Sustaining
heavy casualties, tank and artillery losses from airstrikss, in mid-June the forces
of the Korean People's Army shifted almost entirely to night actions. Their rate
of advance dropped off substantially. The aircraft of the interventionist forces
pinned down the troops, depriving them of the capability to maneuver and redeploy.
and in conditions of mountain terrain and a shortage of transport vehicles, this
affected the relative strengths. Truck and rail traffic was disorganized, as a con-
sequence of which the troops of the Korean People's Army failed to receive adequate
supplies of ammunition, fuel, and rations.

The slowing of the advance of the Korean People's Army enabled the 0.8. colmand to
gain time and, concentrating additional forces, to shift to a counteroffensive.

it was noted in the foreign press that the great distance between the areas of local
wars and the home countries, immense expenditure of equipment and supplies, losses
and the need to replace them enhanced the role of transport aviation. This was
particularly apparent during the war in Vietnam, where the 0.8. military consnd

put into operation a military air transport combined unit. Supplies were airlifted
a distance of 16,000 kilometers. from supply depots in the United States, across

the Pacific to the Indochina Peninsula. The flow of supplies to South Vietnam in-
creased year by year. In 1965, for example, 110,000 tons of various goods were air-
lifted to the theater of operations, 355,000 tons in 1966, 560,000 in 1967, and
910,000 tons in 1968.“

Foreign military observers believe that air forces played a decisive role in the
Israeli aggression against the Arab cOuntries in June 1967. Thanks to secrecy of
preparations for the aggression on the one hand and the poor level of combat
readiness of Egypt's air defense forces and facilities on the other, the Israelis
succeeded in gaining the element of surprise in launching airstrikes against
Egyptian air bases, as a result of which Egypt lost more than half of its aircraft
on the very first day of the war. Having gained total air supremacy, Israel's air
forces proceeded to perform missions of close support of Israeli ground forces and
intensive airstrikes on the enemy forces. The Egyptian army was compelled to
fight on open desert without air cover.

Israeli air forces were compelled to operate in a totally different air situation in GE
1973 Arab-israeli Har. Utilizing the substantially increased combat capabilities of

62

FOR 0511C1AI.US£1MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

: u.

their air defense forces and facilities, the Arab countries thwarted the Israeli
command's plans to gain the element of surprise in employment of air. Foreign
experts state that in contrast to the 1967 war, when the Israelis enjoyed total

air supremacy, in October 1973 the Arab air forces were nore frequently successful.
The air defense forces and facilities of the Arab countries were in a state of high
coebat readiness. Antiaircraft missile forces provided reliable cover to Egyptian
and Syrian troops, airfields and installations in the rear areas. Israeli air
forces sustained heavy losses on their very first attempts to penetrate the nissile
screen. The high degree of effectiveness of air defense weapons in this war led
sane western nilitary theorists to the conclusion that air forces played only a
secondary role. In their opinion. the main reason for diminished Israeli air force
activity lay in the sharply increased effectiveness of air defense.

the interests of other arned forces branches, and also carried out independent ac-
tions, which sonetines assuned the for- of special-purpose air operations. Follovu
ing were the most typical air-force missions: coﬁat for air suprenacy; support of
ground troops and naval forces during operations; sealing off the battlefield
against influx of reserves; landing and dropping airborne assault forces; support-
ing airmobile operations; strikes on targets in the deep rear areas. with the ob-
jective of undernining the eneey's eilitery-aconoeic potential and the morale of
the population: conduct of air reconnaissance; transporting troops, equipment and
supplies.

The war in Korea and Vietnae, the Anglo-French-Iaraeli aggression against Egypt.
lsrael's treacherous attack on the Arab countries in June 1967. and the nilitary
events in the Near East in October 1973, it is believed in the Heat, demonstrated
quite clearly that the battle for air supremacy remains a prinary mission of air
forces,_while gaining of air superiority is a decisive precondition for successful
offensive operations on land and sea. General Stratemeyer, for-er commander of
0.8. Far East Air Forces, once stated: ”Nothing in the Korean War altered the
basic thesis that in order for land and sea forces to be able to operate success-
fully in today's war, it is essential to gain air auperiority."15

The experience of the majority of local wars indicates that surprise Iaesive air-
strikes on the enemy's airfields rennin, with rare exception. the principal neana
of gaining air superiority at the beginning of a war.

The usual exanple cited is Israeli air-force actions in the effort to gain air
suprenacy during the 1967 aggression against the Arab countries. Israel. as ini-
tiator of the areed conflict. at first fully succeeded in repeating the experience
of fascist Ger-any and inperislist Japan in gaining air suprenacy; in particular.
the aggressor's actions in neutralizing opposing air forces proved identical.

this applies both to choice of method of defeating the eneay's air forces and
methods of achieving the stated objective. Conmencsment of nilitary operations
was preceded by surprise Israeli airstrikea on the airfields of the Arab countries.
as a result of which the latter sustained heavy aircraft losses. According to in-
fornation in the foreign press. 25 airfields were attacked sinultaneously by
Israeli aircraft on the first day of the war, and total Arab losses amounted to 60-
66 percent of their aircraft. Israeli aircraft losses during the conflict amounted
to slightly more than 10 percent.16

63

FOR‘OFFHJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR‘OFF1C1AL USEIDNLY

Such heavy losses led to a change in relative strangthsof air forces in favor of the
aggressor. At the beginning of the war, for example, the Arab countries possessed
almost 200 more aircraft than the egamy, while by 12 June the Arabs had 233 aircraft.
and the Israeli air forces -- 260.1

what conclusions are reached in the western military press?

First of all. the endeavor to gain air superiority at the outbreak of war and to
maintain it in the interests of supporting military operations remained a
characteristic feature of military actions. A decisive role in achieving this ob-
jective was played by air forces.

Secondly. with a sneak attack on an unprepared adversary and the availability of
suffificently complete information on aircraft basing, the principal mode of combat
for air supremacy at the commencement of a war would be massive airstrikes by the
attacking side against permanent enemy airfielda.

The second most important mission of air forces in local wars was support of ground
troops in defensive and offensive operations. Principal airstrike targets were
large concentrations of troops and combat equipment, artillery and mortars in fire
positions, tanks and motor transport vehicles, as well as troops in loading and un-
loading areas and during travel. Combat missions would be performed by various
methods. In some cases the selected targets for attack would be subjected to con-
centrated strikes by large groups of aircraft, while in other cases aircraft would
operate in small. stacked groups. . ln conditions of weak opposition by air defense
forces, as a rule aircraft would attack from altitudes of l,500-3,000 meters. with
multiple target passes. With increased air defense opposition. aircraft would at-
tack from higher altitudes or would spend less time over the target. or wOuld st-
tack at night.

Army aviation, especially helicopters. was extensively employed in the war in
Vietnam in the ground troops support role! In the opinion of ".8. military leaders,
they proved to be an indispensable weapon and transport vehicle during operations
on adverse terrain, when it was necessary to maneuver troops or launch surprise
attacks on the enemy. The Hestern press reported that in‘lndochina the 0.8.

Army flew 8.2 million helicopter sorties in 1969 alone, 6.7 million of these for
the execution of combat missions. In the seven years of this war, army helicopters
transported 27.6 million men and 2.6 million tons of equipment and supplies.

Concern for increasing ground forces mobility led to an increase in the quantity
and improvement in the quality of transport aircraft and the development of new

transports. A special place among these aircraft is occupied by the C-SA transport.
on aircraft adopted by the U.S. military in 1966.18

An important place among the missions of the air forces of aggressive nations was
occupied by that of sealing off the combat area from influx of fresh reserves and
supplies. It would be accomplished by attacking the principal lines of communica-
tion with the aim of disorganizing and interdicting all modes of transport. Such
operations were conducted particularly extensively by 0.8. air forces in the wor
in Korea and Vietnam. and to a lesser degree by Israeli. British and French air
forces during the war in the Near East in 1956.

66

FOIioFFKJAl.USE(N‘lY
FOR 0F?1ClAl.USE|DNLY

in were against freedom-loving peoples the aggressors sought to utilise air forces
to hit targets deep in the rear areas, with the objective of undermining military-
economic potential, demoralizing the civilian population and the military, dis-
rupting the functions of government, transportation and communications. The ex-
perience of the strategic bombing operations undertaken by the United States and
Great Britain against Germany and Japan in “arid Her 11 were fully taken into con-
sideration. Just as during the war years, however, the aggressors were unable to
achieve their stated objectives.

Aerial reconnaissance played an important role in air activities in local wars.

Its role and significance were determined by the fact that in local wars success
depended in large measure on prompt acquisition of intelligence on the disposition
of the enemy's forces, his strength, and the axes of advance of his combined units.

The majority of local wars began and were conducted with the aggressor nations en-
joying considerable superiority in air forces. Under these conditions the
countries which were the victims of attack were compelled to utilize a large per-
centage of their air assets for air defense.

The role of air defense varied from one local war to another. It depended, in
particular, on the relative combatcapabilities of air forces and air defense. For
a long time after World war 11 aircraft capabilities to knock out targets were sub-
stantially greater than the capabilities of air defense to repulse air attack. In
a quantitative respect the air defense forces and facilities of the countries which
were victims of aggression usually were less than actual requirements and could not
secure even the most important targets against air attack. Such was the case, for
example, in the first and second stages of the war in Korea, at the beginning of
the war in Vietnam, and during the aggression against Egypt in 1956.

Air defense capabilities increasedasforces and facilities grew, with an accompany-
ing increase in air defense results. The role of air defense in local were also
increased in conformity with this. A gradual increase in the quantity of antiair-
craft artillery and fighter aircraft in an air defense system made substantial
changes in the air situation. By mid-1953 the air defense system of the Korean
People's Army and the Chinese People's Volunteers totaled approximately 2,000 anti-
aircraft guns, nore than 3,000 antiaircrsft mechineguns, and approximately 700
fighters. This resulted in increased aggressor aircraft losses, which totaled
12.200180mbat aircraft lost by the 0.5. Air Force alone by the end of the war in
Korea.

in spite of the fact that quantitative growth of forces and facilities steadily en-
hanced the role of air defense, for a long period of time the advantage remained on
the side of the offense. Aggressor air forces continued carrying out their as-
signed missions in almost full volume, although it now required a significantly
greater exertion and resulted in greater losses. Another approach to solving the
problem was needed, namely: employment of new means of combating manned aircraft.
An exceptionally important stride in this direction was made during the war in
Vietnam, where a fundamentally new air defense weapon was employed for the first
time -- antiaircraft guided missiles. It is believed that this new weapon sharply
increased air defense combat capabilities and effected radical changes in the
character of combat between offensive and defensive weapons.

65

FOR<0FHKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to the development of antiaircraft missiles, fighters played a prominent
role in combat against offensive air weapons, with antiaircraft artillery in second
place. when sntiaircraft missiles came on the scene, they proceeded to fern the
backbone of air defense. For the first time in the history of air defense, ground
weapons occupied a preeminent status. Subsequently improvement in the effective-
ness of air defense was obtained through quantitative growth and qualitative im-
provement of antiaircraft missile systems and an improvement in the level of mis-
sile crew combat proficiency.

Hilitary events in the Near East in October 1973 demonstrated that air defense,
armed with an adequate number of diversified entiaircraft missile systems, had been
transformed into a most important factor in nilitary operations. According to
Pentagon figures, for example, in a period of 18 days Israel lost 107 aircraft.

99 percent of which were downed by air defense weapons.” According to other
sources, in the course of this war Israe1 lost approximately 120 aircraft, about 80
percent of which were destroyed by antiaircraft missiles or antiaircraft artillery
fire on the first three days of military operations.21

In this connection well-known military theorist French general A. Beauffre coments:
"I” any rate it is now clear that air cannot play a decisive role in a ground

battle when powerful antiaircraft missile cover is provided."22 Beauffre states that
"the. firepower of antiaircraft missiles has totally altered the course of the air
battle."

Foreign experts note that as long as the ground forces of Egypt and Syria were
protected by ground air defense weapons, the Israeli army, lacking support from its
own air forces, could not carry out its offensive plans with the same swiftness and
effectiveness as occurred during the 1967 war. Israel's air forces in turn found
themselves in a difficult predicament when attempting to carry out their combat mie-
sions. Discussing this fact. army general (Moran), chief of staff of France's
armed forces, emphasizes that employment of highly efficient ground air defense
weapons "led to the failure of low-level attacks by Israeli aircraft on ~Bgyptian

troop concentrations in the vicinity of the Suez Canal and on canal crossing
points."23

Air defense in local wars was essentially sntiaircraft defense. It did not es-
sentially change even when the attacking side employed winged rockets, since they
were engaged with the same weapons as piloted aircraft. The diversity of con-

dit ions in which local wars were fought was reflected on the organization of air
defense. Its structure, layout, distribution of efforts, and modes of performance
of missions had their own specific features in each war. At the same time, as
foreign observers note, general principles of organization and conduct of air
defense were characteristic of local wars: unity of structure of air defense on a
nationwide scale; concentration of efforts on protecting major insta11ations of
military-economic potential and force groupings; extensive maneuver of air defense
personnel and weapons; combined utilization of all combat arms in conformity with
their combat capabilities. Of decisive significance was the combat readiness of
air defense subunits and units to repel enemy air attacks.

In most cases the air defense of the countries agath which aggression was un-
leashed had to combat an air adversary with considerable inequality between

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
offensive and defensive air weapons. As experience indicates, various targets
were destroyed or neutralized not only by employing large air forces but also by
running repeated bombing strikes on one and the same targets. This same experience
led to the conclusion that the attacking side, even possessing a superiority in
numbers, was unable to attack all targets simultaneously and was compelled to
attack the most important on a selective basis. The selective nature of aggressor
air actions dictated a concentration of air defense personnel and weapons in those
areas where air forces were displaying particular aggressiveness.

Before guided missiles took their place in the air defense system, the principal
means of combating hostile aircraft in local were were fighters and antiaircraft
artillery, supported by radar. In addition to these air defense arms, subunits of
heavy-caliber machineguns, antiaircraft searchlights and barrage balloons (in the
wars in the Near East) have been extensively employed in local wars.

Western theorists conclude that fighter aircraft teoyed two basic techniques in
repelling aggressor air attacks: scrambling from airfields by alert-status aircraft,
and airborne patrols in the vicinity of defended installations. The former was
considered the principal method, since it made it possible to combat hostile aircraft
with the least expenditure of resources and to concentrate the required number of
fighters in the requisite area fairly quickly. This method also made it possible

to increase aircraft combat radius and duration of air combat against the enemy.

The latter technique was less advantageous and was employed only in an unclear or
very complex situation. Fighters would intercept hostile aircraft on the far
approaches to defended installations. This mission was accomplished most success-
fully with several groups of fighters on standing patrol along specified hostile
aircraft approach routes.

The most difficult task for air defense fighters was to repel massive attacks by
large forces of aggressor aircraft. In this case fighter aviation, as the ex-
perience of the war in Korea indicated, also employed massed actions. Several
groups of differing function would engage in air combat simultaneously: a lead
group, the mission of which was to intercept the attacking waves of enemy aircraft
and disrupt their formations, to force them to release their bombs and auxiliary
tanks and to interdict the approach of fresh forces; an attack grOup, which usually
had the mission of shooting down enemy bombers and fighter-bombers before they
could reach the target; a group to provide close cover to friendly main forces,
with the principal mission of supporting their actions; small groups of "hunters,"
who had the mission of destroying enemy aircraft on the return flight. A strong
reserve would be designated for building up combat efforts and carrying out suddenly
arising missions.

This mode of repelling massive air attacks would be employed only when sufficient
numbers of fighters were available. With limited forces fighters would repulse at-
tacks. according to the experience of the war in Vietnam, operating in small
groups and individually, and employing the "hunt" method, swift attacks and im-
mediate disengagement at maxim speed.

As was determined during the war in Korea, night fighter actions were of great sig-
nificance. conducted in close coordination with antiaircraft
searchlights in searchlight light fields.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to employment of antiaircraft guided missiles, anisircraft artillery would
protect force groupings, friendly aircraft basing areas, major political and
economic centers, communications and route centers, and water impoandment
structures, operating jointly with air defense fighters. Coordination between them
would be organized either by zones or within a single zone (by targets, lines,
sectors, altitudes).

The quantitative growth of antiaircraft artillery was accompanied by increased
capabilities for its more extensive employment, which also led to a change in its
modes of action. With sufficient forces, antiaircraft artillery would employ
fixed-position defense of important installations on the battlefield and in the .
heartland. A suitable force grouping would be set up around the target, which would
include various antiaircraft artillery systems, providing mnltitiered fire and in-
tensification of fire on the most important operational axes of hostile air forces.

In spite of the fact that antiaircraft guided missiles were utilized differently in
a tactical respect in local wars in Vietnam and in the Near East, in particular in
the 1973 October War. one can, in the opinion of foreign experts, specify certain
common traits connected with modes of execution of their missions by air defense
forces.

First of all. with a limited number of antiaircraft missile systems, as was the

case in Vietnam up to the middle of 1965, ambush-type actions, employing maneuver

on enemy air routes, were considered the principal mode of employment of antiaircraft
missile forces. A shortage of weapons initially made it necessary to leave un-
defended even important installations in the heartland. As soon as the numerical
strength of antiaircraft missile forces increased. fixed-position defense of '
installations became their principal mode of action. Only a portion of antiaircraft
missile forces would be assigned to ambush-type actions. Subsequent increase in the
number of antiaircraft missile systems led to a changeover to protection by anti-
aircraft missile forces of a group of installations situated in an extensive area.
that is, a shift to the zone principle of air defense force operations. At the same
time there were still forces available to defend individual installations, as well as
for ambush-type actions.

Secondly, although in most instances air defense fighters performed their missions
utilizing old tactics, new elements appeared. It became necessary for aircraft to
fly regular standing patrol in alert zones, and to effect a rapid buildup of forces
when air combat was engaged. This was dictated by the fact that air engagements
would begin with small groups (4-8 aircraft on each side) but would end with a
battle in which as many as 20-30 aircraft participated on both sides. In addition,
combat would occur at altitudes ranging from 50 to 5,000 meters, was of a

dynamic nature. and would be accompanied by swift horizontal and and vertical

maneuver. This required altitude-stacking groups of aircraft patnﬂlingin the alert
zones.

Third. antiaircraft artillery and antiaircraft machineguns, as is noted in the
foreign press. continued to play an important role in engaging air targets at

low and medium altitudes as well as under conditions of jamming. Antiaircraft ar-
tillery performed its missions in close coordination with antiaircraft missile
systems, providing cover to missile positions and force groupings. Teamwork

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between antiaircraft artillery and antiaircraft missile forces in a specific combat
situation would be organised by distributing missions, sectors, and altitudes
between them.

Fourth, in conditions of enemy employment of intensive jamming, radar troops per-
formed their tasks by operating radars in different frequency bands. In a number
of cases force groupings would be established in advance (Near East). Their mis-
sions included organization of radar surveillance of the enemy and detection of

air targets at low, medium and high altitudes. Western experts believe that radars
deployed at mountain sites possessed the best capabilities to perform these mis-
sions. In the frontier zone, along valleys, in gorges, and at locations where
there were gaps in low-altitude radar coverage, it was necessary to augment the air
defense radar system with observation posts in order to detect hostile aircraft;
these posts would be equipped with cos-unications and signaling gear. "hen ag-
gressor aircraft were flying at low and extremely low altitudes, these posts were
sometimes the only possibility of spotting the enemy and providing information on
him. The following were extensively employed to ensure survivability of radar
troops: radar equipment would be sheltered and concealed, positions would be smoke-
screened and protected by sntiaircrsft fire, personnel and equipment would maneuver
to alternate positions. and camouflage would be employed.

The experience of local wars has been the topic of numerous studies by foreign
military experts. It offers the opportunity to refine and develop military theory
on virtually the entire range of problems encompassing strategy and tactics. The
interest of experts is particularly drawn by the problem of the element of surprise
in initiating wars, which has proven inseparable from questions of employment of
air and air defense weapons. As in the past, aircraft are acknowledged to be the
most important means of achieving the element of offensive surprise, and air defense
is acknowledged to be the principal means of repelling a surprise attack. As is
evident from the experience of local wars, the main objective of surprise first
strikes was to achieve air supremacy in rapid order and thus to create favorable
conditions for subsequent employment of all combat arms. The experience of local
wars indicates that in many instances the aggressor succeeded in achieving substan-

tial results precisely in the process of executing initial airstrikes against enemy
aircraft basing locations.

One can determine from statements in the foreign press that significant changes

took place in the combat readiness and air defense capabilities of countries which
were forced to repel aggression. Arab leaders realized, for example. that the un-
successful outcome of the battle for air supremacy in the 1967 war was a consequence
of a poor level of air force and air defense combat readiness to thwart a surprise
attack. although they were not inferior to the adversary in technical equipment.

As a result of taking into account past experience and measures taken, the events

in the Near East developed differently in October 1973. Even prior to the war the
Egyptian and Syrian comnands were maintaining their armed forces in a high state

of combat readiness. were building shelters for aircraft, reorganized the air
defense system, and provided reliable protection against air attack for force group-
ings, airfields and rear areas installatione.2‘ As a result Israel was unable to

employ with impunity the tactics which had brought success in the events of June
1967.

69

FORiOFFﬂJAI.USE¢MVLY
FOI(NWWCJAL|EEZONLY

From the very outset of military operations, the Israeli Air Force failed in at-
tempts to weaken the air forces of the Arab countries with surprise attacks on
airfields and to gain air supremacy. They then changed their tactics: they proceeded
to attack Arab troops and provide support to friendly troops, counting on luring
Syrian and Egyptian aircraft into combat over the battlefield and defeating them.
This challenge was accepted, and air engagements in the battle for air supremacy
became frequent occurrences. Aggressive, decisive actions by Syrian fighters
prevented the Israeli Air Force from gaining success in the battle for air supremacy
on the Syrian Front. Only on the Egyptian Front were Israeli air forces successful,
due to the lack of aggressiveness on the part of Egypt's air forces, but this suc-
case was achieved at a high price.

in the opinion of foreign observers, the fact that air defense forces and weapons
assumed decisive significance in the battle for air supremacy altered the very con-
cept of this struggle. 1n world War 11, as well as in local wars in Korea and
indochina (prior to the appearance of antiaircraft guided missiles), and during the
aggression against Egypt in 1956, the principal content of the battle for air
supremacy was mutual weakening of air forces, while in the 1973 October war, when
antiaircraft nissile forces began to be employed, penetration of air defense became
the most important task.

Air engagements and battles were extensively employed in the struggle for air
supremacy. These engagements and battles, in contrast to the aerial engagements of
world Her 11, were fought over a wide range of altitudes - from maximum altitude

to treetop level. Such sharp altitude variations in air force actions were due to
two circumstances. The first was connected with the employment of jet aircraft,
which were extensively employed as early as the war in Korea. At high altitudes

jet aircraft consumed less fuel, which extended aircraft endurance. This engendered
the endeavor to employ jet aircraft in the nest advantageous and economical operat-
ing conditions. that is, at high altitudes.

The second circumstance was dictated by the fact that air defense weapons, in
particular antiaircraft guided missile systems, by virtue of their performance
characteristics were considered to be less capable of hitting air targets at low
altitudes, and at extremely low altitudes were totally unable to engage aircraft.

At the same time low and extremely low altitudes proved to be the most advantageous
for undetected approach by aircraft to the target and withdrawal from the target fol-
lowing ordnance delivery. This engendered the necessity of aircraft shifting to
Operations at low and extremely low altitudes.

Sometimes local wars took place in conditions where the victims of aggression had
virtually no organized air defense. Then the defending side would resort to ex-
tensive guerrilla actions aimed at destrOying enemy aircraft on the ground. This
mode of combat against hostile aircraft was most typical of operations by the Army
of Liberation of South Vietnan and the patriots in Laos and Cambodia. Guerrilla
subunits and units sometimes achieved major success in raids on air bases. On the
night of 31 October 1966, for example, forces of the Army of Liberation of South
Vietnam attacked a strongly fortified 0.8. airfield at Bien Boa, destroying more
than 20 3-57 bombers and 15 other aircraft.25 During the six years of the aggres-
sive war against Laos, the United States lost approximately 1 200 aircraft, the
majority of which were destroyed on the ground at air bases.26

70

FOR!0FFNJA1.USB(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The experience of local wars prompted change in air force tactics in relation to
countermeasures by air defense forces, a subject to-which considerable attention is
devoted in reports appearing in the foreign press.

Hhen air defense possessed limited capabilities and general weakness. which was ob-
served, for example, on the side of the victims of aggression in the first and
second stages of military operations in Korea and in the war in Vietnam (up to mid-
l965). the most characteristic actions in employment of air forces were either
massive attacks on selected targets by large groups (60-100 aircraft) or stacked
operations in dense formations with aircraft formed in several waves and the ab-

sence of supporting groups, or multiple target passes from altitudes of from 1.5 to
6 km.

In the war in Korea the U. 8. command, pursuing the objectives of overcoming the
opposition of hostile fighters and antiaircraft artillery as well as securing the
penetration of bombers and fighter-bombers through to the target, began employing
passive and active jamming of detection and guidance radars, fire control radars,
and fighter control radio communications.27 And in order to paralyze air defense
fighter actions, the Aaericans attempted to seal them off from attack targets,
assigning large fighter forces (up to 100 aircraft) to operate as so-called "screen
groups.“ These groups, flying on a broad frontage and at various altitudes, with a
fairly deep-disposition formation, would proceed in advance to the area of opera-
tions offriendly attacking units and combined units in order to divert to them-
selves the attention of air defense fighters and thus to "clear“ fighters from a
given area for subsequent bomber access.

The leaders of the national liberation forces in turn undertook specific counter-
measures, in particular assigning special fighter subunits the mission of inter-
dieting the activities of "screen groups." During the Korean Her, by virtue of a
high concentration of jet fighter aircraft of the opposing sides in combat airspace,
sir engagements and battles would be joined and fought at medium and high altitudes.

Increasing saturation of air defense with fighter aircraft and antisircraft artil-
lery compelled the air forces of the attacking side to intensify reconnaissance of
air defense forces and facilities. The obtained intelligence would be utilized in
selecting routes bypassing zones with strong air defense, while when it was neces-
sary to fly through air defense zones, aircraft would employ various maneuvers and
deliver fire on air defense weapons (maneuver in an antiaircraft artillery fire

area, consisting in altering course, altitude, and speed; suppression of antiair-

craft artillery in fire positions by specially assigned forces; sealing off fighter
sirfields; attacks on airfields).

Gradual saturation of air defense with new forces and weapons led to a decrease in
the scale of combat employment of piston aircraft and an enhanced role by jet
fighter-bombers. From 1952 on. piston bombers were for the most part employed in dis
operations. At the same time multirole jet fighter-bombers proceeded to occupy a
leading position in U.S. tactical aviation.

During the war in Vietnam, according to reports in the foreign press, the Americans
proceeded to employ second aircrews, particularly for fighter aircraft. This in-
novation received high marks abroad, since it made it possible to utilise much more

71

POI OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR 0FFKJAI.USE!MVLY

intensively aircraft combat capabilities and enabled a substantially greater number
of aircrews to gain combat experience in a relatively short period of time.28

In addition. the experience of the war in Vietnaa, according to the conclusions of
foreign experts. is also of exceptional interest as regards the occurrence of
fundamentally new changes in air uwth3,dictated by the employment of sntiaircraft
guided missiles in Vietnam's air defense.

Employment of antiaircraft missiles against piloted aircraft resulted in aggressor
air forces shifting immediately to operations in small groups at low and extremely
low altitudes, in formations dispersed in altitude and depth. with an increase in
the number of support groups and intensified active jamming of radar and radio com-
munications. In addition, as is noted in the foreign press, there was a sharp in-
crease in forces involved in electronic warfare.29

Appreciable changes took place in the combat employment of air defense fighters.
Hence the aggressor air forces shifted to operations at medium, low and extremely
low altitudes; air combat zones also shifted to these altitudes.

But this did not end the vigorous competition between offensive and defensive
weapons. The adversaries sought further theoretical and practical solutions: the
aggressor sought ways to penetrate the increased air defense countermeasures, while
the victims of aggression sought ways to increase the effectiveness of air defense.

A number of changes were instituted in the air defense system: cosposite force
groupings were formed, containing antiaircraft systems with various altitude and
range fire [)crformuncc capabilities, while radar troops employed diversified
radars; in order to avoid losses from air attack, large-scale measures were im-
plemented to fortify antiaircraft missile launcher and artillery positions. radar
sites. and fighter bases.

This made it possible to increase to an even greater degree the effectiveness of
air defense against hostile aircraft, while air forces were compelled to modernise
their tactics. Increased aggressor aircraft losses caused by autosatic antiaircraft
artillery and machinegun fire made it necessary to increase aircraft operating
altitudes and to shift once again to massive attacks on targets with large groups,
designating even larger support groups and intensifying electronic countermeasures.
Special operations by large forces of aircraft aimed at neutralizing air defense
antiaircraft missile forces began to be employed. Various kinds of maneuver in
antiaircraft missile system impact zones assumed great importance in air opera-
tions: vertical maneuver and delivery of attack from the so-called'ﬂead zone."
withdrawal from the impact zone by diving or altering course by 90 degrees or more,
simultaneous vertical and horizontal maneuver, etc.3

in the opinion of foreign experts, the experience of recent local wars is of in-
terest fros the standpoint of ensuring aircraft survivability at permanent basing
locations. as well as the survivability of air defense forces and facilities. The
problem of survivability of these combat arms. and of course the problem of ensuring
their combat readiness was resolved by improving fortification of disposition areas,

including the construction of solid reinforced concrete shelters both for aircraft
and for air defense personnel and equipment.

72

FOR 0?FKJAI.USE(NVLY
4. Experience in Combat Bmpluymentofﬂavel Forces

At the beginning of the 20th century British historian and naval theorist Julian
Corbett noted the important role of the navy in "small" wars. Britain had long
sought to maintain a navy which would ensure creation and preservation of a vast
colonial empire in various parts of the world. The navy was extensively employed
in local wars prior to world were I and II. The imperialist nations employed their
naval forces to crush the national liberation movement as the most persuasive ar-
gument of "gunboat diplomacy."

The increased combat power of naval forces after Horld Her II increased their role
in local wars to an even greater extent. The navies of imperialist nations became
a means of presenting a show of force and applying political pressure. This role
was performed especially frequently by aircraft carriers, since it was believed
that they, carrying large numbers of aircraft and nuclear weapons on board, pos-
sessed not only considerable combat capabilities but also the impressive force of
psychological effect. Thus the former "gunboet diplomacy" was replaced by "carrier
diplomacy." Utilization of the navy by imperialist nations, however, went far
beyond display of force. In the majority of local wars the aggressor's naval forces
were in the forward strategic echelon. Frequently an aggressor invasion of the
territory of independent countries would begin with carrier-launched airstrikes and
landing of aaphibious assault forces.

Employment of the navy as “mobile political force" is closely linked with develop-
ment of its basing systea. The United States has established a great many naval
bases overseas, and also plans to set up a number of additional naval basing loca-
tions. The changes which are taking place in the world, however, and particularly
growth in the scale of antiimperialist struggle, make these bases a vulnerable link
in the strategy of imperialisn. There has recently been observed a trend toward
development of a mobile naval basing system which, in the view of 0.8. leaders,
will enable naval forces to conduct combat operations independent of permanent
bases in a given region.

Imperialist nations also view the navy as an effective means of fighting local wars.
because it is capable not only of swift deployment in regions remote from the home
country but is also capable of remaining for extended periods of time in neutral
waters in a state of full combat readiness, without violating the sovereignty of
other countries. As experience indicates, the very fact of redeployment of naval
forces, particularly carrier task forces. often served as a reliable indicator of
deterioration of the international situation and umainent aggression in a given
region.

Thus one of the main functions of the navies of capitalist countries as an in-
struent of policy was always the exertion of ailitery pressure, and in case of
refusal to yield to dictate -- initiation of local were. The aggressors would an-
deavor, by launching surprise nassive attacks by carrier-based aircraft and landing
amphibiOus assault forces, to achieve decisive results in a short period of time,
and thus to paralyze the will of peace-loving peoples to resist. The Anglo-French-
Israeli aggression against Egypt in 1956, for example, began with a simultaneous
land offensive by Israeli forces and an invasion from the sea by Anglo-French in-
terventionist forces. The Anglo-French fleet, supporting land operations, con-
stituted the aggressors' main striking force.

73

lilt¢lﬂﬂ€1AI.USE(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the u.s. aggression in Lebanon, in the Dominican Republic and in other con-
flicts, U.S. naval forces quickly seized major centers by landing amphibious as-
sault forces and supporting them from the sea. The comparatively small size of
these countries and the fact that their principal cities were situated on the coast,
and the fact that the victims of aggression were generally unprepared to offer armed
resistance, enabled the invaders to mount swift operations.

During military operations in Korea and Vietnam - in these two longest and most
savage local wars -- the navy participated very actively. During initiation of
these wars, the aggressora' naval forces were in the forward strategic echelon. In
the course of the war the navy took part in combat operations jointly with the army.
The navy's especially important role in these wars was determined primarily by the
fact that success in the conduct of military operations on land depended directly
on transport of troops, equipment and supplies by sea to the theater of operations.
0n the other hand, the aggressor endeavored by means of naval operations fully to
cut off the theater of operations from the sea.

A principal feature of employment of naval forces in local wars was the fact that
the aggressors as a rule enjoyed total sea supremacy. This made an imprint on the
character and modes of fleet operations. Employment of naval forces essentially
constituted unhindered actions "from sea to land," since the victim of aggression
either had no navy at all or possessed only weak naval forces.

In local wars between countries with ccrmon land, and even see borders, the role of
the navy would be determined by its strength and degree of influence on the course
of combat on land. As a rule small strengths of naval forces, which was character-
istic, for example. of the Arab-Israeli wars and the lndo-Pakistan military con-
flict, limited the role of naval forces to assisting ground troops and delivering
isolated attacks from the sea on eneay bases and shore installations.

Characteristic of employment of naval forces in local wars was further development
of the trends which appeared in World Har II. The first of these consisted in close
coordination of combat operations in all three realms (on land, on the sea, and in
the air) for the sake of achieving the end objective - seizure of territory. A
second trend was that the further development of naval weaponry was accompanied by
increased naval utilization capabilities, as well as an increase in the navy's

share of participation in carrying out operational and tactical missions on land. The
specificfeaturesof«ombatin local wars, in which the national liberation forces were
inferior to the aggressors in terms of military technology, further strengthened
this trend. Attacks on enemy ground installations, ground troops and lines of com-
munication, as well as support of the operations of friendly ground forces wore
considered the principal function of the aggressor's navy.

The naval forces of the warring sides performed the following missions in the course
of local wars:

striking land military and industrial installations, ground force groupings
and lines of communication;

landing amphibious assault forces;

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.USEINVLY

air and artillery support of ground troops in offensive and defensive opera-
tions;

naval blockade of coast;
support of friendly sea transport, troop redeploynent and evacuation;
destroying eneny naval forces at sea and in base;

coast defense. _
Experience indicates that attacks on land nilitary and industrial installations.
ground force groupings and lines of cosnnnication pursued the objectives of under-
nining nilitary-scononic potential. disorganising control, denoralising the civilian
population and arsy. and weakening ground forces.

Carrier task forces conprised the principal forces snployed to achieve these oh-
jectivea. Typically carrier-based aircraft would he eaployed both independently
and in coordination with strategic and tactical sir against ground installations
and troops. Eaploynent of carrier-based aircraft for such strikes was practiced
by Anglo-Anerican naval forces toward the end of Horld Bar II. In local were an-
ploy-eat of carrier-based aircraft against land installations and ground troops
assuned even greater importance. Carrier-based aircraft were extensively utilised
for this purpose for the first tine since Horld Her ll during the war in Korea, in
which u.s. and British carrier task forces participated. After the Korean People's
Arny launched a devastating counterstroks against the South Korean forces. 0.8.
President Truaan issued orders to furnish air cover and support to the forces of
the South Korean authorities.

Onl.July Vice-Adeiral Joy. con-ending the Naval Forces in the Far East, ordered a
carrier task force "to launch a nuher of continuous strikes on the ensny, in view
of the rapid deterioration of the situation in Korea. Principal attention should
he focused on railway structures in the environs of Kinch'on, 58:1"03 and
Sinanju."31 Carrier-based airstrikes helped u.s. forces hold the Pusan heachhead.

Operations against land installations and ground forces continued to counties one
of the principal conhat nissions of carrier task forces. During the three years of
the war in Korea, u.s. and British naval aviation flew approxiaately 267,000 cosbat
sorties. approxinately 200,000 of which involved holhing land installations and
striking ground forces.32

During the Anglo-Prench-Israeli aggression against Egypt in 1956. prior to landing
assault forces, the connand authorities considered their principal nission to be

the destruction or neutralization of Egyptian air power within 2 or 3 days, followed
by “psychological warfare," which would include. in particular, drOpping leaflets
and night boshardnent of the civilian population and nilitsry installations. Anglo-
French carrier-based airstrikes on Egyptian towns and nilitary installations
proaoted the successful landing of assault forces and the advance of Israeli troops.

The tendency of u.s. ailitary and political leaders to eaploy carrier-based aircraft
against land targets and to support ground forces wns even sore strongly in evidence

75

FOR‘O'FKJA1.USI(HNLY
ma OFFIUAI. LSE ONIJ‘

when the aggression against Vietnam began. 0n 5 August 1964, that is, even before
the beginning of extensive offensive operations on land, 0.8. con-and authorities
launched carrier-based airstrikes against naval bases and populated localities on
the shore of the Gulf of Tonkin. Their intention was to show their resolve to
intervene militarily in Vietnam and to demoralize its population; only later did
they commence land operations against the pepular liberation forces.

From 5 August 1966 up to the end of the wan there were constantly from 1 to 6
carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin, while during the offensive operations of the
popular liberation forces in March-April 1972 there were six carriers stationed off
the coast of Vietnam, froa which were being flown as many as 350 sorties per day.33
As is noted in the foreign press, the principal objective of the sirstrikes was to
sap the nilitary-economic potential of the DRV and to seal off combat areas.

The U.S. carriers operated as components of carrier task groups (1 carrier and

3-5 supporting ships). Combat maneuvering was performed in a special area 150-
200 miles from the southeast coast of the DRV. Prior to launching airstrikes,
carriers would approach the coast to a distance of 40-120 miles. in order to
shorten aircraft distance to the target. Distance between task groups ranged from
25 to 60 miles.

0.5. naval command authorities carried out an extensive aggregate of measures to
provide the carriers with combat support. Anti-air warfare would be handled by

the escort ships as well as embarked fighters on continuous standing patrol.
Detection of air targets was handled by distant early warning aircraft. patrolling
in likely directions of threat approach. Antisubmarine warfare would be handled by
escort ships and shore-based ASH aircraft. The most modern equipment, including
satellites, were employed for intelligence and weather support.

Carrier-based air tactics were characterized by the fact that aircraft would at-
tack in gr0ups. the size of which would be as much as half of the strength of an
air wing based on a carrier. The largest raids involved the participation of up to
half the aircraft strength of a carrier task force (100-160 aircraft). According
to the testimony of 0.8. pilots, the combat radius of the Corsair 11 aircraft was
approximately 650 miles (800 km); maximum tine over target with conbat payloads

(8 Mk 82 bombs) was approximately 30 minutes.3‘ Beginning in December 1971, in-
tensity of carrier-launched missions was as high as 100 sortiea per day.

In local wars and military conflicts in which large naval forces did not participate,
navies carried out in a nuaber of cases the mission of attacking enemy shore in-
stallations. Guided missile patrol craft or inshore fire support ships would hit
separate installations, coastal route centers and built-up areas. This description
applies in particular to Egyptian and Israeli naval forces during the war in the
Near East. as well as the Indian Navy during the Indo-Pakistani conflict. Such
employment of naval forces produced successful results in a number of instances,
when the enemy was short of aircraft and weak in coastal defense. In October 1967,
for example, Egyptian guided missile patrol craft succeeded in destroying fuel
depots on territory occupied by Israeli forces.

Amphibious landings were extensively employed. In a number of cases landing of
troops with immediate offensive exploitation was the principal mode of combat. Em-
ploying large assault forces. the iaperialiat nations have succeeded in putting

76

INJI¢OFFICIAL.USiE(MVLV
ROI 0I1WCIAI.US£4ONL¥

1

down revolutionary uprisings in a number of countries in the Bear East. South
America. and Africa.

Marines -- specially trained elite troops prepared to fight in any part of the

world -- comprised the nucleus of lending forces. Special amphibious units. con-
raining forces and equipment to land and support an assault force. were incorporated
in the 0.5. Sixth and Seventh fleets for amphibious landing operations. In a num-
ber of instances con-and authorities enlisted the main forces of fleets to sup-

port the landing of large amphibious assault forces. Operational. tactical, punitive
and raidingoreconnaissance landing forces were employed.

Concentration and deployment of amphibious landing forces would as a rule be ac-
complished in secrecy. while the landing itself would be executed with the element
of surprise. A landing would usually be preceded by preliminary airstrikes and
artillery lsmbardment. The first amphibious landing operations in Korea were
carried out with employnent of the same equip-eat as in World war II and using
those techniques which had been developed in the course of that war.

Airborne and amphibious assaults were employed in the aggression against Egypt in
1956. often in combination with one another; the first heliborne assault was
executed during this aggression, delivering a force of more than 500 men. Its
mission was to build up the forces of the first wave of an amphibious assault force
which had previously been put ashore.

Special heliborne assault techniques were worked out during the war in Vietnan,
techniques which were given the names "vertical envelop-eat" and "eagle's flight."
The "vertical envelopment" nethod consisted essentially in helilifting a force
ashore. taking off froa amphibious assault ships and dock landing ships, after
which the helilifted force would seize e beachhead. The "eagle's flight" technique
would be employed when landing force subunits. after capturing a beachhead, would
be carried by transport helicopter deep into the defense to capture new positions.
In both instances assault actions would receive fire support from special heli-
copters as well as Marine VTOL aircraft. In the view of 0.8. com-mad authorities,
six such aircraft are sufficient to provide air support of a Marine battalion.3

During the war in Vietnam 0.8. command authorities, in addition to amphibious land-
ings on the seacoast, extensively enployed river assault operations. A special
river flotilla was established for this purpose.36 RLverine assaults were employed
with particular frequency in the delta of the Mekong River, where up to that time
national liberation forces had been operating with impunity. Riverine assault
forces would be delivered by helicopter and special air cushion river craft.

In local wars the aggressor, possessing total sea supremacy. extensively employed
naval blockade of the coast -- in the war in Korea. in Algeria, during the attack
on Egypt in 1956, in the struggle against revolutionary Cuba, and particularly
extensively in Vietnan. With the aid of a naval blockade the imperialists sought
to deprive the victim of aggression of support from friendly nations and to sap
its ability to fight.

A naval blockade would enploy two principal modes of action: patrolling on
approaches to the coast, bombing and mining ports.

77

FIIICHNNCIAI.U881JVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As foreign Investigators note. patrolling assumed an extensive scope: large num—
bcrs of naval aircraft and warships would take part. During the war in Korea, for
example. patrolling was handled by 2 strike forces, consisting of 2-6 carriers,
2—3 cruisers. 15-20 destroyers, escorts and minesweepers. In the war in

Vietnam this mission was handledby a task force (approximately 180 ships and
patrol craft) and part of the forces of a carrier task force. A task force of
river patrol forces consisting of 150 vessels was established for river-patrol
duty. The largest forces were employed during the Caribbean crisis to establish a
naval blockade of revolutionary Cuba: practically the entire U.S. Atlantic Fleet
was involved in the blockade.

Patrolling would usually be conducted in two zones: close in -- at a distance of
approximately 2 miles from shore, and further out - at a distance of lZ-bo miles.
Patrol craft and minesweepers would patrol close to shore, while petrol ships,
destroyers and cruisers would patrol in the outer zone. Aircraft would be ex-
tensively employed for sea surveillance. The overall depth of the patrol zone,
taking into consideration aircraft range, would extend to 110 miles, while in
Vietnam the patrol zone stretched 2.000 miles. The entire area under surveillance
would be divided into a number of sectors, in each of which a group of forces
would operate. Vessels detected in the patrol zones, including fishing vessels,
would be subjected to inspection, and in a number of cases would be destroyed.

Attempting to cut the sea lines of communication of the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam, on the night of 9 May 1972 the Americans planted massive numbers of mines
on the approaches to the North Vietnamese ports of Kamfa, Hon Gai, Haiphong, Vinh,
Dong H01, and Thanh. All internal waterways were also lined. Contact, magnetic
and acoustic influence mines were planted by embarked aircraft operating from
carriers stationed in the Gulf of Tonkin.

Neither blockade patrols nor barbaric bombing and mining of ports and port
approaches. however, were able to prevent the shipping of cargo by sea from the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries.

Waging local wars constantly required that imperialist nations organize supply of
troops and naval forces by sea. As experience indicates, the scale of shipment
of supplies was enormous. in spite of the limited character of the wars. During
the Korean War, for example, see transport totaled more than 52 million tons of
dry cargo, 21 million tons of fuel. and approximately 5 million men.37

Chartered privately-owned vessels as well as “.8. Navy warships, cargo ships

and transporuswere used to haul supplies from the United States to Vietnam. in
1966 alone sea shipments from the United States totaled 30 million tons, on which
the Department of Defense spent 750 million dollars. Containers were extensively
employed for shipping supplies; they would be loaded on board specialised 10,000
ton vessels (which can carry 750 containers weighing 7 tons each . The vessels
were off-loaded with the aid of cranes and special helicopters.

During the war in Korea U.S. naval forces were compelled to accomplish urgent re-
deployment and evacuation of troops by sea. A total of five divisions, one brigade

and one regiment were redeployed from Japan to defend the Pusan beachhead (in 1950),
while a South Korean division was evacuated from Yonghae and transported to Pusan.

78

FOR'OFFﬂﬂAl.USEiONLY
FINICMWWCJAI.USEGMNLY

in December 1950. during the retreat out of North lorea u.s. command authorities.
saving troops from total rout, evacuated more than 100.000 men from nungnam. The
evacuation was carried out by approximately 200 amphibious landing and transport
vessels. During the period of evacuation a portion of the troops were defending
the beachhead. supported by warships and naval aviation. Six carriers, the battle-
ship "Missouri," two heavy cruisers and 66 destroyers were employed to cover the
evacuation and support the defending troops.

In a number of local wars and military conflicts national liberation forces were
compelled to accomplish the difficult task of coast defense. The difficulties were
caused by the fact that they were fighting an adversary who possessed a powerful
navy. Defense of the seacoast aimed at complicating or preventing the landing of
amphibious assault forces and artillery bombardment of coastal installations by

the enemy. These operations experienced greatest development in the wars in Korea
and Vietnan.

Laying of minefields and coast artillery fire delivered on enemy warships were the
principal modes of coast defense.

Aggressive minelaying activities by the navy of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea created. according to reports in the foreign press. considerable difficulties
for interventionist naval forces and hindered their combat operations. Hinefields
protected naval bases and ports. as well as sections of coastline suitable for an
amphibious landing. In order to impede sweeping activities. as a rule minefields
would be covered by coastal artillery. skillful employment of mines forced the
enemy to utilize substantial forces for sweeping activities. to alter the timetable
of fleet combat missions and. in addition, negatively affected fleet fighting ef-
ficiency. warships were afraid to approach close to shore, for example, and this
diminished the effectiveness of their fire.

Although u.s. command authorities possessed an enormous superiority of sea forces,
they were unable to prevent Korean naval personnel from laying mines, with these
personnel displaying a high degree of skill. courage and persistence in carrying
out these activities. Hines sank five and seriously damaged an additional five in-
terventionist warships.

In October 1950 minefields (approximately 3.000 mines), covered by coastal artillery
fire. delayed for an extended time the landing of a large enemy assault force in the
Korean port of Honsan. The landing force waited eight days for sweeping to be com-
pleted. cruising ainlessly back and forth in the Sea of Japan until the city was
captured by land. Rear Admiral A. Smith. commander of forward forces. re rted to
his command that "the 0.8. Navy has lost sea supremacy in Korean waters." 9

Coastal artillery waged a fairly successful battle with interventionist warships.
Artillery batteries delivered fire froe indirect positions and naneuvered along the
coast. Coastal artillery fire just in the Hansen area damaged three battleships.
four cruisers. 16 destroyers. and other ships. while total interventionist warship
losses comprised five ships sunk and 73 damaged.

0.8. naval forces also received resolute resistance in Vietnam. Dozens of warships.
including cruisers, took dasege from shore battery fire. In the first few days of

79

FOI‘OFFKJA1.USE(NULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

August 1972 alone five U.S. warships were seriously damaged, while by August 1973
artillery of the popular liberation forces had damaged 20 cruisers and destroyers.
This was one of the reasons for the decision to bring the battleship "New Jersey"
out of mothballs and dispatch it to the coast of Vietnam; the thick armr plating
of this ship was able to resist damage."0

The foreign press notes the inmrtance of actions by light forces, especially armed
with missiles. as well as mines and coastal artillery against large surface warships,
even under conditions of enemy sea and air supremacy.

The war in Korea brought the military-political. leaders of a amber of imperialist
nations to the conclusion of the necessity of strengthening naval forces as an in-
strument of interventionist policy directed against small ocuntrias and peoples.
Taken into consideration thereby was the capability of a navy to operate in open
waters in the vicinity of areas of aggression and swiftly to intervene in the course
of events. Many foreign military exper-a, examining the experience of local wars,
agree in the opinion that "minor" wars and even military conflicts cannot develop

in a direction favorable to the imperialists without involving large naval forces

in military operations. it in not surprising that in the last two decades imperial-
ist pout-rs have pursued a policy. in organizational development of naval forces. of
development of so-called "balanced" fleets, consisting both of strategic nuclear
forces Ind of "general purpose" naval forces, whereby the "general PUtPOBG"

forces were clearly intended for the conduct of combat operations during local wars.
This has found expression in a steady increase in funds allocated for fleet develop-
ment. in the period 1955-1972, for example, one third of the military budget was
spent each year on the 0.8. Navy. In the 1973 budget the share of funds appropriated
for development of U.S. naval forces exceeded by 2 billion dollars funds appropriated
for the Air Force, and by 3 billion dollars funds appropriated for the Army.
Characteristic is an increase in the percentage share of expenditures on "general
purpose" naval forces.

A number of trends were determined in the character of employment of naval forces
in local wars, trends which are considered by foreign military experts in develop-
ment of naval hardware and fleet organizational development.

A fundamental trend in employment of naval forces was expansion of fleet operations
against land targets. Ir. local wars which were relatively protracted, employment

of naval forces was almost entirely subordinated to the interests of land forces.
Usually the principal naval forces would be employed to support their operations.
The experience of local wars and military conflicts indicated that in operations on
coastal sectors the operations of ground forces. air and naval forces comprised a
unilied process, and this required unity of con-tend and organization of close opera-
tional-tactical coordination among the services. U.S. military and political
leaders encomtered this problem during the war in Korea.

Another trend in the employment of naval forces in local wars was expressed in an
increase in the volume of see shipping to support the combat operations of ground
forces overseas, especially when were assumed a protracted and persisting character.
in the war in Korea, for example, 6 tons of military equipment and supplies were
required per soldier, with a daily replenishment requirement of 29 kg per man. In
the war in Vietnam, 80,000 tons of ammunition were brought in each month, as well
as 320.000 tons of fuel and 1.5 million tons of food provisions.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The diversity of nissions performed by the navy in local ware determined a third
trend -- tnc necessity of harnonioue d

weaponry. Analyzing the experience of the war in Korea, herican historians e.-
phasized: "Proportional develop-cut of all h

...Under no circuustances should the inportance of nineeueeping forces and naval
aviation be ignored. Inchon and ﬂu

ngnan enhaeized once again with particular force-
fulncss the vital necessity of anphib

sit-explosive,
special cluster bombs, guided boobs. as well as

l embarked aircraft. According to the figures

rfornance characteristics,
izing electronic equipment. VTOL aircraft becane

dition to embarked attack aircraft, the Phantom
F—Z carrier-based fighter was also extensively employed. The increased scale of
amphibious landing operations in lo

3 operation support forces amounted
, in the opinion of experts, facilitated or-
ganizstion of combat operations.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ON».
FYHICNNHCIAI.US£GDNLY

general nuclear war, and that training and equipping of the Marines would continue

in thekguture to be focused primarily on the conduct of amphibious landing opera-
tions.

in the 1960's, under the influence of the experience of local wars, a reappraisal
of the significance of naval artillery was made in the Heaters countries. ,The were
in Korea and Vietnam showed the necessity of maintaining on board warships artil-
lery with the performance capability to engage an air and sea adversary and to
deliver fire on shore targets. There was noted in the development of artillery a
trend toward versatile automatic medium and small-caliber systems for anti-air
warfare, for performing missions of artillery support of ground troops, and engage-
ment of enemy light naval forces. It was assumed that the artillery of amphibious

landing force inshore fire support ships would be employed to support a landing
force on shore.

According to the testimony of foreign authors, local were, in particular the war in
Vietnam, showed the great importance of minefields, and coastal artillery fire for
coast defense and for thwarting the landing of amphibious forces. For example, sub-
stantial forces of the powerful U.S. fleet were immobilized in the coastal areas
around Hansen, with the U.S. Navy taking losses, in spite of an overwhelming sea and
air superiority. This provided an impetus for the further development both of mine
weapons and minesweeping forces, and increased the importance of employment of
helicopters and air cushion vehicles for amphibious landing operations.

Combat against enemy sea and air forces in coastal areas revealed a trend toward

development of a uniform system of anti-air warfare and coastal defense in combina-
tion with maneuver actions by light naval forces.

This required the development of light forces, in particular patrol craft carrying
gun and missile armament. The need for development of light naval forces was also
dictated by combat on coastal lines of communication.

Trends in employment of naval forces in local wars found reflection both in the
development of weaponry and in the organization of forces.

NATO and U.S. naval forces, in a state of continuous readiness for combat, are
situated in key areas of the world Ocean, forces organized into fleets or task
forces. These forces have taken part in all local wars and military conflicts. The
Sixth Fleet, for example, which operates in the hediterranesn, directly or in-

directly supported the aggression aganlt the Arab peoples, while the Seventh Fleet,
based in the Pacific, fought in Korea and Vietnam.

Amphibious forces operate as components of the U.S. fleets, forces which include
amphibious assault ships, dock landing ships, and other amphibious warfare ships.
U.S. military and political leaders also adopted the practice of forming temporary
task forces for performing specific combat missions in a given area of the world
Ocean where a local war or military conflict was unfolding. In the fall of 1971,
for example, during the lndo-Pakistani conflict, a U.S. Navy task force was formed
to operate in the Indian Ocean, a force which included the aircraft carrier "En-

terprise," an amphibious assault ship, a replenishment-at-sea ship, and seven es-
corts.

82

FOR OFFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A special service fleet provides support services for 0.8. combatant ships. In ad-
dition, support both of the Sixth and Seventh fleets is grounded on an extensive
system of naval bases, the existence of which, in the view of foreign military ex-

perts, remains one of the principal conditions for comprehensive servicing of the
combat fleets.

5. Some Problems of Troop Control

The combat experience of local wars and military conflictefaced the military
leaders of the imperialist powers and national liberation forces with a number of

problems in the area of troop control. They apply both to general, basic questions
and to methods and means of troop control on the battlefield.

Statement of these problems was evoked on the one hand by globalization of the im-
perialist strategy of local wars, and on the other hand by those possibilities of
improving the control process which opened up as a result of achievements of the
scientific and technological revolution. An important role was also played by

the fact that, as indicated by the experience of military operations, a decline in
morale is taking place in the armies of the imperialist nations, and this phenomenon,

in the opinion of militarist circles, can be compensated to a certain degree by re-
organization of control.

Although local wars and military conflicts have taken place on different continents,
at different times, in different geographic conditions, and the level of tech-
nology and control methods have differed from one another by virtue of this, one

can elucidate certain general trends in the development of organization and the
means of troop control proper.

The endeavor by aggressive military bloc leaders to possess an efficiently operating
control system, taking into account such factors as globalization of strategy and
the specific features of troop operations on different continents and in different
theaters of war, can be called the first of these trends. In Horld War II

strategic planning was organized strictly by theater, and coordination of the ob-
jectives and modes of conduct of operations in the various theaters was accomplished
by both coalitions only in connection with situation change, while today a global
control system has been established in peacetime, in which the control activities
of all elements are mutually coordinated. when each local war or conflict arose,

it would immediately fall within this system and become an object of control.

Creation of a continuously operating control system became possible thanks to the
scientific and technological revolution, the achievements of which have been
deliberately placed in the seriice of aggressive policy by the leaders of the im-
perialist nations. A global communications system, the mass media, a complex of
technical devices, including satellite reconnaissance and communications facilities -
all this has been utilized for organization of control on a global scale in any
crisis situation. As early as 1947 the so-called "National Security Law" in the
United States defined the basic principles of control of forces and facilities

and coordination of actions with allied forces on the occurrence of a crisis situa-
tion. These principles applied to three areas of activity by "crisis management"
agencies: the area of collection and aralysie of information on current and poten-
tial crises, the area of control and management of resources during current crises,

83

FOR OFFIC1A1.USEMOhﬂN
FOR 0511(1AI.US£13NLY

and the area of forecasting and planning u.s. policy in regard to future crisis
situations.

The United States, and subsequently the imperialist military blocs as well elaborated
a system of control and management, including special "crisis management" agencies

at various levels, global means of communication and theater operational control
centers for the performance of these tasks.

At the top of the pyramid of 0.8. "crisis management" agencies is the operations
center of the National Security Council - the so-called white House "situation
room," which is linked to the crisis situation assessment centers of the Department
of Defense. State Department, and Central Intelligence Agency. Since technical
support and communications for these centers are handled by the Department of
Defense, the "main axis" of the entire "crisis management" system at the highest
level is the operations control center of the military command authorities.

The ”crisis management" operations center system is being continuously modified. In
April 1969 President R. Nixon established within the framework of the National
Security Council a Washington special operations group (H500), which was assigned

to the task of drawing up contingency plans for possible conflicts and coordination
of the activities of the various government agencies in periods of crisis.

The HSOC contained the following: the president‘s adviser on national security
affairs, the user secretary of state for political affairs. the deputy secretary of
defense, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the director of Central
Intelligence. The "$06 drew up in detail the plan for the invasion of Cambodia by
U.S.-Saigon troops in 1970, the invasion of Laos by Saigon troops under the direc-
tion of 0.3. advisers in 1971, directed the activities of the 0.5. foreign policy
and military machinery during the Jordanian conflict in 1970 and the Indo-Pakistani
conflict in 1971.

when H. Kissinger was serving as the 0.5. presidential national security adviser,
"crisis management" was concentrated in the National Security Council and in its
regional groups (on Europe, Latin America, Africa, the Far East, the Near East, and
South Asia). These groups prepared National Security Council memorandums for the
president, which contained u.s. policy and strategy proposals for crisis situations
in a given region. A total of 138 memorandusa were prepared, including 13 on Indo-
chinaz39 on the Near East, and 7 on South Asia, the Indian Ocean and the Persian
Gulf.

In NATO the Permanent Military Planning Con-uttee (at the minister of defense level)
is the leading agency dealing with determination of military questions. It con-

tains a military committee. to which the NATO theater and mobile forces commands
are subordinate.

Direction of NATO military activities in the period between military committee
sessions is handled by a permanent military committee consisting of representatives
of the general staffs of the NATO member nations. The nilitary committee's working
body is thejointstaff, which coordinates theactivities of the NATO joint commands,
engages in long-range planning of development of joint forces, draws up plans of
employment of joint forces in periods of crisis, organizes and verifies execution
of decisions adopted in the area of military organizational development.

84
FOR OFﬂCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pursuant to the North Atlantic Treaty. the NATO zone of responsibility encompasses
the territory and territorial waters of the NATO member nations, as well as the
Atlantic Ocean north of the Tropic of Cancer. This entire zone is subdivided into
theaters of war and theaters of military operations.

The zone of responsibility of the NATO Supreme Command in Europe includes the ter-
ritories of the NATO member nations (with the exception of Great Britain and
Portugal) and Turkey. as well as the waters of the Mediterranean Sea, the Sea of
Marmara. and the southern part of the Black Sea. This command is the only one in
NATO which contains joint forces consisting of ground and air combined units and
units transferred to its control by the member nations. An American general has
always held the position of supreme commander of NATO Joint Forces in Europe. The

supreme commander is responsible for maintaining forces in a continuous state of
combat readiness.

A second trend in organization of troop control consisted in implementation of the
principle of so-called'divided responsibility" for control, according to which the
United States assumed strategic direction of military operations and, in addition,
provided air and naval forces and supplied troops with arms and equipment. while
the aggressor's allies -- puppet regimes -- provided manpower. This trend first
appeared during the war in Vietnam. At the beginning of the intervention U.s. mili-
tary-political leaders assumed control of the operations both of u.s. troops and
those of the Saigon regime, believing that direct combat intervention by the 0.5.
military would lead to a rapid victory over the national liberation forces. but
this was not to be. In 1969 0.8. military-political leaders were forced to ac-
knowledge that they had made many mistakes in Vietnam, particularly in the matter
of directing military operations.

Somewhat later the Department of Defense proposed adoption of the principle of
"divided responsibility" for management and control of military operations. Sub-
sequently established in troop control practices. it was expressed in puticulxinne but
that the United States greatly reduced its contingent of ground forces in a number
of countries, while stepping up military assistance to puppet regimes and in-
creasing the combst readiness of air and naval forces, deploying them closer to

the targets of aggression and, in addition, increasing the mobility of troops
stationed at home.

An expression of this same principle of "divided responsibility" is the idea, ad-
vanced by the United States, of establishing a so-called "unified army of the
free world." This army would contain two strategic echelons: the first would
comprise the forces of u.s. allies in Asia. the Rear Seat, and Africa. while the
second would consist of 0.5. forces.

The third trend in the development of control and management pertains to means
and methods of battlefield tr00p control. It is expressed in the fact that the
system of troop control in local wars and military conflicts is being continuously
improved in a technical respect, but at the same time it is becoming considerably
more complex. This applies. although to an unequal degree, to the control agencies
both of the armies of imperialist powers and to national liberation armies.

85

FOI:0$1WCIAI.USE‘0NlN
FOR OFIWCIAI.USEIDNLY

This general trend was manifested in a number of directions of development of the
means and methods of troop control, namely: in partial change in the role of head-
quarters staffs and various control elements; in the development of new communica-
tions gear; in automation of troop control.

During the period of the war in Korea, no substantial changes had yet taken place

in the system of troop control in comparison with the recently ended Horld War II.
Troop control in the 0.8. and South Korean armies followed the traditional scheme:
army-corps-division-regiment, and so on down to the platoon. Attached to ".5.

8th Army Headquarters was the 306th Independent Signal Battalion, which provided
command wire and radio communications right down to the infantry platoon. Unit and
combined unit command posts played the role of headquarters agencies sited in the
field for tactical control. 0.3. forces were equipped with wire and radio communi-

cations gear which had been employed in World Var II (SOP-536 and SCP-300 radios,
u-llO and "-130 cable).

The same control methods and means as were employed in world Her 11 were used for
securing teamwork and coordination between ground and air forces. The following
were set up at 5th Air Force Headquarters: a tactical air control center, an air
guidance center for the zone of responsibility of each army corps, air guidance
posts for the zone of responsibility of each infantry or armored division, and air
surveillance, warning and cot-unication posts for areas remote from the battle line.

Air control and requests for air were handled with the assistance of old-model
radars (AN/CPS-S. AN-HPS-S, etc).

Control and coordination were organized according to approximately the same scheme
in the forces of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Chinese
volunteers. The level of technical equipment of the signal units of these forces.
however, was much poorer than that of the Americans.

if we compare in this regard the war in Korea with the war in Vietnam or with the
1973 Arab-Israeli war in the Near East, the evolution experienced by the means and
methods of troop control during this period of time will become obvious.

Control means underwent radical changes. Tropospheric, microwave relay and short-
wave radio conmmnications began to be extensively employed. Electronic warfare
equipment began to be employed by air defense and air forces. Aggressor army head-
quarters staffs began extensively utilising control automation equipment.

There was also a change in the former principles of level-by-level transmission

of orders and reports from the army down to the platoon and vice verse. In the

1973 October war in the Near East, for exanple, general headquarters in Tel Aviv
maintained direct communications with the Israeli units which were crossing the

Suez Canal. In the Egyptianand Israeli brigades control of subunits was handled for
the most part by radio on shortwave, vhf and uhf bands. Radio communications gear
was mobile as a rule.

Organization of troop control in the Syrian and Egyptian armies in the 1973 war was
much better than in the 1967 war and ensured stable control prior to initiation of
combat actions. Control was frequently disrupted in the course of conbst, however,

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.OFV1C1AI.US£GDNL¥

as a result of errors by individual commanders. a rapidly changing situation, and
sometimes as a consequence of active enemy jamming activities. This led to setbacks
in combat operations in certain sectors.

During the war in Korea and the war against the national-patriotic forces of South
Vietnam, in which troops of the Saigon regime, South Korea and Thailand also took
part. 0.8. military-political leaders sought to establish a unified command. But
this proved unattainable due to disagreements among the allies which arose when
assessing the combat situation. Therefore troop control was organised according
to the principle of national affiliation of control agencies.

Coordination of operations, however, remained in the hands of 0.8. command authori-
ties. Overall direction of military operations was handled by the commander in
chief of 0.8. forces in the Pacific. In July 1965 a command of 0.8. forces in
South Vietnam was established. with headquarters (field commands beginning in March
1966) of operational combined units in each of four corps regions. These head-
quarters (field commands) coordinated the operations of 0.5. and Saigon puppet
troops.

Troop control was handled initially from command posts at some distance from the
combat areas. But with this organization of control u.s. Army command authorities
could not respond swiftly to situation changes. Therefore beginning in 1966 a
system of mobile con-and posts was established. set up on helicopters, armored
personnel carriers and armored cars. This greatly facilitated troop control with
the conduct of operations in complex terrain conditions and in separated sectors.

A shift to mobile command posts, however, led to a situation where they were cut
off from headquarters sited at permanent locations. This in turn resulted in head-
quarters personnel (in any case at the lowest command and control echelon) being
reduced. while the headquarters themselves gradually began merging with command
posts.

The United States set up a unified strategic, operational and tactical communica-
tions system to direct military forces in Indochina. It included as a subsystem

a regional unified Southeast Asia communications system, with the aid of which con-
trol of combat operations was accomplished. Small radios adapted for operation in
the specific conditions of South Vietnam were the principal means of communication
in tne line units.

During the war in Vietnam U.S. forces extensively employed night surveillance
devices. it is believed that this improved troop control during the hours of
darkness. In 1966 the United States began series manufacture of AN-TYS-b units,
which were mounted on combat vehicles and aircraft and provided the capability not
only of observing objects at night but also of delivering aimed fire at them.

That same year the "Night Window" TV system was tested in Vietnam, designed for
battlefield reconnaissance and terrain surveillance under low-light conditions.

By the end of 1966 establishment of a semiautomated tactical air control system
was completed in South Vietnam and Thailand. As was noted in the 0.5. press. it

provided the command authorities of the 7th Air Force centralized control of tac-
tical aviation in striking targets in South Vietnam, Laos, and the DRV. In 1969

87

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(HNLV
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the system included the tactical air control centers. three control and warning
centers, more than 20 control and warning posts. approximately 10 guidance posts,
and more than 10 forward control posts. The system was served by a special tactical
air control group.“‘

Control of air defense facilities was also improved during the war in Vietnam. In
1969 a unified air defense system was established in South Vietnam. It was utilized
for the benefit of the operations center of the 7th Air Force Air Defense

Region, which had responsibility for controllng all air defense forces in South
Vietnam and Thailand. The system included air target detection radars, air target
identification and automatic tracking radars, as well as information collection and
display equipment. It operated for the benefit of the 7th Air Force tactical air
control center. as well as other air defense regions.

As U.S. military experts note. during the course of the war U.S. military command
authorities established in Vietnam a fairly effective air force and air defense
combat operations control system, the experience of which is being studied and
adopted in air force organizational development.45

The Americans tested in Vietnam electronic sensors which would be placed along
potential routes of enemy movement and would record (employing the principle of the
photofinish equipment employed in sports) the passage of troops past an "electronic
barrier." information on enemy movement would be transmitted to a field computer
which, after processing the data (enemy strength. direction of movement. which

force grouping was the most dangerous at a given moment). would give the signal to
swing into action the entire fire delivery system. In the estimate of 0.8. command
authorities, electronic sensors were effectively employed in the demilitarized zone
between the DRV and South Vietnam to record the flow of fresh forces from North
Vietnam. Computers were also extensively employed for ground weapons fire control.

This entire "automated battlefield" system. as it is called in the United States.
was not employed in Vietnam, however, as a consequence of the sharp change in the
situation after 1969. which led to the defeat and withdrawal of U.S. troops from
this country. However, the idea of automating the process of fire delivery on the
enemy, implementation of which would sharply reduce troop strength requirements,
was enthusiastically supported in U.S. military circles. In particular, General
westmoreiand. counandcr in chief of U.S. forces, was an ardent supporter of the
idea of an "automated battlefield." portraying the picture of combat operations as
follows: “i see a future battlefield with zo-hour or almost 24-hour surveillance of
all types in operation. On this battlefield we can destroy everything we detect,
with the aid of instant communications and immediate employment of firepower. I
foresee the growing need for highly-mobile combat forces. the mission of which will
be to detect and destroy the enemy with the aid of automated devices."‘6

John Foster, Defense Department director of defense research and engineering, was

an enthusiastic advocate of an "automated battlefield." At the beginning of 1970

he stated that "combat operations on land can be completely revolutionised in coming
years... as a result of development of a new series of sensors for long-range
detection and rapid weapons employment."‘7

FOR OFTWCIAI.USII(NVLV
INT! OFFIfIAI.(ESEi(NVLV

As we can see, the United States used the war in Vietnam as a laboratory to iaprove
troop control processes in "future Vietnale."

while the iaperislist aggressors were developing a troop control systen in the
course of local vars chiefly by mechanising and automating processes, national
liberation forces, taking into account new trends in the development of control
means and methods, were placing Iain eaphasis on unity of definition of operational-
strategic combat objectives. the skill of cos-and authorities in rapidly assessing

a combat situation, their persistence and efficiency in accomplishing coabst nie-
sions.

Experience in guiding and directing liberation forces accumulated over the course of
decades. It included the finest ass-plea of control and aanagement of the assess by
revolutionary leaders of the proletariat and easy generations of leaders of the
national liberation movement, in particular such eminent fighters against colonial-
ism and imperialist reaction as Silon Bolivar, Jose Marti, no Chi Mink, Fidel
Castro. Patrice Luau-be, Ernesto Che Guevara. and others. these leaders of the
masses deaonstrated that in the overall correlation of forces vith the ens-y. the
art, skill and level of control can become a factor which determines the outcose
both of individual battles and the liberation struggle as a whole.

700130728

1. UEHRTBCHNIK. No ll. 1972.

2. JAMES. 1973-1976, pp 569-571.

3. The term "another war" characterizes actions acconpanying troop actions on the
battlefield. "Another var" included all types of sabotage activities, acts of
provocation, terrorisa, etc.

4. ATOM -- antitank guided missiles.

5. See ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYB OBOZRZNIYB, No l. 1976, pp 69-70.

6. 1514.. No 1.. 1976, page 109.

7. Ibid., pp 47-50.

8. See Dsh. Styuart. "Vozdushnaya noshch' -- reabayushchaya ails v Koreye" [Air
Power -- the Determining Force in Korea]. translated froa English. Hoscov,
1961, page 30.

9. See ibid., page 8.

10. Ibid.

ll. See ”Voyna v Koreye 1950-1953 gg." [The War in Korea, 1950-1953], Moscow, 1959.
page 671.

89

FOR‘OFFIJAI.UGBINVLY
12.
13.
110.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.

21c.

25.

26.
27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AVIATION WEEK AND SPACE MINOLOGY, No 6, 1966.
"DIR UND HIRTSCHAPT, No 7, 1967, pp 602-503.

See TYL I SNABZHENIYE SOVETSKIIQ! VOORUZWKB $11., No 2. 1972, page 91.

A. Brofi, "Voyenno-vozdushnyye sily SShA" [The 0.5. Air Force], translated fron
English. Moscow, 1957, page 910.

can SPIEGEL, No 25. 1967, pp 21-27.
SURVIVAL, No 8, 1968, pp 256-257.

The C-SA can carry a payload of more than 60 tons a distance of approximately
3000 miles without refueling. The C-SA is capable of carrying up to 680
soldiers or two "-60 heavy tanks. It can be used to airlift practically any
type of ground forces division armament. The c-SA has a nude: of iaportant
features which are significant for its employ-ant in local wars and ailitary
conflicts. It can be loaded quickly, and can operate out of aaall, crude air-
strips. This mnumuy is very imortant for i's eaploynent in such regions as
Asia, Africa and Latin America. As was reported by former 0.8. Defense Secreta-
ry J. Schlesinger, C-SA aircraft were the 'key factor" in organizing the "air
bridge" used to transport aria iron the United States to Israel during the
October 1973 Har in the Near East (aee V. V. Zhurltin, "SShA i aashdunarodno-

politicheskiye krizisy" [The United States and International Political Crises],
Moscow, 1975, page 56).

See "Voyna v Koreye 1950-1953 33" [The war in Korea, 1950-1953], lbscow, 1959,
pp 402, 403, 597. 671.

ALLCEMEINE SCHUEIZERISCNE MILITAERZEITSCHIIPT, No 1, 1976, page 1.
FLICIIT INTERNATIONAL, November 1973, pp 879-881. .

FORCES ARMEES FRANCAISES, NO 18. 1974, pp 8-15.

DEFENSE NATIONALS, July 1974, page 727.

Suffice it to say that approxiaately 2,600 antiaircraft guns and 150 antiair-

craft missile sites were deployed to protect targets around the Suez Canal and
Golan Heights.

See U. Berchett,"Voyna v dzhunglyakh Yuzhnogo V'yetnaaa" [Bar in the Jungles
of South Vietnam]. translated from English, Moscow, 1965, page 328.

Sve PRAVDA, 7 January 1970.
Sue ZARUBEZNNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRKNIYB, No 5, 197‘, page 16.

The Pentagon sent (at least for one tour) 73 percent of all colonele, 83 per-
cent of majors and 85 percent of 0.8. Array nomolniuioned officers to coabat

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.
30.

31.

32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
60.
lol.
(02.

63.

Mo.
45.
46.

47.

mu OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Vietnaa (ZARUBEZHNOYB ‘10sz 0302M. No lo, 1976,
page 109).

ZARUBEZNNOYB VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYB, No 6, 1973, page 10.

See ZARUBBZNNOYE VOYENNOYB ODOZRBNIYB, No 5. 1976, page 16.

H. Kegl and F. Henson, "Norakaya voyna v Koreye" [Naval Narfare in Korea].
abridged translation fro- Bngliah, Noacov, 1962, page 36.

Ibid.

See MRSKOY SBORNIK. No 6, 1972. page 92.
See mRSKOY SBORNIK. No 6. 1976. page 93.
INTERNATIONAL DBFHCE REVIEN. No 5. 1971. pp 636-435.
NAVY, No 10, 1967, pp 366-3108.

Kegl and Henson, op. cit.. page 383.

DATE, No 3, I968.

Kegl and Henson. op. cit.. page 125.

NAVY TIMES. No ’0. 1967.

Kegl and Henaon, op. cit., page 366.
INTERNATIONAL DEMOS NEVIS", No 5. 1971.

See V. V. Zhurkin. "85M 1 aezhdunarodno-politicheakiye kriziey" [The United
States and International Political Crieea]. Moecov, 1975, page 66.

See VOYENNO-ISTORICNESKIY ZNURNAL. No 10, 1975. page 68.
0RDNANCE, No 290, 1968, page 126.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD. 1970. pp 3 9213-3 9216.

NASNINC‘I'ON EVENING STAR, 2 January 1970.

CON CLUS ION

The developaent of world history in the lat 80 yeara haa convincingly confined
Lenin's definition of iaperialiaa an the final atage of an axploiter ayatea which
is departing froa the arena of hietory. Thie proceaa cannot be prevented by ar-
tificially stimulating aarket conditions. to vhich nonopoly capital reaorta free

91

I-‘OIOFI'ICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time to time. nor by building up military might for the purpose of “restraining"
the revolutionary process, nor by wars. Plans to employ military forces as the
most radical implement of policy of the imperialist nations were thwarted as a
result of the Great October Socialist Revolution and birth of the world's first
worker and peasant state. when its military organization was created and the
bourgeoisy's monopoly of military force came to an end.

Since that time imperialism has attempted, if not to restore its lost monopoly.
then at least to retain military superiority over revolutionary and national-
democratic forces. Following Horld Her 11, when radical changes took place in the
world and a world systee of socialist countries was formed, the process of changes
in the correlation of forces in the world arena in favor of democracy and socialism
took on an irreversible character. It was taking place, however, in an acute
struggle against the forces of reaction and imperialism, engendering among the
ruling circles of the imperialist countries an attempt to adapt to the radical
changes taking place in the world and to shift to a counteroffensive free time to
time. Hilitarism as an aggregate of the material and spiritual capabilities and
aspirations of imperialism began to develop in conditions where its material

foundation was constantly growing, while realistic capabilities to employ military
force were diminishing.

Local wars and military conflicts after world war Ii assumed a number of distinctive
features in comparison with past armed clashes. Remaining forms of limited armed
influence by the forces of imperialiss and world reaction on the processes of the
revolutionary and liberation movement, they became an instrument of the global
strategy of imperialist forces. At the same time their content and thrust changed
radically. In the postwar period the spearhead of local armed assaults by im-
perialism was directed for the most part against the forces of the world revolu-
tionary process, including against individual socialist countries.

Three historical periods can be delineated in the history of local wars and armed
conflicts: the first -- from the establishment of imperialism to rupture of
its general chain as a result of the victory of the Great October Socialist
Revolution; the second -- from the October Revolution to the end of world Her 11;
the third -- the period of new upsurge in the revolutionary and national libera-

tion movement and acute struggle between the two social systems following Horld
War 11.

As special studies have shown, just in these three periods imperialism has initiated
or incited 259 local wars or large-scale military conflicts, including 52 during

the first period. 65 in the second, and 1&3 in the third (see appendices l, 2, 3).
Thus over a period of almost 80 years the number of local armed clashes steadily in-
creased. As figures for the third period indicate, however. the number ap-
preciably dropped off beginning in the latter half of the 1960's, following the
crushing military defeats of imperialism in Southeast Asia. This can only be
assessed as bankruptcy of the imperialist policy "from a position of strength."

Representatives of Western militarist circles themselves are compelled to state that
a policy of resolving international problems by military means does not guarantee

success. "The experience of the Vietnam "at." stated 6. Ball, 0.8. under secretary
of state, “should be assessed only peasimistically. But it by no means attests to

92

FOR OFF1C1AI.USEGMNLY
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a decrease in our military might but rather to the fact that there are areas in the
world where employment of modern weapons does not guarantee achievement of the most
effective results."1

0.5. Secretary of State a. Kissinger made a definite statement about the lessons of
Vietnam in 1975. "Following the bitter experience of Vietnaa," he acknowledged.
"America has learned that it does not possess sufficient might to solve every
problem and that our influence has its 1imits...."2

The policy "from a position of strength" in international relations. permeated by a
spirit of militarism, has plunged into an acute crisis. This crisis has a broad
spectrum of manifestations. It is expressed in particular in the fruitlessness of
attempts by iaperialism to secure military-technological superiority over the
socialist countries or to exhaust them economically, and in failure of the

strategy of local wars.

F. Engels drew attention to the external and internal consequences of militarism.
Operation of the economic factor in the direction of bankruptcy of militarism, he
pointed out, is grounded on the fact that violence is not simply a volitional act
but requires quite real preconditions for its implementation, namely a certain
number of artillery pieces. Building these guns costs "a devilish amount of money,“
which must be obtained through economic production. the capabilities of which are
not limitless. Hence. he concluded. militarism contains "the seeds of its own
downfall."3 which is inevitable for the wealthiest industrially developed countries,
for they alone are capable of producing the highly complex iaplemsnts of war, which
rapidly become obsolete, acquiring together with this a monopoly of wasting money
and bringing a financial collapse ever nearer. V. I. Lenin spoke quite definitely
about the inevitability of crises with the domination of nonopolies as early as
1915 and persuasively demonstrated this with facts of history. In the article
"Marxism and Revisionism," defending the Marxian theory of crises against attacks,
he wrote that at the beginning of the 20th century "the forms, sequence, and
picture of individual crises changed, but crises have remained an inevitable com-
ponent part of the capitalist system."‘

In another work. "Imperialism as the Highest Stage of Capitalism," V. I. Lenin
stressed that ”crises of all types. and economic crises in particular, but not just
these elone,"5 intensify the parasitic. rotting character of this system, when some
of its main properties are transformed into their opposite, when features of a
transition era from capitalise to a higher socioeconomic system - socialism -- are
formed and revealed along the entire line.

The crisis of the policy "from a position of strength" definitely does not signify
the autosatic collapse or spontaneous disintegration of the military system of im-

perialism, but it limits to a significant degree capabilities to employ military
force.

The persistent, consistent struggle by the Soviet Union and all peace-seeking
forces for détente in international relations is bringing tangible fruits in the
world arena. But detrute is not to the liking of many in the world of capital.
Powerful. influential forces are still operating in the west. which are attempting
to remake the world in conformity with their bourgeois ideals of "freedom and

93

FOI10FFKJAI.USIINVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independence." These are primarily representatives of the military-industrial
complex in the United States and other capitalist countries; marching shoulder to
shoulder with them are the Maoists, on whom the enemies of peace and détente are
now counting.

These forces embody the adventurous course of foreign policy of the imperialist
powers, which is fraught with the danger of outbreak of new local wars and military
conflicts. The activities of these forces have quite specific manifestations. The
first is an endeavor to achieve a steady buildup of military power, in spite of a
narrowing of the framework of its application, and counting on further escalation
of the arms race and increasing military budgets for the sake of profit and gaining
military superiority over the socialist countries. A second is maintaining a
course toward dictate in foreign policy, toward the military presence of major in-
perialist powers in various regions of the world, and strengthening of military
blocs for the sake of violent suppression of the national liberation movement and
preservation of strategic positions on all continents. A third is insistence on
old, fully compromised global strategy concepts and elaboration of new methods and
forms of application of military force, in order to raise the degree of its
"utility."

Following the crushing defeat in Vietnam, the attention of the strategists of im-
perialism began to be drawn to an even greater degree by Africa and the Near East.
The political leaders of the imperialist countries are counting on support from the
Pretoria racists, on lsrael, as well as on reactionary regimes in certain Arab
countries. They are offering generous support to these countries and regimes,
hoping to strengthen their influence both in Africa and in the Near East, and to
ignite focal points of conflict in this area, in order to achieve their imperialist
goals by the hands or the Africans and Arabs. This attests to the fact that new
aspects have appeared in the global strategy of imperialism, reflectings its an-
deavor to expand the sphere of its activities in the world.

In present-day conditions militarist circles in the imperialist countries are
seeking to modernize their "base strategy“ to some extent, carrying out plans of
establishing military bases on sparsely-populated islands near centers of the na-
tional liberation movement. These same objectives are pursued by the policy of
"remote military presence," where u.s. mobile forces on the continent and at near-
by bases are kept in a state of constant readiness for swift redeployment to mili-
tary conflict areas.

Re out events indicate that in the United States and certain other imperialist
C0u1ilie8 power is swinging over to those groups which would escalate the arms race
and incite new military interventions in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.

A direct consequence of the influence of these groups, for example, is the interven-
tion by imperialist forces in Zaire, undertaken in 1978 in response to an armed
rebellion by the people of Shaba Province, as well as acts of

armed provocation against Iran, aggressive actions against Afghanistan, attempts

to interfere in the internal affairs of Nicaragua, etc. As was noted on 18 January
1980 by CPSU Central Committee General Secretary Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, chairman

of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, in replies to questions put to him by

a PRAVDA correspondent,"Hashington has arbitrarily appropriated to itself the 'right'

94

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lorewsrd or 'punish' independent sovereign nations, and this brings up a fundamental
question. By such action the v.5. Government is in fact harming the orderly inter-
national-legal system of relations between nations."6

The experience of local wars and military conflicts indicates that the political
restrictions to which one or both warring sides are compelled to resort in armed
conflicts in our time place a certain imprint on the scope of ailitary operations,
on the parameters of employsent of arms, and on the very character of an armed
conflict. Suffice it to say that in the largest local war in the first postwar
decade -- the war in Korea -— the America aggressors, contrary to their desire,
refrained from giving free play to the employment of superior military force. In
the course of the war in Vietnam the United States, faced by the heroic resistance
0: the Vietnamese people and as a result of stern warnings by the USSR, were com-
pelled on several occasions to cease holbing innocent towns and villages in the Dev,
and in the final analysis were forced to adopt a program of "Vietnamization," and
following the failure of this program, to accept a peaceful settleaent. The u.s.
Government, with all its hatred of revolutionary Cuba, recognized the necessity in
1962 of halting aggressive actions at that perilous line beyond which the flames of
a "major" wsr could erupt. Finally, escalation of local wars in the Near East in
1956, 1967, and 1973 was averted as a result of forced political restrictions.

Millions of people have been killedh local wars and military conflicts, and nations
have sustained enormous material loss. According to incomplete figures, more than
20 million persons were killed just in the were and conflicts of the postwar period,
or twice as many as during the entire period of world Her I. And armed conflicts
were accompanied by an enormous quantity of so-called noncomhatant casualties. Ap-

proximately 10 million persons, for example, were driven from their lands and
perished during the Indo-Pakistani conflict of 1971.

Local wars and military conflicts of the postwar period have contained a
number of unique features in a military-technical respect.

First of all this pertains to employment of military equipment and weapons. The
battlefields in local wars since World Var II have continued to serve as weapons
proving grounds for imperialist armies. The combat equipment brought to these
"proving grounds," however, was qualitatively different. The scientific and tech-
nological revolution opened up extensive capabilities to produce unprecedented
means of destruction, both nuclear and improved or new nonnuclear weapons. It was

these weapons (with the exception of nuclear warheads) which were the primary
"test material."

The experience of local wars indicated that the following were the principal
directions of development and improvement of conventional arns:

increased versatility of arms and equipment for general-purpose forces (to use
the American terminology), to produce acapsbility of conducting military operations
in conditions of nuclear and conventional warfare;

improvement of weapons quality in order to increase their combat effectiveness,

to compensate for a shortage of manpower on the side of the interventionists, and
to replace the morally unstable soldier of the bourgeois army with a machine;

95

I70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAI.US£(NVLY

development of equipment promoting increased mobility of units and combined
units for swift intervention in military conflicts;

creation and development of means of automating the battlefield troop control
process.

1heprocesa of increasing the versatility of army, air force and navy equipment
proceeded along the line of ensuring the preparedness of the war machine of the
aggressive nations for actions in any situation, in any conflict at a nuclear or
nonnuclear level. To achieve this, special forces (units, combined units) were
designated, first of all. in each branch of the armed forces, forces designated for
self-contained operations in conditions of a nuclear or conventional war, and
secondly, certain types of weapons (artillery, ground forces launchers, aircraft

and naval missiles and rockets) were adapted for carrying both nuclear and non-
nuclear warheads.

Improvement in the qualitative level of conventional weapons proceeded in the
direction of development of more effective (in terms of lethal power and
destructive force) of small arms, artillery and tank armament. As a result the
firepower and striking power of ground forces has increased substantially, in
particular because new missile systems have undergone extensive development.

A most important direction in the technological development of the armed forces of
the United States and the other NATO countries is an increase in their strategic

and tactical mobility. Strategic mobility has been achieved by building large-
payload ships and aircraft for rapid delivery of troops to conflict areas. Tactical
mobility is achieved by building up army aviation capabilities and by building
transport helicopters and helicopter gunships. Special airmobile subunits and units
have played an important role in increasing troop mobility.

local wars have he d an appreciable influence on armed forces organizational
structure, Under the direct influence of the experience of local wars and military
conflicts, there have occurred numerous reorganizations of the armies of the lead-
ing imperialist nations, which have boiled down to adapting them to the demands
both of a "major“ war and of local conflicts. The specific features of combat
have sometimes resulted in creation of totally new combat arms. In particular,
airmobile and amphibious combined units and units, as well as special-purpose '
forces have been developed.

Modes of operation of air forces, air defense and naval forces of the imperialist
and developing countries have undergone considerable changes. One general trend

has occurred in this area of the art of warfare: a return to the synthesized
practices of world War 11.

Typical in this respect is employment of air forces and air defense weapons in

local vars. Jet aircraft vere extensively used in combat in the war in Korea. But
15 years later, in the war in Vietnam, the Americans began to employ, alongside

jet aircraft, piston aircraft of Horld Her ll vintage. Army aviation was extensive-
ly used in Vietnam, which resulted in the development of such a new type of opera-
tion as the airmobile operation. Transport aviation, vhich handled large-scale

intercontinental airlifting of troops and supplies, also experienced rapid
development.

96

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE(MNLY
FOR 0510“. USE ONLY

Air force tactics were strongly influenced by the adoption of air defense antiair-
craft nissile systels and their technical iaprovelent. Aggressor air forces sought
and found new nodes of action in the effort to penetrate air defense.

Following Horld War II, of all the arsed services, it was perhaps the navy which
sost fully assinilated the experience of local were. This happened because during
all these years the navy was developing under the direct influence of the inter-
ventionist policy of imperialists. As a remit, fleet organisation and equipment as
well as nodes of action underwent frequent changes. One can state that aggressive
policy dictated develop-en: of the navy as a unique scans of nilitary expansion.

The experience of local wars exerted great influence on the systes of acquisition,
schooling or] training of nilitary cadres. is a result of involving large quantities
of personnel in combat. the i-perialist countries established large reserves of
nilitary specialists with conhat experience. At the seas tine participation by
capitalist armies in fruitless. antipopular local were and conflicts led to a sharp
deterioration in the morale of officers and enlisted nsn. This factor was one

of the sain reasons for a shift to the sercenary principle in obtaining empower
for the anies of elaost all major imperialist countries. As a result, declasee
elenents flooded the array, individuals with extremely vague concepts of morality.

The entire experience of local wars and nilitary conflicts initiated or incited by

the forces of inperialian, ettesting to the hopelessness of the policy "fron a posi-

tion of strength." at the sane tine teaches people to be vigilant in regard to the
intrigues of international reaction.

P0013038
1. FOREIGN AFFAIRS, July 1969, pp 623-626.
2. TEE 00m OF STATE BULLETIN, 18 December 1978, p 842.
3. K. Marks and P. angel's. “Soch.” [writings], Vol 20. page 175.
lo. V. l. Lenin, "Poln. Sohr. Soch." [Conlcte Forts]. Vol 17. page 21.

5. Ibid., Vol 27, pegs 32$.
6. PRAVDA, 18 January 1980.
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1981

3026
CSO: 8146/ 086 Ill)

97

momcmmeormr