FOR OFFIf‘IAI. "SI-i ONLY

JPRS L/10308
5 February 1982

USSR Report

MILITARY AFFAIRS

(FOUO 2/82)

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERKING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
USSR REPORT

MILITARY AFFAIRS
(P000 2/82)

CONTENTS

MILITARY-POLITICAL ISSUE
Book Excerpts: 'me Military Bloc Policy of Imperialism
(VOWO-BLCKOVAYA POLITIKA IHPBRIAIJZHA -- ISTOHYA I
sommosr" 19w)OOOOOOOOOOIOOOOICOOOOOOOOOOOIIOIDOOOOIIIO. 1
some owns AND 11mm TROOPS

Book Excerpts: Border Guard Activities Fro- 1929-1938
(NA 5mm SOVETSKIIH mzmv 1929-1938, 1981) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

PERGPTIONS, VINS, COHHBN'IS

Book: Excerpts: Internationalist: and the Socialiet Calamity
(“NOVA BMBVW squzA. 1981)....0000000.0.0.00'00'0000000000 ‘0

- a - [III - USSR - 4 POUO]

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY-POLITICAL ISSUES

BOOK EXCERPTS: THE MILITARY BLOC POLICY 0? IMPERIALISH

Moscow VOYENNO-BLOKOVAYA POLITIKA IHPERIALIZHA -- ISTORIYA I SOVREHENNOST' in
Russian 1980 (signed to press 18 Feb 80) pp 3-6, ‘52-‘56, 5-11, 60-62, 80-82, 122-
126, 169-171, 202-206, 266-269, 322-324, 401-403, 645-651

(Annotation, table of contents, Introduction, chapter headings, introductory and

concluding portions of chapters 1 through 9, and Conclusion of book by 0. A.
thesh-zvskiy. A. Karizius ct a1]

[Excerpts] Title Page: '-

Title: VOYBNNO-BLOKOVAYA POLITIKA INPBRIALIZMA -- ISTORIYA I SOVREHENNOST'
(The Military Bloc Policy of Imperialism -- History and the Present

Day)
Publisher: Voyenlzdat

Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1980
Signed to Press Date: 18 February 1980
Number of Copies Published: 30,000
Number of Pages: 65‘
Brief Description:
This volume, prepared by a team of authors at the USSR Ministry of Defense.lnstitute
of Military History and the Military Historical Institute of the GDR, examines the
economic, political. and military-strategic principles of the military-bloc policy
of the imperialist nations, the organizational structure of military blocs, and
their reactionary role in the contemporary international situation. The authors

reveal the aggressive, anti-Soviet essence of the military-bloc policy of imperial-
ism and demonstrate its hopelessness.

This volume is intended fora broad readership spectrum.
Table of Contents Page

Introduction ......... ..... . ...... . ..... ................................. 5

1

FI”!(HWNC1AI.USE‘0NLN
Hill OH'N 'IAI. USO-L ONLY

Chapter One. The Reactioaary Essence of the Military-Bloc Policy of the
Imperialist Nations ....................................................

l. Marxism-Leninism on the Origin and Reactionary Essence of Military
Alliances and Bloc Policy of Imperialism ...........................

2. Principal Stages and Directions 01 Development of the Military-Bloc
Policy of Imperialism ........ ..... .................................

3. An Antisocialist Thrust —- The Main Feature of Contemporary Military-
Bloc Policy of Imperialism .........................................

Chapter Two. Collapse of the Anti-Soviet Coalition Strategy of Imperialism
During the Years of Foreign Military Intervention and Civil Har.........

11
25
34

41

l. The Socialist Revolution in Russia and the Radical Shift in the Military-

Bloc Policy of Imperialism .........................................
2. Forms and Methods of the Anti-Soviet Bloc Policy of Imperialism in

1917-1920 seesassessesseeeessseeeeeessseseseeesooeoseeeessoeessseeee
3. Failure of the Plans of International Imperialism to Destroy the

Young Soviet Republic ..............................................

Chapter Three. Establishment of the Imperialiat Military Coalitions of
Horld Her It. Failure of Attempts by Imperialism to Create a Unified
Anti-SOVIQC 310C (1920.8-1930'8) eesseseeesceaes'seessseoeaseaeessseeoev

l. The Military-Bloc Policy of Imperialism Between the Hats and in the
First Period of Horld War II .......................................
2. Characteristic Features of the Military Doctrines of Imperialist
Blots. Establishment of Agencies of Coalition Leadership ..........
3e COIIEPSG 0f the Anglo-PIBDCh COBlltion oneaoesseeeesseeeoeassoveesse
4. Struggle by the USSR to Establish a Collective Security System.
Failure of Attempts to Organize a New Joint Military Campaign
“ain‘t the USSR ...... 000.00....OOUIOOOOOIOOOCOOOOOO'OOOOOOOOOOIICO

Chapter Four. Horld War II and the Crisis of International Military-Politi-
cal Relations of Imperialism .....

1. Features of the Fascist Bloc as the Shock Force of Unrld Reaction
Againlt socialiﬂﬂ seeeeeassssses'ssesssseosse.saesoeeeseseeeeseessee

2. Growth of Conflicts Within the Fascist—Militarist Bloc and Its 001-
lapse in the Course of Horld war II ................................

3. Historical Significance of the Anti-Hitler Coalition and the Decisive
Role of the USSR in the Defeat of Fascism ..........................

Chapter Five. The Aggressive Essence of the Military-Bloc Policy of Imperial-
ism Following Horld Her II .............................................

1. Change in the world Balance of Power and Its Effect on Military-Bloc

Policy oso...seessecesseeeesoeeeeeeeeanoesosssoassesses-oesoosorsess

2. Fundamentals of the Contemporary Military-Bloc Policy of Imperialism
3. Principal Directions of Formation of a System of Aggressive Blocs ..

FOI‘OFFKJAI.USE¢HVLY

42
52
71

82

83

96

106

112

124

124
138
152

171

171
180
195
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Six. Establishment and Development of NATO -- The Principal Instru—
ment of Aggressive Imperialist Policy (1949-1969) .......................

l. NATO -- Imperialism's Largest Aggressive Military-Political Bloc ....

2. NATO Structure and Governing Agencies. Principal Features of Its
Political and Military Organization .................................

3. NATO Military Strategy and Counterrevolutionary Activities ..........

Chapter Seven. "Peripheral" Imperialist Blocs (1945-1970) .................

1. Features of Establishment of a System of "Peripheral" Military Blocs
of Imperialism ......................................................

2. "Peripheral" Blocs -- Instrument of Struggle Against the Socialist
Community and the National Liberation Movement ......................

3. Attempts to Intensify the "Peripheral" Thrust of Military-Bloc Policy
of Imperialism ......................................................

Chapter Eight. The Military-Bloc Policy of Imperialism in the 1970's.
Evolution of Military-Political Doctrines

1. Change in the world Balance of Power in Favor of Socialism and Its Bf-
fect on the Military-Bloc Policy of Imperialism .....................
2. Modification and Increased Aggressiveness of the Military-Bloc Policy
of Imperialism ......................................................
3. Evolution of Strategy and Strengthening of the Military Power of the
NATO Bloc ...........................................................
4. Crisis Phenomena in the System of "Peripheral“ Military Blocs and
Attempts to Increase Their Activeness in the Struggle Against the
Principal Revolutionary Forces of the Contemporary Bra ..............

Chapter Nine. The Struggle of the Soviet Union. the Nations of the Socialist
Community, and A11 Peace-Seeking Forces Against the Aggressive Military-
Bloc Policy of Imperialism ..............................................

1. Peace Program of the Socialist Nations and the Campaign Against Im-
perialist Military-Bloc Policy ......................................
2. Role of the Harsaw Pact Organization in Thwarting the Aggressive Plans
of Imperialism ..... ..... ............................................
3. Struggle of the Worker. Communist and General Democratic Movement in
the Capitalist Countries Against the Military-Bloc Policy of Imperial-
18m Coﬁoooooooooolooooooll00.00.000.3000000000IOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOI
4. The National Liberation Movement -- Important Factor in the Struggle
Against Military-Bloc Policy of Imperialism .........................

Conclusion .................................................................

INTRODUCTION

204
204

229
244

268

269
286

316

324

325
331

354

382

403

404

414

428
437
447

Mankind's entry into the final quarter of thr 20th century was marked by a further
change in the correlation of forces in favor of socialism and to the detriment of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperialism. Two basic trends are clashing increasingly more clearly in world
politics, one of which, which has been dominant throughout the last decade, leads
along the road toward furtuer détente, while the other. hindering tuis movement and
escalating tension, is creating an increasing threat to the cause of peace,
democracy, and social progress.

Imperialist military blocs occupy a leading position among those forces which em-
body the latter trend, which seek to hinder the consolidation of positive changes in
the world arena.

The military-bloc policy of imperialism is rooted in the history of the exploiter
society. Imperialist nations have united into military‘-political alliances for

the mutual struggle for spheres of influence, for sources of raw materials and
markets. and for strengthening class supremacy within the individual countries. The
victory of the Great October Revolution in Russia and emergence of the world's

first socialist state determined the new thrust of imperialist military-bloc policy.
Beginning in October 1917, its main task was organization of joint actions against
the new social system and the forces supporting it.

As early as 1915 V. l. Lenin had written of the possibility of provisional agreements
between capitalists and capitalist powers in order "to crush socialism in con-
cert...."1 In 1917-1920 the imperialists in fact attempted to unite all forces of
reaction and counterrevolurion in order to strangle the young Soviet Republic.

0n the eve of World Hat II they once again undertook efforts to establish a unified
anti-Soviet imperialist bluc. When this was unsuccessful, however, the bloc of
fascist states went to war against the nation of socialism. Following Horld War II
there occurred a substantial intensification of the trend toward establishment of
imperialist military blocs directed against socialism. in connection with deepening
of the general crisis of capitalism and weakening of its forces.

In a situation of aggravation of the struggle between the two world systems, the
capitalist countries, in spite of growing conflicts which divide them, are endeavor-
1ng to unite their efforts for the purpose of preserving and strengthening the
doomed exploiter system. By establishing reactionary, aggressive military-political
alliances, the imperialists are attempting to strengthen their position against the
world socialist system, the international worker class, and the national liberation
movement, and to thwart advance of the world revolutionary process by means of
forcible intcrference in the affairs of other countries.

U.S. ruling circles began to play a leadership role in determining the military-
bloc policy of imperialism in the postwar period. At 0.8. initiative the ag-
gressive NATO bloc was established in 19b9, which became transformed into the
largest and most highly organized military-political grouping of capitalist

nations. In addition to NATO, a number "peripheral" military blocs were established
under 0.5. aegis. Addressing the June 1976 Conference of European Communist and
worker Parties. L. l. Brezhnev nuted that "our coamon class adversary - the in-
ternational bourgeoisie -- is displaying many examples of international coordination
of his actions in the struggle against revolutionary forces. Wherever the ex-
ploiter system is under threat, wherever forces of national and social liberation,
democratic forces are gaining the upper hand in the struggle, imperialism undertakes

4

FOIIOFFHJAI.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

literally feverish attempts to coordinate its counteractscks, and there are many
current examples of this -— in Europe, in Africa, and elsewhere."2

is being intensified. Stepping up the activities of military blocs and continuous-
ly escalating the arms race, imperialism is attempting to create insurmountable
difficulties for the struggle of peoples for peace and social progress. The sys-
tem of military blocs is viewed, within the framework of this class strategy of
reactionary forces, as the most effective foundation for utilization of the mili-
tary power of international imperialism against socialism.

effective ways to counter the stepped-up military-political activities of imperial-
ism and the growing threat of war. The policy of peaceful coexistence between na-
tions with differing social systems. a policy which is pursued by the Soviet Union
and the other socialist countries, demands an end to military confrontation. E.
Honecker emphasized in the Report to the Ninth Congress of the Socialist Unity
Party of Germany: "For us Communists peaceful coexistence means peace between so-
cialist and capitalist nations and development of mutually beneficial cooperation
on a basis of equality.... Peaceful coexistence signifies neither preservation of
the socioeconomic status quo nor ideological coexistence."3

In spite of the conflictive nature of the international detente which has begun in
recent years, there are realistic possibilities for success in the difficult
struggle for triumph of the principles of peaceful coexistence. The military—bloc
policy of imperialism. directed toward maintaining tension, is opposed by the
economic and military power of the nations of the socialist community, their
vigorous peace-seeking Foreign policy, the revolutionary worker movement in
developed capitalist countries, and the national liberation struggle of the peoples
of Asia, Africa, and Latin Iterica.

The aggressiveness of imperialism, however, and its reactionary class nature con-
tinue to be maintained. with great persistence it seeks to attain its aggressive
aims, which can lead to rapid, unexpected shifts in the international political
situation and to the emergence of new focal points of war. It is primarily the
military blocs of imperialism which create a foundation for this.

In spite of the great urgency of the problem of the genesis and present-day
manifestations of the military-bloc policy of imperialism, it has not yet been in-
vestigatcd to a sufficient degree. although in recent years a number of studies

have been published in the USSR, GDR, PPR and Other socialist countries dealing with
an analysis of new phenomena characteristic of contemporary state-monopoly im-
perialism, the processes of capitalist integration, international monopolies, and
certain aspects of the organizational development and activities of military blocs
of imperialism.

lacking or are extremely rare in bourgeois historiography. Ruling circles in the
west have no desire for the publication of studies which would shed light on the
history of collective military-political actions by imperialism against the so-
cialiSt community and the national liberation movement, because this would

reveal the reactionary, aggressive nature of the military-bloc policy of imperialism.

e

5

FDI:0FF“JAI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY

directed against so; La; progress. anticommunisn- and anti-Sovmtism have comprisec
the ideological remade-Lion of all bourgeois literature dealing, with tail! wry-bloc
policy since the tin: of tne Great October Socialist Revolution. EKLBCIILc mili-
tary-historical literature by bourgeois authors on military blocs is for the most
g-ert of an apolotgia warure. '1th ~:I 1;». .m of tn': n11 Jinn—bloc pr. Lacy or' the im-
perialist powers. which is annotnnes -. .tuntned in t. -. dent, u'. «AucmtteLf y imea
at adapting this politv to (9130229: in the international. arena and thus at in-
creasing» its effectiveness.

This present Johnna. muster w: mittary historians of the been and mm. investi-
gates the military -hlo:: policy '12 imperialism, its aggressive nature and obiecliaus
content and forms, its evolution over the course of the last 60 years, and
synthesizes the results of the struggle against this policy by contemporary
progressive forces.

The team of authors set for itself the task of examining as an aggregate the mili-
tary-bloc policy of the imperialist nations sequentially, through the course of

the contaporary era -- the era of a historic contest between socialism and capital-
ism and choice of the road to socialism by more and more peoples. The chronological
framework and nature of the study make it possible to elucidate and show the patterns
and mechanisms, specific trends. as well as development prospects of one of the most
dangerous directions of foreign and military policy of the imperialist nations.

The writings of the founders of Harxism-Leninism, documents of the international
Commist and worker movement and the writings of prominent figures in this movement
which reveal the specific features and most significant traits in the evolution of
imperialist policy, the strategy and tactics of struggle by progressive forces for
peace. democracy and social progress serve as the methodological foundation for
preparation of this study. These writings and documents constituted a reliable con-
pass for investigating the patterns, mechanisms and cause-effect relationships in
the bloc policy of imperialism. for producing fundamental assessments of its class
thrust and role in preparation for and initiation of wars and armed conflicts at
various stages of our era.

0f great methodological significance for this study were such Leninist theses as
the law of nonuniformity and unevenness of the economic development of capitalism
in the era of imperialism, discovered by V. I. Lenin, Lenin's determination of the
possibilities and limits of unification of capitalist nations into various blocs
and military coalitions in the interests of joint struggle against the world
revolutionary process, V. I. Lenin's conclusion on the unifying and disuniting
forces both within mutually hostile imperialist groupings and within the imperialist
system as a whole.

The military-bloc policy of imperialism is examined in this volume through a prism
of analysis of the aims, principles and methods of operation of various military
blocs, as a phenomenon which is organically linked with changes in the international
situation, the foreign and domestic policy of the leading imperialist powers, their
economy, military doctrines and strategy.

Following the demand of comprehensive discussion of the military-bloc policy of im~
perialism and elucidation of its interrelationship with various external factors.

6

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

the authors always had the main thing in mind -- to reveal and expose the concrete
content of this policy. which is directed primarily toward creating favorable ex-
ternal political conditions for preparation for and conduct of aggression by a
given group of imperialist nations.

The book consists essentially of two parts. The first part reveals the essence of
the military-bloc policy of the imperialist nations and presents an analysis of this
policy from the foreign military intervention against Soviet Russia during the civil
war years up to the end of World War II. In this part is revealed the reactionary
role of such imperialist blocs as the Entente and the Quadripartite Alliance, in
support of the struggle by the White Guardists against the first worker-peasant
state in Russia, and in putting down socialist revolutions in a number of other
countries; the authors analyze the process of emergence, the structure, organization,
policy and strategy of the fascist-militarist bloc and the Anglo-Trench coalition,
and reveal the reasons for the defeat of the latter in the summer of 1960; they
show the struggle of the Soviet Union against reactionary attempts to establish a
unified anti-Soviet bloc of imperialist nations on the eve of World War II, and the

decisive role of the USSR in the defeat of the fascist-militarist bloc and in es-
tablishment of an anti-Hitler coalition.

In the second part of this study, which deals with investigation of the military-
b10c policy of imperialism since 1945, the authors discuss the fundamentals of the
contemporary bloc policy of imperialism, analyze such military blocs and groupings
as NATO, SEATO, CENTO, ANZUS, and others, and show the scope and effectiveness of

the struggle of peace-seeking forces, headed by the USSR, against the danger of
anather world war.

The military-bloc policy of imperialism is examined in light of its role and place
in the struggle between two opposing social systems - capitalism and socialism.
The authors demonstrate that the imperialist system is doomed and show the in-
creasingly glaring discrepancy between the endeavor by the imperialist powers to
hold their present position and the steadily shrinking capabilities at their dis-
posal. In spite of attempts to gather together all the forces of imperialism with-
in the framework of military blocs to combat genuine socialism, the military-bloc
policy of imperialism is for all practical purposes unable to accomplish this task.
The future belongs to socialism.

This volume is only a first step in comprehensive investigation of the multifaceted
problem of the history and contemporary development of the military-bloc policy of
imperialism. The authors express the hope that their modest labor will draw the
attention of a broader group of specialists toward study of the historical-theoreti-
cal problems of the military-bloc policy of imperialism and exposure of its threat
to peace and social progress and will promote further increase in the vigilance of
peoples in the struggle against the aggressive intrigues of international reaction.

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete works], Vol 26, page 354.

2. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" [Following a Leninist Course.
Speeches and Articles], Vol 6, Moscow, 1978, page 63.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.|. E. ”Much-2, "mun: Ina-unu'uwg. huulzeta new 1h o"yualu hmmlallmth‘heeluw
ycdinoy purtli ﬁermauli" {Central Committee Report to the Ninth Congress 01 the
Socialist Unity fbrty of Germany], Dresden, 1976, page 21.

Chapter One. 'i’liE Ifihd!i3.\.‘.i.‘. -..-.I..25CE Cl“ TEE MILI'LLRYt-BLOC POLICY 0?
THE IMPERIALIST NATIONS

Elucidation of the atticpolitital essence of the military-bloc policy of imperialism
is one of the mast .mpartaut JIQ”CqUiBICBO for analysis of the historical deVeLop-
ment and contemporary manifestations of this policy. A product of the era of in.
perialism, this policy is rooted in the military policy of the exploiter classes of
preceding socioeconomic systems. At all stages of development of the military-bloc
policy of imperialism its essence has remained unchanged, as has the predatory,
aggressive nature of the imperialism which engenders it. Today, when im-
perialism has been placed by the inexorable course of historical development before
the necessity of adapting to the changes in the correlation of forces which have
taken place in the world. military-bloc policy is one of the means with the aid

of which the leading imperialist powers are attempting to reverse the course of
historical progress. Disclosure of the essence and basic content of the contempob
rsy'mﬂitery-bloc policy of imperialism is of cardinal significance for success in
the campaign for military detente and for radical reorganisation of international
military-political relations in the interests of peace and social progress of man-
kind.

it.

Thus military-bloc policy is one of the most important trends in imperialist ag-
gressive policy as a whole. Possessing a long prehistory. connected with the
evolution of military alliances and coalitions of the preimparialiet eras, military-
bloc policy under imperialism has acquired a deeper and more elaborate socioeconomic
foundation, which has placed an imprint both on the substance and on the form of
military blocs. The turning point in man's history accomplished by the Great 0c-
tober Socialist Revolution signified a substantial change in the distribution of
class forces in the international arena. The appearance of a new socioeconomic
system -- socialism -- placed anti-Sovietiem and anticommunism at the apex of the
military-bloc policy of imperialism.

Chapter Two. COLLAPSE OF THE ANTI-SOVIET COALITION STRATEGY OF IHPERIALISH
DURING THE YEARS OF FOREIGN HILIIARY INTERVENTION AND CIVIL WAR

The victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution in Russia shook capitalism to
its very foundations and aggravated its general crisis. The world had split into
two opposing social systems. The struggle between them now tecame the focal point
of the class struggle on an international scale.

The imperialist powers saw in the appearance of the first socialist state in the
world arena and in its foreign and domestic policy a threat to the stability of the

FOR 0!1ﬂ(1Al.[ﬂﬂE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roundations of capitalism and a serious obstacle to their colonial policy. Their
attitude toward the new, Soviet Russia was determined by the interests of the
monopoly bourgeoisie and by the class hatred of the capitalists toward the
proletariat. This led to radical changes in the military-bloc policy of imperial-
ism. Imperialist military coalitions began to display first and foremost an anti-
Soviet, anticommmnist character, and their activities were directed against the
revolutionary gains of the working people.

The reason for such a change in military-bloc policy proceeded from the very es—
sence of imperialism, from the irreconcilable class conflict between the capitalists
and the proletariat, and from an endeavor on the part of the monopoly bourgeoisie

to preserve its domination and to crush its class enemy. A qualitatively new,
second stage had begun in the military-bloc policy of imperialism.

The imperialist powers attempted with all means at hand to impede the emergence of
this new societal system. Immediately following the October Revolution they adopted
a policy aimed at destroying the Soviet State. This task was complicated by the
state of war between the two imperialist coalitions. Roth military

groupings of imperialists employed diversified forms and methods of struggle against
the Soviet Republic. Main emphasis was placed on snuffing out the young Soviet
Republic by means of armed violence. Military intervention, in which both imperial»
ist blocs actively participated, was supplemented by vigorous support of donestic
counterrevolution. Such forms of military-bloc policy of imperialism as economic
blockades, subversive propaganda, diplomatic isolation, and others were also em-
ployed.

Substantial efforts were undertaken by influential circles of the opposing military
blocs to establish a united imperialist front against the world's first socialist
state. Acute imperialist conflicts between the powers of the Entente and the
QuadripartiteAlliance,however, which in addition were skillfully exploited by the
young Soviet Republic in its foreign policy, impeded the establishment of such a
front on a world scale. During the first years of existence of the Soviet Republic
the military-bloc policy of imperialism went through a number of stages. At first
both blocs independently undertook armed aggression against the Soviet Republic,
while subsequently one of the blocs placed its money on domestic counterrevolutionary
forces; after this an attempt was made to establish an anti-Soviet bloc of
neighboring bourgeois states. Resolute resistance to the interventionists and
internal counterrevolution. organized under the leadership of the Communist Party,

led to total failure of the military campaign by imperialism against the Soviet
Republic.

it!

The imperialists sought to prevent the existence of the new, socialist system. Im-
mediately following the Great October Socialist Revolution they embarked upon a
course of policy aimed at destroying the Soviet State. An important role in carry-
ing out this plan was assigned to an aggressive military-bloc policy. Both im-
perialist groupings -- the Quadripartite Alliance and the Entente -- employed the
most diversified forms and methods of anti-Soviet actions. Main emphasis was
placed on defeating the young Soviet Republic with the aid of military force. The
sand intervention, in which both blocs actively participated, constituted open,

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gross intervention by the imperialist powers in the internal affairs of the Soviet
State. Aggressively utilizing military-bloc policy. they offered collective as-
sistance to the domestic counterrevolutionaries, supplying the white Guardist armies
with combat equipment. arms and gear. Subversive propaganda, economic blockade and
diplomatic isolation of the Soviet Republic became important. component pa:ts of
bloc policy.

Influential circles in the opposing imperialist coalitions sought to establish a
united front to gain military defeat of the world's first socialist state. The
existence of major conflicts between the blocs, however, which were skillfully ex-
ploited by the foreign policy of the Soviet Republic, prevented the establishment of
a formal alliance between these coalitions.

The new system, engendered by the Great October Revolution, withstood the onslaught
of the united forces of imperialism. Socialism proved to have more sources of
strength than capitalism. These sources included the dedication of the workers and
peasants of Russia to the Soviet Government, their solidarity behind the Communist
Party, and their heroic, self-sacrificing struggle against the foreign intervention-
ists and "bite Guardists. Russia's working people, together with the proletariat

of other countries, dealt a first crushing blow against anti-Soviet bloc policy.

Chapter Three. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE IMPERIALIST MILITARY COALITIOHS OF
WORLD WAR II. FAILURE OF AHMTS BY IMPERIALISH TO CREATE A WED
ANTI-SOVIET BLOC (1920'8-1930'8)

The military-bloc policy of imperialism after World War I and the failure of mili-
tary intervention in Soviet Russia evolved under conditions of further deepening of
the general crisis of capitalism. Under the influence of the fundamental conflict
of the era ~- the conflict between capitalism and socialism -- the interimperialiat
struggle became increasingly more closely interwoven with the intensifying struggle
by world reaction against the first worker and peasant state and with attempts to

destroy mankind's greatest achievements, which were embodied by the Soviet Union.

Up to the mid-1930's the victors in World War I -- the United States. Great Britain,
and France -- succeeded in securing for themselves an advantageous balance of

power in the capitalist world. The activities of the governments of these countries
reflected a trend of the bloc policy of iaparialism which was predominant in that
period, expressed in an aspiration to unita in a "crusade" against the USSR.

As a consequence of the nonuniformity of capitalist development, which became in-
tensified as a result of the 1929-1933 crisis, as well as the move by countries
with fascist-militarist regimes to aggressive actions in Europe, Asia and Africa,
beginning in the mid-1930's there was a sharp increase in the trend toward establish-
ment of mutually hostile imperialist groupings, and the western powers stepped up
attempts to resolve aggravated imperialist conflicts at the expense of the USSR,

at the coat of betrayal of other countries and peoples, which in the final analysis
led to World War II.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

* i .

One of the important features of development of imperialist military-bloc policy
in the prewar period was the fact that the forming of mutually antagonistic im-
perialist groupings took place in conditions of an acute struggle between unify-
ing and disuniting tendencies. This created the preconditions for the abrupt
development of bloc policy -- for swift changes in the composition of imperialist
groupings, their strength and innediate objectives. This process was nnifested
in concentrated form at the stage of the prewar crisis. when a sharp aggravation
of interimperialist conflicts led to a clash between two imperialist blocs -- the
beginning of World War II.

Considerable influence on the forming and development of military-bloc policy was
also exerted by the subjective factor. that is. the character of political.
diplomatic and military decisions made by various nations and groupings.

The campaign being conducted by the Soviet Union and other progressive forces to
establish a system of collective security and organization of joint resistance to
fascist aggression was the only possibility of averting world War II. "During those
years when the threat of fascist aggression hung over the world," stated 1.. I.
Brezhnev. "the Soviet Union was persistently campaigning for establishment of a

system oi collective security which could restrain the aggressors and prevent World
War II."

The possibility of establishing a system of collective security and of preventing
World War II proceeded from objective premises: fascist aggression threatened not
only the USSR but also Great Britain. France, the United States. and a number of
other capitalist countries. The anti-Soviet thrust in their policy, however.
prevented them from joining in a comaon front of struggle against the fascist in-
vaders and placed the Soviet Union in a position of political isolation and direct
threat of aggression from West and East.

In the prevailing conditions of the international situation, the Co-unist Party
and Soviet Government. exploiting the conflicts between the imperialist groupings,
were able temporarily to divert the military threat free the USSR and to gain al-
most 2 years to strengthen this country's defense capability and to lay the ground-
work for subsequent establishment of an anti-Hitler coalition and future victory
over fascism and militarism. The failure of the imperialist plans for a united
anti-Soviet campaign. which threatened the existence of the USSR and the fate of
world socialism and progress. was an outstanding achievenent of the Comnist Party
and Soviet Government, a brilliant example of elaboration and execution of military-
political decisions on the basis of a Marxist analysis of the distribution of class
forces and trends in the bloc policy of imperialism. '

FOOTNOTE

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom. Rechi i stat'i" [Following a Leninist
Course. Speeches and Articles), Vol 2. Moscow. 1973, page 123.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Charter Four. HOKLI) was ll AND 11!! CRISIS OF INTERNATIONAL MILITARY-
POLITICAL RELATIONS OP IMPERIALISM

The sharp, irreconcilable conflicts caused by the increasingly more uneven political
and economic development of the main capitalisr countries in the 1920's and 1930's
led to the formation of two mutually opposing imperialist groupings. They were
united by anticommunism. Both groupings sought to inflict military defeat on the

Soviet Union and on this basis to resolve the conflicts within the capitalist sys-
tem.

The military-political calculations of the ruling circles of Great Britain, France,
and the United States consisted in channeling the aggressive aspirations of Germany
:against the USSR and thus putting an end to the socialist state. But nevertheless
Horld War II began as a conflict between the opposing imperialist alliances. In
the summer of 1940 the Anglo-French coalition suffered a number of serious defeats
in the struggle against the fascist-militarist bloc, which led to its collapse.

Strengthened by seizure of the countries of western, Central and Southern Europe,
fascist Germany proceeded with execution of its main plan - aggression against the
USSR. As the Bitlerite leadership conceived it. defeat of the Soviet State and
enslavement of the Soviet people would not only lead to achievement by fascism of
its class aspirations, but also to removal of the main obstacle in the path of es-
tablishment of world domination by the Third Reich. Preparing for war against the
USSR, Bitlerite Germany and the fasciat-militarist bloc it had created opposed so-
cialism as the main shock force of world reaction.

tﬁﬁ

The process of formation of mutually opposing military coalitions on the eve of and
during World Her 11 expressed on the whole the development of the principal conflict
of the era between the world of capitalism and the world of socialism. Therefore
final polarization of forces and the hammering together of military coalitions took
place in the final analysis around two countries: the shock force of imperialism and
reaction -- fascist Germany -- and the nost consistent adversary of imperialism,
fighter for democracy and social progress -- the Soviet Union.

The main feature of the fascist bloc was the fact that it began to be formed even
-prior to the outbreak of war -- on the basis of anticommunist, antidemocratic and
aggressive aims, on the basis of the dictate of a single, mightiest power, which
prior to the attack on the Soviet Union, in view of the fact that the opposing
forces were splintered, achieved substantial military-political success.

In contrast to the fascist bloc, the anti-Hitler coalition began to be formed fol-
lowing the collapse of the Anglo-French military alliance, during the period of
defeats of the capitalist countries which were forced, in order to save themselves,
to join forces with the principal adversary of the fascist bloc -- the Soviet
Union -- which became the main force in the military defeat of the aggressors and
saving mankind from fascist enalavement. The outstanding victories of the Soviet
Armed Forces and the consistent policy of the socialist state aimed at strengthen-
ing relations between allies, became the cementing force of the anti-Hitler

12

FIMICNﬂﬂKJAl.USEIDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

coalition and served us the basis for the crushing detest of the fascist-mllitarlst
bloc.

Nevertheless the social conflictivensss of the coalition was in evidence throughout
the war. Two policy lines were constantly in struggle during the war. The USSR
was consistently and unswervingly seeking the adoption of decisions aimed at
achieving the earliest possible victory and elaboration of democratic principles of
postwar arrangement of the world. The Hestern powers sought to subordinate conduct
of the war and resolution of postwar problems to imperialist interests.

Definition of war aims, coordination of war plans and hammering out the basic prin-
ciples of the postwar peace settlement were the most complex area in attainment of
mutually acceptable political solutions. The policy of the Soviet Union won out,
which enabled the anti-Hitler coalition successfully to accomplish its principal
tasks. The policy pursued by the Heaters powers was leading to prolonging the war
and shifting its main burden onto the shoulders of the Soviet people and their

Armed Forces. In addition, temporary alliance with the USSR did not signify a
change in the anticommunist and antisocialiat aims of the imperialist powers. This

was particularly clearly evidenced following the defeat of the fascistamilitarist
bloc.

As a result of a radical change in the world balance of power following Horld Her II
in favor of socialism, the conflicts between the imperialist powers receded to the
background. Development of the third, postwar stage of the military-bloc policy

of imperialism was characterized by a dominant tendency toward worldwide unification
of all forces of imperialism against social progress, and particularly against so-
cialism, which had become a worldwide system.

Chapter Five. THE AGGRESSIVE ESSENCE OF THE HILITARX-BLOC POLICY 0?
IMPERIALISM FOLLOWING WORLD VAR II

After world war II a new, third stage began in implementation of the military-

bloc policy of imperialism, which is still continuing today. A radical change in
the world balance of power in favor of socialism as well as redistribution of forces
within the imperialist system have become characteristic of the international situa-
tion. Consolidation of the three main revolutionary forces of the present day was

a distinctive feature of this situation; this consolidation was expressed in es-
tablishment of a world socialist system, growth of the worker and Communist movement,
and development of the national liberation movement. Deepening of the general
crisis of capitalism was occurring in an inseparable link with development of the
world revolutionary process. As the struggle of revolutionary forces developed fol-
lowing Horld Her 11, there also wasoccurringan intensification of the subversive
activities of the imperialist powers and their allies, aimed at shifting from
defense to offense and weakening, and paralyzing if possible, the growing influence
of the forces of socialism and peace. In these conditions the imperialist powers
resorted to employment of diversified means and methods in the global struggle
against democratic and revolutionary forces. primarily against socialism. The mili-
tary-bloc policy of imperialism assumed qualitatively new features. The growing

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lnllurnvr or (he Intros ul peeve, deuurtdcy and socialism narrowed the possibilities
of imperialist policy. At the same time the reactionary, aggressive essence of im-
perialism and its antisocialist aims remained unchanged.

***

The principal factor which determined development of the military-bloc policy of im-
perialism following world War II was the further deepening of the general crisis of
capitalism. Establishment of a world socialist system, collapse of the colonial
system of imperialism, and the emergence of a large number of young independent
states. as well as growth of the worker movement in the capitalist countries narrowed
the possibilities of actions by imperialism but did not change its aggressive, ad-
venturistic nature.

Reaction by imperialism to the progressing development of the world revolutionary
process in conditions of a radical change in the world balance of power in favor of
socialism was expressed in concentration of the efforts of all capitalist countries
and a trend toward establishment of an international antisocialist military al-
liance under the sponsorship of the major imperialist power -- the United States.
The aggregate of imperialist military blocs, around which are also grouped other
countries linked to the leading imperialist powers by bilateral agreements,comprise
the military-political foundation of this coalition. Creation of a system of im-
perialist military blocs signified concentration in the hands of imperialism of
enormous military power directed primarily against the USSR, the other countries of
the socialist community, and the international worker and national liberation nove-

ment, and constituted a dangerous source of imperialist aggression and threat of
war.

Analysis of the foundations of imperialist military-bloc policy attests to its ag-
gressive nature, dictated by the essence of contemporary state-monopoly capitalism
and constituting an expression of the interests of the most reactionary monopoly
bourgeois circles. Military-bloc policy reflects the principal stages of develop-
ment of the global imperialist strategy of war and aggression. The activities

of the imperialist blocs is of a clearly marked class character and serves as af-
firmation of the domination of an exploiter elite in the countries of the world
capitalist system.

The realm of military-bloc policy is subjected to the action of two trends ~-
centripetal and centrifugal, the development and struggle of which is influenced by
the correlation of forces in the world arena and within the capitalist system. In
recent years there has been clear evidence of the fact that the military-bloc

policy of imperialism is being subjected to serious crisis phenomena, which is con-
firmed by the collapse of certain blocs. The establishment and activities of im-
perialist military-political blocs in the postwar period, however, indicates that

one should not underestimate or ignore to the slightest degree the aggregate economic
power and integrated military strength of imperialism, its aggressive aims, programs
and plans, and its striving toward unification on an anti-Communist basis. This
would signify loss of a realistic approach to reality, and forgetting Lenin's
statement on the necessity of revolutionary vigilance in regard to the class enemy --
the bourgeoisie -- which "is prepared to perpetrate any barbarous acts, atrocities

and criminal actions in order to defend the moribund system of capitalist enslave-
ment."

16

FIHI(NWNCJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTE

1. V. I. Lenin, “Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete works], Vol 23, page 166.

Chapter Six. ESTABLISHMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF NATO - THE PRINCIPAL
INSTRUMENT 0F AGGRESSIVE IMPERIALIST POLICY (1949-1969)

After Horld War II the military-bloc policy of imperialism found its most con-

sistent expression in the activities of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO).

This bloc, established at U.S. initiative, became the nucleus of the entire postwar
system of aggressive military-political blocs, the main instrument of the global
strategy of 0.5. imperialism, which aims at world domination. This aggressive bloc
has pushed the world tothelwink of nuclear catastrophe time and again thrOugh its
activities, which are directed against the socialist community and the world
revolutionary movement.

The United States and the other imperialist powers, however, uniting in NATO their
vast military and economic potential, were unable to achieve their sins of "con-
taining," "pushing back" and destroying genuine socialism. The reverse happened.
The growing night of the socialist community and the attractive force of its peace-
aeeking foreign policy not only successfully withstood the bloc policy of the NATO
powers but also promoted an increase in the crisis within this aggressive military-
political grouping. The capitalist countries within the bloc were forced to adapt
to the new conditions of the international situation.

*tﬁ

By the beginning of the 1970's the more than 20—year history of NATO clearly at-
tested to the fact that the military-bloc policy being conducted by reactionary
monopoly capital groups in the United States, the PRC, Great Britain and the other
NATO countries against the Soviet Union and the socialist community presented a
serious military danger to the forces of peace, socialism, and social progress.
Since World Bar II reactionary forces had succeeded in unifying the military paten-
tial of almost all highly-developed capitalist countries in a volume and scope un-
precedented in history. in gathering these countries into a single military bloc,
and in accomplishing moral and material preparations for war by armed forces and
nations according to uniform principles, which led to aggravation of the interna-
tional situation and especially to intensification of the danger of war. In spite
of all this, they failed to achieve their stated objective of driving back and
destroying the socialist countries. NATO, as an instrument of a predatory foreign
policy, was unable to help either the U.S. sonopolies implement their global strate-
gy in Europe, Southeast Asia and the Near East. nor the PRC imperialists to carry
out their revanchist plans in regard to the GDR and the other socialist nations.

In the 1950's and l960's the world balance of power was shifting increasingly more
obviously in favor of the nations of the socialist community. The general crisis
of capitalism entered its third stage. It becsne considerably aggravated at the

15

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

end of the 1960's in all its manifestations. The fiasco of the military-bloc poli-
cy of monopoly capital was obvious not only in the example of NATO but also in that
of the "peripheral" imperialist military blocs.

The forced adaptation by imperialism to the changed world balance of power at the
end of the 1960's also affected military-bloc policy. Militant NATO leaders, how-
ever, refused to give up their aggressive plans of struggle, fraught with the
threat-of war, against the nations of the socialist community and the other prin-
cipal revolutionary forces of the contemporary era.

Chapter Seven. "PERIPHERAL" IMPERIALIST BLOCS (1945-1970)

The military-bloc policy of imperialism in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other
parts of the world pursued the principal mission of struggle against the socialist
system. Aggressive military-political alliances and exclusive groupings which
"supplemented" NATO, enveloping the socialist countries with a chain of military-
strategic bridgeheads intended for initiating new wars, became the main instrument
of this policy on the "periphery" of the capitalist world. Another aim of military-
bloc policy was suppression of the liberation struggle of the peoples of the colo-
nies and dependent countries. The imperialist powers, relying on "peripheral"
blocs. sought to prevent disintegration of the colonial system, to hinder oppressed
peoples from gaining independence, and to prevent liberated countries from choosing
socialism or a road of noncapitalist development.

Diversified forms of bloc policy were employed to attain these two basic goals: es—
tablishment of military—political blocs headed by imperialist powers. into which
liberated countries were drawn; formation of military coalitions headed by im—
perialist nations for the purpose of waging wars against socialist or liberated
countries; transformation of disintegrating colonial empires into military-political
neocolonisl confederations, as well as organisation of military groupings within
them. In addition. bilateral military agreements were reached within the framework
of military-bloc policy, a system of military strongpoints was established which en-
compassed the entire world, the main imperialist powers forced military assistance
on yOung national states. and attempts were made to utilize regional associations
of liberated nations for the military purposes of monopoly capital.

The military-bloc policy of imperialism in Asia, Africa and Latin America was
developing in a situation of profound imperialist conflicts. The struggle between
the old colonial powers and the United States, which was playing the role of
hegemonic power of the capitalist world, assumed a particularly acute character.

iii

Establishment of a system of "peripheral" blocs in Asia, Africa and Latin America,
closely linked with NATO and with each other, aimed at strengthening the "rear" and
"flanks" of the imperialist camp in the world war which was being planned against
the USSR and the entire socialist community, as well as crushing of the worker and
national liberation movement. In the 1950's and 1960's the imperialist powers,
headed by the United States. extensively employed a system of "peripheral" blocs for

16

INJR¢OFIUCJAI.IISEZCHNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

material preparations for another world war, suppression of the revolutionary and
national liberation movement, and local wars. The "peripheral" military blocs
promoted to a significant degree the maintenance of focal points of political ten-
sion and armed conflicts in the zone of national liberation. The "peripheral"
blocs, however, were less cohesive than NATO; deep conflicts and centrifugal trends
developed within them, undermining the unity of policy of the leading imperialist
powers and the leadership role of the United States. The bloc system created by
imperialism contained very substantial "flaws" from the standpoint of imperialism.
In the first place, plans to establish an all-encompassing system of these blocs
proved unsound. Dozens of liberated nations not only did not affiliate with

blocs but established close relations with the socialist countries, in many in-
stances relying on their military systems. The movement of the masses of Asia,
Africa and Latin America, vigorously opposing imperialist military-bloc policy,
took on an extensive international character. Secondly, the blocs them.:.ves were
internally unstable, and participation in them evoked dissatisfaction buth on the
part of the developing and certain capitalist countries, especially in matters of
forms and methods of general policy, and resistance to Hashington's dictate. Third,
the created blocs, especially the Baghdad Pact and SEATO, proved little effective
in the face of major international political crises, wars and military conflicts.
In order to wage local wars the imperialist powers were compelled to create special
military coalitions, in the formation of which bilateral military agreements
"operated" most reliably, while puppet regimes which were not bloc members were

the most vigorous assistants of 0.8. imperialism. There was no success in creating
joint military forces in any of the "peripheral" blocs.

Membership in blocs had a pernicious affect on developing countries, since it
resulted in rule by reactionary regimes, for the most part military dictatorships,
excessive expenditures on maintaining constantly growing armed forces, and enormous
material and human sacrifices in connection with involvement in local imperialist
wars. This evoked dissatisfaction on the part of the worker masses and led to com-
plication of the internal situation in these countries.

The activities of the "peripheral" blocs were fraught with enormous danger for the
national liberation and revolutionary movement. They contimaﬂ to remain a serious
military threat for the socialist countries and independent national states in both
hemispheres and a source of military and political pressure and subversive activi-
ties in countries sharing a common border with them. The "peripheral" blocs
frustrated détente in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. The bloc member countries
were virtually isolating themselves from the forces of peace and progress and were
doomed to follow the neocolonialist policy of imperialism.

By the end of the 1960's, however, progressive mankind, headed by the USSR and the
nations of the socialist community, had achieved major success in the struggle
against imperialist war and aggression. This had the most direct and immediate
influence on the effectiveness of the military-bloc policy of imperialism in the
"Third World" countries. The forces of reaction and militarism began seeking new
ways to maintain their influence in existing blocs, attempting to alter the world
balance of power in favor of capitalism by means of regrouping. Therefore ruling
circles of the imperialist powers directed particular attention to regional

groupings, which constituted nominally independent alliances of liberated nations.
Liberated countries, endeavoring to achieve economic independence and liberation

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0mm“. USE ONLY

from the domination of foreign capital, sought in regional associations compensation
for their economic weakness. At the same time the imperialist powers, particularly

the United States, stepped up attempts to transform these regional associations in-

to military blocs subordinate to their dictate. The RAID military bloc, nucleus of

the military-bloc system, was the point of departure for these actions.

Chapter Eight. TEE MILITARY-BLOC POLICY 0? IHPERIALISM IN THE 1970's. EVOLU-
TION OF MILITARY-POLITICAL DOCTRINES

At the end of the 1960's failure of the postwar antisocialist strategy of imperial-
ism became an obvious fact. The determining causes of the failure were, on the one
hand, further upsurge in the world revolutionary movement, and particularly the suc-
cesses of world socialism, and on the other hand. deepening of the general crisis of
capitalism. In the prevailing conditions the military-bloc policy of imperialism
was undergoing significant changes. Reflected in it to a greater degree than in
other policy areas of the main imperialist powers was the endeavor to adapt to the
new correlation of forces in the international arena and to overcome further develop-
ment of the deep crisis phenomena which are organically characteristic of this

policy.

As is indicated in the Program of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, however, the
process of adaptation to new conditions "does not alter the substance of imperialism,
its adventuristic and predatory nature. It craves maximum profits, intensifies ex-
ploitation, oppression and expansion, and seeks ways and means to arrest and prevent
the further development of antiimperislist, democratic forces. It utilizes all the
potential capabilities at its disposal to carry out its dangerous, aggressive plans.
Preservation and expansion of its position. undermining and destruction of the so-
cialist system remain the primary objective of imperialism."1 The leading imperial-
ist powers perceive in modification of military-bloc policy a convenient method of
uniting and utilizing in a more concentrated manner all the political, economic and
military resources of world imperialism in the struggle against socialism and other
forces of the world revolutionary process.

kt.

In the 1970's ruling circles in the United States and the leading NATO member nations
and other capitalist countries proceeded to increase their efforts further to ac-
tivate the military-bloc policy of imperialism, expand its area of action and in-
crease the military potential of imperialism. These efforts correspond to the prin-
cipal direction of imperialist policy at the contemporary stage: attempts by the in-
ternational monopoly bourgeoisie to find in unification of its efforts, on the basis
of a common political and military strategy and in alliance with the Chinese
leaders. ways of combating the main forces of the world revolutionary process which
promise success. L. I. Brezhnev noted at the Berlin Conference of European Com-
munist and Hbrker Parties that ruling circles of the monopoly bourgeoisie are at-
tempting to stop the general crisis of capitalism "by invigorating the imperialists'
military- political blocs. . . ."2

Created as an instrument of the global strategy of imperialism during the ”cold war"
years, military blocs are today more than at any time in the past an anachronism in

18

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

international relations. They represent the principal obstacle in the path of
further advance of political detente and concrete measures aimed at ending the arms
race. at arms limitations and disarmament. U.S. ruling circles as well as other
centers of imperialist rivalry continue to reject all proposals by the socialist na-
tions on putting an end to military confrontation and on the simultaneous, gradual
dissolving of military groupings. Military force continues to be viewed by these
circles as a means of attaining their foreign policy objectives. Only the forms
and methods of its application change. in relation to the current correlation of
forces.

Military blocs, and particularly NATO. continue to remain the principal centers of
preparation for war. Proof of this is the fact that the imperialists are seeking
new variations of aggressive foreign policy doctrine and military strategy, the es-
calating arms race, efforts aimed at expanding political and military cooperation
among the imperialist countries which are members of military blocs, and acting in
concert in the conduct of disarmament talks. Preparations by the armed forces of
military blocs for aggressive actions on any scale are continuously escalating. and
concentration of NATO troops on the European continent is continuing to increase.
Increasingly larger stockpiles of arms are being built up, including mass destruc-
tion weapons, and the military infrastructure is steadily improving. These exten-
sive military preparations in peacetime are taking the form of attempts by imperial-
ist nations to use military force to exert pressure and threats directed primarily
against the socialist countries.

Military blocs are used to maintain existing focal points of war and to create new
military conflicts. It is characteristic that new military blocs or military-
political groupings are usually established in such regions. Wherever an upsurge
in the revolutionary liberation struggle threatens the position and interests of
imperialism, new methods of military-bloc policy are usually born.

The contemporary military-bloc policy of imperialism most vividly expresses the ag-
gressive essence of the domination of the monopolies. In spite of conflicts and
competition, the monopoly bourgeoisie seeks to units into military-political al—
liances in order to forestall the inevitable collapse of world imperialism. Being
the last exploiter class of human society, it is attempting to utilize all the means
and methods of class struggle at its disposal, including armed violence, in hopes

of preserving its class rule.

Aggressive imperialist circles have not ceased and are not ceasing for a single day
their preparations for war. Military budgets are continuously growing and the arms
race escalating in the United States and the other NATO countries.

Leading the military preparations of the West is the United States, which in the
last 10 years has doubled expenditures for these purposes. Washington is planning
further escalation of the arms race. however: in the 1981 fiscal year it is planned
to allocate 160 billion dollars for militarist purposes, which comprises more than
25 percent of the national budget. In 1985 plane call for spending a quarter of a
trillion dollars on military needs.

The socialist community and its growing might are limiting the aggressive military
aspirations of imperialism. Those patterns and mechanisms which are characteristic

19

FOR¢HHHK1ALIEE$ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of monopoly capitalism. however. invariably engender and intensify a nilitary throat.
Persuasive evidence of this is the military-bloc policy of imperialism in the 1970’s,
the principal directions of which continue to be dictated by the military-industrial
complex. It is precisely these forces of imperialism which constantly seek to in-
cline their governments toward pursuit of an adventuristic, expansionist course in
foreign and military policy. Dominant in military-bloc policy is an aggressive
orientation, an endeavor to employ military forces and means in the struggle against
the world revolutionary process.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Programme Sotsialistichsskoy yedinoy partii Germanii" [Program of the Socialist
Unity Party of Germany], page 17.

2. "Konferentsiya ko-mnisticheskikh i rabochikh partiy Yevropy" (Conference of
European Communist and Worker Parties], page 69.

Chapter Nine. THE STRUGGLE OF THE SOVIET UNION, THE NATTONS OF THE SOCIALIST
COMMUNITY, AND ALL PEACE-SEEKING FORCES AGAINST THE AGGRESSIVE MILITARY-
BLOC POLICY 0? IMPERIALISM

V. l. Lenin, pointing to the inalterably predatory, aggressive nature of imperialism
and its internally inherent tendency toward wars, at the same time emphasized that
the first socialist state, in alliance with the world revolutionary movement,
represents a force which in the future will be capable of guiding international
development "to the deliverance of mankind from the yoke of capital and from im-
perialist ware."1

V. l. Lenin's prophetic thoughts have been confirmed by the entire course of the
world revolutionary process. After Hbrld War II a number of European and Asian
countries detached from the capitalist system, a world socialist system was formed,
the international Communist and worker movement gained strength, and the colonial
system of imperialism collapsed. Today militant imperialist circles are opposed in
the international arena by a powerful community of socialist nations, which enjoy
the broad support of progressive forces in Europe and the entire world.

The world of socialism places in opposition to the imperialist policy of war and
aggression, enslavement of other countries and peoples a Leniniat policy of peace
and friendship among peoples and active involvement of the masses in the struggle
for the victory of just, democratic principles in international relations.

"Today it is more clearly apparent than ever before," stated L. I. Brezhnev at the
Berlin Conference of European Communist and worker Parties, “that imperialism can

no longer dictate the fate of Europe. Today the socialist nations as well as the
worker and democratic movement in the capitalist countries have a great deal to say
in determining these fates. And these forces deserve the principal credit for the
fact that for more than 30 years new Europe has been living in conditions of peace."2

20
FOR 0FFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iii

International events following World war II once again graphically confirmed the
hopelessness and reactionary nature of the military-bloc policy of imperialism and
the invincibility of the main re alutionary forces of the present day -- the world
socialist system. the revolutionary worker and Communist movement, and the national
liberation movement, which constitute a powerful and steadily growing force of the
contemporary era. The forces of peace, democracy and socialism are today playing a
leading role in the world and are exerting increasingly more determining influence
on the destiny of mankind. Their success in the struggle against the aggressive
forces of imperialism is inseparably linked with strengthening of the world social-
ist system, intensification of the class struggle of the proletariat of the capital-
ist countries and the national liberation movement. and with their unity of actions.

With their actions, genuine socialism and the other forces of the world revolu-
tionary movement are thwarting many aggressor plans and are forcing the leaders of
the reactionary imperialist blocs to reckaawith the present balance of political and
military power in the world. Today imperialism is being forced to accept the fact
of disintegration of some of its blocs, the necessity of their reorganization, the
withdrawal of certain countries from blocs or their military organizations. and

the elimination of military bases and "military presence" in a number of countries,
especially in Asia.

Further success on the part of peace-seeking forces in the struggle against the

bloc policy of imperialism. which holds a danger for all mankind. depends to a
decisive degree on development and strengthening of the world socialist system. The
nations of the socialist community, relying on increasing defensive strength and
fully supported by the working people of the entire world. succeeded in the 1970's
in achieving a shift from "cold war" to international detente. Winning new victories
on their journey toward communism, they are creating new, more favorable precondi-
tions for further development of the class struggle of the working people of the
capitalist countries and the national liberation movement against imperialism. in-
cluding against the military blocs created by imperialism.

Affirming the principles of a policy of peaceful coexistence and applying all
energies and resources toward further deepening and development of international
detente, the USSR and the brother socialist countries, as well as all progressive
forces bear in mind that imperialism cannot change its reactionary nature. "Detentel'
stated L. I. Brezhnev, "does not and cannot abrogate or alter the laws of class
struggle. Nobody can count on the Communists, in conditions of detente, becoming

reconciled with capitalist exploitation or the monopoliste becoming champions of
revolution."3

Imperialism has lost its monopoly on settling the questions of war and peace. Sup-
ported by the world socialist system. alllhe revolutionary detachments of the
international proletariat are uniting and becoming more aggressive. V. I. Lenin's
prophetic words ring out today with new force: "The worker movement will gain
ascendancy and build the road to peace and socialism."4 As the position of social-

ism becomes stronger, the crisis phenomena in the military-bloc policy of imperial—
ism will inevitably intensify.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOI.0FFKJAl.lEﬂ10NlN

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sohr. Soch." [Complete works], Vol bk, page 168.

2. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursem. Rechi i stot'i" [Following a Leninist
Course. Speeches and Articles]. Vol 6, page 50.

3. "Matsrialy XXV s"yezda KPSS” [Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress], page 33.
4. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 35, page 18.

CONCLUSION

An analysis of the origin, development and main features of the military-bloc policy
of imperialism in the contemporary era, an era of transition from capitalism to
socialism, reveals one of the most important aspects of military-political activity
of the international monopoly bourgeoisie. This analysis shows that military-bloc
policy constitutes one of the forms of the class struggle of capitalism against
socialism, an organic part of the foreign-policy doctrines and military strategy of
the leading imperialist powers. and is focused on the struggle against the world
revolutionary process and all progressive forces. and in particular against genuine
socialism. Following world Her 11 and emergence of a world socialist system. the
role of military-bloc policy as a means of global unification of the forces of in-
ternational reaction into a united anticommunist front increased sharply. The bloc

political and military relations and is serving as a source of constant military
threat for all mankind, a serious obstacle on the road to successful resolution of

such problems as the campaign for peaceful coexistence of nations with differing so-
cial systems. disarmament, a lasting peace, and social progress.

Acting in opposition to intensification of trends directed toward uniting anticom~
munist forces are disuniting tendencies caused by the struggle for hegemony by
certain groups within the monopoly bourgeoisie. Interimperialist conflicts have
fostered the collapse of a number of military coalitions of imperialism and the
failure of many variations of imperialist military-bloc policy. At the same time
the monopoly bourgeoisie, which defines the course of policy of contemporary centers
of imperialist rivalry, continues to count on military-bloc policy as a means of
struggle against the main currents of the world revolutionary process and is modify-

ing this policy, adapting the systen of military blocs to the new world balance of
power. This is fraught with a serious military danger.

operation with countries of a different social systen are helping ensure the most
favorable conditions for building socialism and communism and intensified develop-
ment of the world revolutionary process. The fruitful peace policy of the USSR

and the entire socialist community. the principal points of which are formally stated

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the Peace Program and the Program of Further Struggle for Peace and Interna-
tional Cooperation, points out the way toward a world without military blocs, in
which the security of every country is guaranteed.

The Moscow meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the Hareaw Pact mem-
ber nations presented in its November 1978 Declaration a realistic and at the same
time highly optimistic answer to the vitally important problem of strengthening
peace and guaranteeing security. The Warsaw Pact member nations solemnly declared
that "they shall do everything in their power to ensure that this great task is
accomplished and that mankind enters the 21st century in conditions of a lasting
peace and extensive international cooperation."1 They also reaffirmed their will-
ingness to dissolve the Warsaw Pact Organization simultaneously with dissolution of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and, as a first step, to disband their mili-
tary organizations, beginning with a mutual reduction of military activities.

In contrast to the initiatives of the socialist nations, ruling circles in the
United States and its allies concentrated their efforts on the threshold of the
1980's on achieving greater aggressiveness and effectiveness of military-bloc policy.
In conditions of deepening interimperialist conflicts, when the capabilities of in-
dividual capitalist countries had become considerably reduced in the area of con-
trolling international relations in a favorable direction, imperialist

ruling circles are stubbornly endeavoring to find ways to achieve a "collective"
solution to problems which arise in the realm of economics and politics.

First of all there is a long-standing and persistent tendency toward strengthening
with various means the NATO pact. the main instrument of the military-bloc policy
of imperialism. The crisis of the "peripheral" blocs, which deepened with the
collapse of SEATO and CENTO, resulted in acceleration of the process of transforma-
tion of NATO into an instrument of imperialist policy on a global scale. One as-
sumes that the NATO foreign policy thrust for the period up to the 1990's, adopted
in 1978, as well as this bloc's long-range program of further acceleration of the
arms race pursue this objective.

The deal between the ruling circles of the leading imperialist powers and the
Beijing succesams of Mao Zedong constitutes a new. highly dangerous and insidious
trend in the military-bloc policy of imperialism. "A qualitative change of a
counterrevolutionary nature has taken place in the international activities of the
Chinese leadership. Increasingly going beyond the framework of a national matter,
the Chinese problem now directly affects the root interests of the peace and
security of peoples and carries a threat to all."2

On the threshold of the 1980's the military blots of imperialism once again
constituted an active force impeding detente and disarmament. In addition, their
leaders stepped up their attempts to affect a return to "cold war" times. The arms
race, initiated and carried out to a considerable degree with the assistance of
military blocs, began to increase in pace and reached a dangerous level both
qualitatively and quantitatively. This applies not only to strategic, operational-
tactical and tactical nuclear weapons but conventional arms as well. The main ob-
jective toward which ruling circles in the NATO member nations are striving is

an end to the existing approximate balance of military forces of the opposing sides
and gaining of military superiority over the socialist nations and the other nations
of the world. Restricted in an uncontrolled arms race by the coordinated decisions

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the governments of the USSR and the United States, the imperialist countries
are counting on increasing the lethality and improving the quality of arms. At-
tempts are continuing once again to transform military strength into s widely used
means of aggressive imperialist policy.

Another trend in the development of military-bloc policy is manifested in efforts
to give greater flexibility and diversity to its forms and methods. This applies
not only to the military area but also to diplomacy, economics, and ideology.

Pursuing a policy of broadening the realm of military-strategic expansion, U.S.
ruling circles are using military blocs and centers of comprehensive imperialist
policy and strategy and are endeavoring to bind their allies in a network of
bilateral and multilateral pledges and to utilize for this purpose not only their
military presence but also military organizations and alliances of the most
diversified character. In spite of the failures of this policy, the monopoly
bourgeoisie intends to build a flexible military-police system exercising control
over the entire world, with NA'DO and other imperialist blocs comprising strong-
points of this system.

Attempting to counter the successes of the peace offensive of the USSR and

other socialist nations, as well as the liberation struggle against imperialism
which is being waged by liberated nations, U.S. propaganda and that of the other
NATO nations is intensifying its apologia of the military-bloc policy. A broad
range of arguments are being advanced in favor of continuing the military-bloc
policy "by more effective means." An important place among these arguments is
occupied by fantasies about a "military threat" which allegedly emanates from so-
cialism, as well as other anticommist, anti-Soviet slander, which is accompanied
by claims about an imaginary cmonality of destinies of the "free world" nations
and the "necessity" proceeding therefrom for them to give one another mutual mili-
tary assistance.

Serious defeats and failures have befallen the military-bloc policy of imperialism
on the threshold of the 1980's. In spite of the complexity of the present world
situation, there exists a real possibility, through persistent effort on the part
of all peace-seeking forces, to build a solid obstacle in the path of that danger
carried by the military-bloc policy of imperialism. Conflicts and rivalry within
the camp of the monopoly bourgeoisie limit possibilities of achieving the objectives
of the silitary-bloc policy. But the main obstacle in its path is the strength and
might, the vigorOus peace policy of the Soviet Union and the other socialist na-
tions, and the antiinperialist struggle of the working people of the capitalist
countries, the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America, who are demanding dEtente
in international relations and averting of the threat of a world war.

Nevertheless the reality of the military threat engendered by imperialism and its
military-bloc policy is obvious. The endeavor by imperialism to unite all forces
at its disposal for the struggle against the world revolutionary process is a
continuously operating factor which heightens the threat. With the aid of military
blocs, the United States and its allies seek to shift the overall world balance of
power in their favor and to obtain favorable conditions for conducting "big stick"
tactics toward the socialist countries although. as the experience of history has
shown. it never brought imperialism the desired results and inslterably ended in
the failure of counterrevolutionary plans and actions. As Mar SU D. F. Ustinov,

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFKJAL USE¢NVLY
Q

USSR minister of defense. noted, "forces of reaction and aggression exist and are
actively operating in the capitalist world, which oppose detente and disarmament.
They are attempting to revive in intergovernmental relations an atmosphere of
distrust and brinksmanship, seek to expand existing and create new aggressive mili-
tary blocs, and to achieve military superiority over the socialist countries. These
forces are supporting focal points of tension, are ,tovoking military conflicts,

and are escalating the arms race, which is becoming increasingly more dangerous."3

Persistent efforts on the part of the Carter Administration to destabilize the in-
ternational situation and to plunge the world once again into a state of "cold war"
constitute evidence of the unceasing endeavor on the part of reactionary military
and political circles in the Heat, particularly U.S. imperialism. to thwart the
policy of peace, detente and disarmament nhich is being pursued by the nations of
the socialist community. This policy, hostile to the cause of detente, a policy of
escalation of the arms race, leading to an increased danger of war, was adopted by
ruling circles in the United States and other NATO countries at the May 1978 meet-
ing of the NATO Council. In 1980, in the traditional "State of the Union" New
Year's Message to Congress, reflecting the spirit of "cold war," President Carter
openly declared U.S. claims to a "leadership role in the world." This was followed
by Presidential Directive 59, which essentially "legitimized" nuclear war as a
means of achieving the global anticommunist aims of U.S. imperialism and launched

a new round of militarist preparations.

As L. I. Brezhnev stated in his replies to questions put by a PRAVDA correspondent
on 13 January 1980, "militaristic trends in U.S. policy have recently also been
expressed in acceleration of new long-range arms programs. in establishment of new
military bases far from the borders of the United States. including in the Rear East
and the Indian Ocean, and in establishment of a so-called 'rapid deployment force' --
this instrument of a policy of military intervention."‘ In his replies L. I.
Brezhnev also exposes attempts by the U.S. administration to utilise the events in
Afghanistan in December 1979 to block international efforts to strengthen peace.

A considerable role in the activities of the U.S. Government is played by new attempts
to expand and strengthen the bloc system of imperialism, particularly the NATO bloc
and the alliance of anti-Soviet forces in Asia with the participation of China.

In these conditions, in order successfully to counter the aggressive military-bloc
policy of imperialism, it is essential to continue in the future strengthening the
economic. political and military might of the nations of the socialist community
and the Warsaw Pact Joint Forces. Close cohesion and coordinated actions by the
socialist countries with all peace-seeking forces are capable of averting the danger
presented by the military-bloc policy of imperialism and of securing world peace.

FOOTNOTES
1. PRAVDA, 24 November 1978.

2. xomwuxsr, No 4, 1979, page 72.

3. "60 let Vooruzhennykh sil SSSR. Dokumenty i materialy" [60th Anniversary of the
USSR Armed Forces. Documents and Materials], Moscow, 1978, pp 27-28.

a. PRAVDA, 13 January 1980.

COPYRIGRT: Voyenizdat, 1980

25
3020

650: 1801/ 07° roe oman. use ONLY
300K EXCERPTS: BORDER GUARD ACTIVITIES FROM 1929-1938

Hoscow NA STRAZHB SOVETSKIKH ROBBINS? 1929-1938 in Russian 1981 (signed to press

1 Apr 81) pp 1-15. 264-271

(Annotation. table of contents. introduction and conclusion from book "On Guard

over the Soviet Borders 1929-1938”. by A. I. Chugunov. Order of Labor Red Banner

Voyennoye Izdatel'stvo Ministerstvs oborony 8833. 35,000 copies. 271 pages]

[Excerpts] The nonogrsph covers the operational and service activities and combat
activities of the Soviet Border Guard Troops and generalizes the historic experi-

ence of guarding the USSR state border in the period from 1929 through 1938.
The book is intended for a wide range of readers.

Contents
Introduction..................................................................
On Guard over the Northwestern and Western Sectors of the Border..............
Security of the Irenscaucesus Sector of the Border............................

-Conc1usion of the Struggle Against the Besnsch. Security of the Southern

Borders-oassessessee-asseessessseeseosseoees'soseoosssssessoesssosoeaeeesssssae

Security of the Eastern Sector of the Border................................

Rebuffing the Provocstory Sallies by Chinese Hilitarista on the Fer Eastern
30:60! (1929-1931)....so.seessuccesses-essenceessasaseessseeeeessaeseeesesees.

Thwarting Provocations by Japanese Hilitsrists in the Far East by Border
Guard hoop. (1929-1938)000OOOOOOOOQOOOOO'OOIt.O...0OOIOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOO

Fighting Prowocations by Japanese Nilitarista on the Border with Henchuria..

Border Guard Troops in Fighting at Lake Khsssn................................

Conclusion....................................................................

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

15
39

$2
127

133

168
189
236

26k
Introduction

Hith the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution the Communist Party and
V. I. Lenin personally resolved the task of organizing security of the borders of
the first socialist state in the world along with other urgent and immediate tasks.

The SNK [Council of People's Commissars] Decree signed by V. I. Lenin on 28 Hay

1918 set up the Border Guard Troops. which are a component of the USSR Armed Forces.
The first Red Guard detachment became part of them. as did later the best Red Army
units from the legendary combined units of Shchors. Kotovskiy and Parkhomenko. the
Samera-Simbirak Iron Division and others.

An orderly structure of the Border Guard Troops had taken shape by the mid-1920's.
The Main Administration of Border Guard Troops was in charge of the troops and
organization of security for the USSR borders. In outlying areas these tasks were
made the responsibility of administrations of districts of the Border Guard Troops.
Border Guard detachments were subordinate to them. border couandants' offices were
subordinate to the detachments. and the Border Guard posts directly guarding the
state border were subordinate to the commandanta' offices. Border Guard ships
placed together into groups and divisions and subordinated to district administra-
tions of the Border Guard Troops were assigned for protection of maritime borders.

From the first day of their existence the Border Guard Troops vigilantly guarded
the state border of the homeland of the Great October. Independently and together
with Red Army units. they fought steadfastly and courageously against foreign mili-
tary interventionists and the White Guard hordes. and defeated numerous armed bands
of the Basmetch and Khunkhuz. of Ungern and Semenov. of Hakhno and Petlyura. of
Grigor'yev and Zelenyy. and many other sworn enemies of Soviet power.

By 1929 Border Guard personnel had gained abundant experience in fighting large and
small armed enemy formations and had acquired high Chekiat expertise in guarding
the Soviet borders.

The years 1929-1938 were years of intensive peaceful labor for our country. Under
the leadership of the Communist Party. the Soviet people successfully implemented a
program of socialist construction.

Socialism was advancing in all sectors along an extensive front. Complete collec-
tivizstion had been carried out in agriculture. There was a fundamental change in
the social. economic and political make-up of the village with the victory of the
kolkhoz system. The many millions of peasants shifted to a socialist form of work.
which changed the way of life and labor activities of the toiler of the soil.

The national economy was modernized technically in the 1930's. giants of heavy
industry were erected. methods of economic management were improved and the coun-
try's defensive capabilities strengthened. There was a significant increase in the
material and cultural standard of living of the workers. Socialism was completely
victorious in the USSR by I936. which was secured in the Constitution adopted in
December 1936.

The colossal successes in various areas of the national economy and in the coun-
try's material and cultural life became possible thanks to the wise politics of the
Communist Party. the peaceloving course of the socialist state. and the close unity

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of party and people. The results 9! elections to the USSR Supreme Soviet on 12
December 1937 attested to the solidarity of workers, kolkhoz peasantry and labor
intelligentsia about the party. Participating in the voting were 96.8 percent of
electors. and of these 98.6 percent voted for candidates of the bloc of communists
and nonparty persons to the Council of the Union, and 97.8 percent to the Council
of Nationalities}

In the period 1929-1933 an economic crisis shook the world system of capitalism.
which sharply aggravated contradictions between labor and capital and among the
imperialist countries. Reactionary forces tried to resolve the heightened contra-
dictions in the capitalist world by aeans of war. This began to be seen especially
clearly with the arrival of fascism to power in Germany and with-the beginning of
Japanese military actions in the Far East, resulting in the occupation of Northeast
China.

The Party Central Committee took all steps to prevent war and guard the Soviet
Union against provocations and aggression on the part of imperialist states. An
important role was given to assuring the security of the state borders in the
general plan of struggle for preservation of peace.

In the period 1929-1938 the imperialists were preparing bases of operation for a
war against the USSR in the northern and western parts of the country and in the
Far East. and from year to year the sending of spies and saboteurs across the bor-
der stepped up. In the early 1930's an end was put to the Basmatch bands in the

south. but the fight continued against smugglers and against agents of the imperial-
ist states.

The remigration movement into the USSR created great difficulties on the border of
Central Asia and Kazakhstan. The populace which had fled abroad in the 1920's
began to return to the Motherland. This change occurred as a result of a strength-
ening of Soviet power and a rise in the workers' material welfare.

The situation on the far eastern border was most difficult. Here the Japanese
militarists. who had occupied Korea and North china. systematically provoked inci-
dents and unleashed armed conflicts.

At the same time the western border also demanded unremitting attention. Here bour-
geois governments of contiguous countries were conducting hostile. subversive
actions against the USSR on a rather broad scale. They stepped up especially with
the arrival to power in Germany of the fascists, who began preparing for world war
11.

In the peaceful 1930's an acute class struggle continued on the USSR's borders.
demanding exceptional attention. vigilance. staadfastness. courage and endurance of
the Border Guard Troops against the endless provocative border violations.

The reports then coming from the Border Guard posts. detachments and districts told
of the systematic erection of various installations for military purposes (espe-
cially on the far eastern border) and about armed clashes with violators of Soviet
borders. The Japanese militarists concentrated troops on the Soviet-Manchurian
border. conducted shows of military force. moved weapons around and stockpiled
ammunition.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nachuugus of firo.unittauuiuni lighting on the southern and tar eastern borders
occurred almost daily. In four months of 1929 (January-April). Border Guard Troops
entered into armed clashes 537 times. In December 1930 and January 1931 alone there
were as clashes with armed groups in these sectors2 and 113 exchanges of fire with
lone violators and groups invading Soviet territory for various purposes.3 In Jan-
uary 1931 some 2.200 violators were detained in the southern sector of the border
alone.” among whom were a large number of smugglers. Fire often came from contigu-
ous territories against peaceful Soviet citizens and Border Guard Troops: There
were 18 such cases in April 1931.5

It often was necessary to conduct combat actions against armed bands invading USSR
territory from abroad. especially on the Central Asian border. In just four months
of 1929 (January-April). 90 bands violated Soviet borders. It should be noted. how-
ever. that the number of such provocations gradually dropped: While 649 bands
intruded into our country from abroad in 1928. there were only 120 in 1929.

Although the number of bandit raids dropped. there was an increase in the number of
attacks on Border Guard details by various armed groups from contiguous countries.
In the period January-April 1928 there were 17 attacks on Border Guard Troops, and
for this same time in 1929 there were 21 attacks. There was an increase in the num-
ber of shellings of Soviet territory. During January-September 1928 there were 153
shellings. and there were 266 for that same time in 1929. The majority of shellings
were conducted from Manchurian territory. The number of such provocations almost
tripled in 1929 in comparison with 1928 in this sector of the border.

During the period 1929-1931. when the country was carrying out mass collectiviza-
tion. demolishing the last hopes of enemies of Soviet power for a rebirth of capi-
talism in the USSR. chiefly among the well-to-do peasants. rich landowners in Cen-
tral Asia. reactionary clergy and bourgeois nationalists. there was a reactivation
of antisoviet activities and of actions by internal kulak and Basmatch bands and
those beyond the Border Guard outposts. In those years Soviet Border Guard person-
nel successfully eliminated major kulak-bai bands In the Transcaucasus :nl Central
Asia and white Guard bands in the Far East and other border regions in bloody armed
clashes. The last major Basmatch gang. of Durda Hurt. was eliminated in May 1933.

An intense struggle against smugglers continued on the Soviet border in the 1930's.
As a result the size of the smuggling trade became considerably below that of the
1920' s. and dropped each year. At the same time. smuggling trade was still signifi-
cant. espscially in the first half of the 1930's. and to some extent damaged the
economy of the Soviet state. In developing the economy under conditions of a diffi-
cult class struggle against the capitalist world. the USSR was forced to mobilize
its export resources to a maximum for acquiring from abroad the industrial articles
extremely necessary to the national economy.

The policy of an economic blockade of the Soviet Union carried out by a number of
bourgeois states placed USSR foreign trade organizations under difficult conditions
in carrying out export-import plans. In this connection the struggle for maximum
accumulation. economy and proper expenditure of every ruble of currency played an
important role for our country. Asignificant place was set aside for the Border
Guard Troops in the struggle against currency smuggling. The fact is that the
rigid currency regime established in the USSR. which restricted to a maximum the
speculative opportunities of foreigners trading with us encountered opposition on

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the part of foreign trade partners. expressed in the form of a massive evasion of
Soviet laws and extensive illegal smuggling of ten-ruble banknotes from abroad.

In addition. smugglers would move various deficit goods. valuables and currency
across the border. Bands which were pursuing not only economic but also political
goals participated in these criminal transactions on the eastern and southern bor-
ders.

Losing their last hopes for a rebirth of capitalism. the kulaka and other represen-
tatives of the overthrown exploiting classes tried to flee abroad illegally, taking
with then cattle. property and various valuables which were the people's property.
Soviet Border Guard Troops were faced with the task of stopping the illegal export
of property and valuables and the driving of cattle outside the country.

The fight against export contraband on the European border bore a somewhat differ-
ent character than on the Asiatic and far eastern borders. There were practically
no hands here in the 1930's and the contraband shipments prepared by the "nepmen"
and kulaks often were stopped at the moment they were being carried out. The
Chekists usually promptly exposed the "moneybox" funds of the "nepmen"_and kulaks.
which did not find use with the petty private traders being actively crowded out of
trade and production. The number of detentions and amount of contraband detained
under these conditions sharply increased in connection with the reinforcement of
border security. The flow of smuggled goods on the western border constantly
dropped. While contraband amounting to over £2,350.000 was detained on the western
border during 1928 and the first half of 1929. more than R6.268.000 was detained in
the latter half of 1929 and in 1930. But the unpunishsd flow of goods on the far
eastern and southern borders was still considerable.

The serious economic depression and low trade in Northern Hanchuria created favora-
ble conditions for smuggling activities. The rugged mountainous terrain hindered
actions of the Border Guard Troops. The border guard of contiguous countries aided
the criminals in an attempt to use them for espionage purposes.

Concrete figures indicate the impressive scope of smuggling. In 1930 contraband
amounting to a total of R12.7 million was detained on all borders of the USSR. of
which 62 percent consisted of export contraband (i.e.. being taken illegally
abroad). The majority of smugglers on the western border were "nepmen" and hulaks,
and on the borders of the Transcaucaaus. Central Asia and Kazakhstan they were the
bai‘ and bai-manap.7 who in the majority of cases were armed. The struggle against
them was accompanied by armed clashes.

Cattle held a prominent place among the export contraband on the Central Asian bor-
der. The bai and bai-manap tried to drive cattle over the border in large herds.

In 1930 Border Guard troops detained some 48,000 head of cattle and. in 1931. over

81,000 head.

Smuggling increased sharply during the period of mass collectivisation and elimina-
tion of the kulaks as a class. Kulaks tried to move accumulated riches over the
border. In 1933 contraband amounting to almost 326.5 million was detained.

The movement of smuggled goods, valuables and currency began to drop sharply begin-

ning in 1933. In 1934 contraband amounting to a total of some 320 million was
detained. and amounting to some 36.7 million in the first half of 1935.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Smugglers were inventing more and more new methods for transporting goods and espe-
cially valuables and currency. In taking out currency at anchorages on the Caspian
Sea. for example. they would hide it in floats secured to boat anchors by long
lines and to old pilings near piers. During the departure the anchor would be
hoisted and contraband collected. Valuables and opium would be sewn into belts.
hidden in specially made hollow objects. between double walls of cans. suitcases
and so on.

The fight against smuggling was no simple matter. With a good knowledge of the
terrain, acting under the protection of foreign intelligence agencies and having a
far—flung network of mutual ties. persons engaged in smuggling disguised them-
selves and the contraband skillfully. At the same time they often went to extremes
on being detained and made use of weapons.

The thirst for profit spurred the smugglers to take the most extreme measures and
the most daring actions. In March 1937 a group of Border Guard personnel discov-
ered smugglers with four poods (64 kg) of opium. The criminals were set up in sev-
eral bases. one of which was in a mountain gorge from which smuggled goods were dis—
seminated to nearby auls [villages] over camouflaged trails difficult of access.

The Border Guard Troops uncovered and closed all routes of approach to the base. As
a result of a skillfully conducted operation all ten smugglers were arrested

despite their furious armed resistance.

Two days later a new base with seven persons was discovered in this same region.
The smugglers opened up rifle fire on the border guards. Three suugglers were
killed and one wounded and captured in the exchange of fire which ensued. while
three took advantage of the nearby border and fled abroad. Some of the contraband
was thrown into an inaccessible canyon. while part of it. including several dozen
kilograms of opium. was seized by the border guards.

The instances where smugglers did not offer armed resistance to the Border Guards.
especially on the southern and far eastern borders. were rare. In 1936 alone there
were 55 armed clashes with smugglers in the Turkmen sector.

The Communist Party devoted much attention to extensive political work among the
border populace and to an increase in the workers' welfare. Hhile goods amounting
to R8.382.000 was brought in for the populace of the border zone in the latter half
of 1928 and the first half of 1929. this sum amounted to some R40 million in 1929
and the first half of 1930.

Steps taken by the Communist Party and Soviet government to combat smuggling con—
stantly reduced its import and export. In 1929 alone in comparison with 1928 the
number of smugglers dropped 20.9 percent on all USSR borders. The volume of
imported contraband dropped 3.5 percent.

Soviet ten-ruble notes were the chief kind of imported contraband. Smart foreign
dealers who had Soviet money tried to send as much as possible of it into the USSR
in exchange for foreign currency and valuables with their subsequent shipment

abroad. Opium held a prominent place in imported contraband on the Central Asian
border.

The amount of unpunished smuggling dropped even more in subsequent years in connec-
tion with stepped-up security of the state border and other measures taken to stop
smuggling activities.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The year 1935 was a turning point in the content and forms of state border viola-
tions. There was a sharp reduction in the number of Soviet border violators. but
at the same time the importance of each violation rose. In 1935 the number of bor-
der violators in various sectors dropped 2-3 times. The largest amount of border
violations in this period was in the Turkmen sector with 33 percent and the Kazakh
sector with 26 percent. with 6-10 percent each in the remaining sectors. although
even in the first two sectors the number of violations also had become much fewer
(for example. by fourfold in the Kazakh sector).

The massive drop in the number of violators occurred as a result of a reduction in
emigration, a drop in renigration and the elimination of bands. The main contin-
gent of those detained on the border in 1935 consisted of smugglers (21 percent),
remigrants (18 percent) and emigrants (3.6 percent), with the remaining violators
(2-3 percent) performing assignments for intelligence agencies of imperialist
states and various foreign antisoviet centers. The number of such violators began
to grow constantly. In comparison with l934 the proportion of persons connected
with foreign intelligence agencies in the overall mass of those detained on the
border in 1935 rose from 1.3 to 5.5 percent (6.2 times) and tne proportion of
smugglers rose from 12 to 22 percent (almost double).

Meanwhile there was a growing frequency of provocative sallies leading to incidents
and conflicts on the border. Consequently the reduction in number of detections on
the border did not reduce the tense situation. The proportion of violations pur-
suing clearly sntistste goals rose. especially in the Far East. which had become a
center of conflicts and incidents. as well as on the border with Finland and. to a
certain extent. with Poland and Romania. with consideration of this, the party
took steps to beef up security of the state border in these very regions.

Armed forces were concentrated. additional border outposts were set up and new
commandsnts' offices and detachments were activated on the operationally most impor-
tant sectors of the state border, where the situation was especially tense and
where governments of contiguous countries were conniving with provocations. In the
period from 1932 through 1937 alone 28 newly activated Border Guard detachments and
three separate Border Guard commandsnts' offices were set up in the most important
operational sectors. Border Guard aviation was set up in 1932. Soviet-made vehi-
cles were received by Border Guard units in the 1930's. The formation of Border
Guard aviation regiments and squadrons and the motorization of outposts, comman-
dsnts' offices and detachments was of great isportance for increasing troop mobil-
ity and maneuverability and for raising their combat effectiveness.

By decision of the Communist Party and Soviet government, the Border Guard Troops
received the best small arms in the period 1929-1939. which considerably improved
the fire capabilities of Border Guard personnel in fighting violators.

A strengthening of USSR state borders in the 1930's was carried out in all direc-
tions. During this period the Communist Party and Soviet government did much to
train highly qualified cadres for the Border Guard Troops. The Border Guard educa-
tion institutions were set up to train company grade commanders and political offi-
cers. In the period 1930-1932 the Novo-Petergof. Khar'kov and Moscow military bor-
der guard schools were opened for training command and political personnel.

In 1929-1939 the Communist Party devoted great attention to reinforcing party-
political work in the Border Guard Troops. Political departments were set up in

1%

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
border guard detachments. and districts. detachments and outposts were reinforced
with ideologically conditioned. well trained political workers. Party members were
sentfromindustrial enterprises to outposts and commandants' offices. Pull-fledged
party organizations were formed at border guard outposts and in commandants' offi-
ces with their arrival and with the increased acceptance of lomsomol activists as
candidate members of the VKP(b) [All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik)].

The publication of large circulation newspapers which began to be put out in the
1930's by decision of the Communist Party was of great importance in political
indoctrination work of the Border Guard Troops. For example. the following news-
papers began to be published in 1929: NA BOYEVOH POSTU [At the Combat Post] in the
Timkovichi. KRASNYY POGBANICHNIK [Red Border Guard] in the Nakhichevan. NACHEKU [On
Guard] in the Daurskoye and AHURSKIY POGRANICHNIK [Amur Border Guard] in the Blago-
veshchensk border guard detachments.‘

Steps taken by the party and government to strengthen the state border in the
1930's were of exceptionally great importance in providing reliable security of the
Soviet borders.

From the first day of victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution the
Communist Party and Soviet government firmly conducted a peaceloving Leninist
course of foreign policy and respect for the sovereignty and independence of other
states. came out for prevention of conflicts and against the seizure of foreign
territories.

In securing the sacred borders of the Motherland. the Soviet Border Guard Troops
steadfastly and courageously rebuffed those who tried to encroach on the peaceful
life of the Soviet people. H. l. Kalinin. chairman of the Presidium of the USSR
Talk [Central Executive Committee]. gave high praise to the selfless actions of
Border Guard personnel in a speech during presentation of governmental awards to
Border Guard personnel and sailors of the Navy on 17 March 1936: "In the 15 years
of its existence it can be said boldly that the border security has earned the
award with which our party and government have recognized the Border Guard Troops.
There is probably not a single state where service is so difficult and so complex
as that in our Border Guard Troops.

"Let's take just the eastern borders. were we to list just the open attacks
reported in our press and which are set down in official documents. there would be
a very considerable number of them in one year.

"These are only those attacks which have deep repercussions throughout the Soviet
Union. but the fact is that all kinds of minor incidents take place daily about
which nothing is reported in our press. Why is this? Why against our state.
against its borders. against one of the most powerful states. the strength of which
is recognized by all capitalist countries. why do these countries permit themselves
to take such a defiant. provocative policy with respect to our state? We know that
the capitalist states do not permit themselves such impudent provocative conduct in

relations among themseives. Then why do these capitalist states permit themselves
this provocative conduct toward the Soviet Union?

"It is only because our state is a state of workers and peasants and the armies
opposing us or. more precisely. the leaders of these armies. hate us. experience
literally a bestial hatred toward our state and are ready to destroy us or. if this
is impossible. then at least to inflict some damage on our state...

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"And when you think this out in your minds. the provocative policy of our enemies
as carried out by them on our borders will become understandable to you. As you
see, our Border Guard fighting men are performing the most responsible. the most
important and the most difficult work."

In his greeting to fighting men. commanders and political workers on the day of the
15th anniversary of Border Guard Troops. USSR People's Commissar of Defense Mar SU
K. Ye. Voroshilov wrote: "Your steadfastnees and valor and your utter dedication to
the cause of Lenin evoke admiration of your brothers in arms in the Red Army and
peoples of the Soviet Union. Standing on guard over the Soviet borders, the glori-
ous Border Guard personnel invariably set heroic examples of genuinely Red Army
courage and aslflessness. together with the necessary self-control and iron disci-
pline. in the cause of defending our socialist borders.”1°

The Border Guard Troops of OGPU [United State Political Administration] of the
Belorussian Front were awarded the Order of Labor Red Banner of the Belorussian SSR
by decree of the Presidium of the Belorussian SSR TeIK dated 15 January 1932 for
services in protecting the Soviet borders and for extensive vork in reinforcing the
economic and political status of border regions. On 14 February 1936 the USSR Tle
presented the Order of Lenin to the Kamchatka and Tajik Red Banner border guard
detachments and the Order of Red Banner to the Blagoveshchenak, Grodekovo, Seetro-
retsk. Kamenets-Podol'skiy. Slavuta. Timkovichi. Ashkhabad. Xerki. Baku and Daur-
skoye border guard detachments for outstanding services in securing the state bor-
der and heroic exploits. This same decree. as well as decrees of the USSR TsIK
dated 26 August and 22 November 1936 and 2 Hatch 1937. and ukases of the USSR
Supreme Soviet Presidium dated 22 and 25 October 1938 presented USSR orders and
medals to large groups of Border Guard personnel and local residents for courage
and valor displayed in securing and protecting the state borders.

The situation on the border and combat activities of Border Guard Troops in the
[930's reveal a number of important points in the USSR's foreign policy relations
with contiguous states. demonstrate the uniqueness and change in methods of hostile
acts by imperialist states applied on the border with respect to the USSR. and pro-
vide an opportunity to understand the grounds for measures taken by the Comunist
Party to strengthen the Soviet borders. to prevent and rebuff provocative sallies
on the Soviet Union. and to instillpatriotism. a feeling of high obligation to the
Motherland. and moral-combat qualities in border personnel and the young people vho
come to replace the veterans.

Meanwhile. the difficult and tense struggle on the border in 1929-1938 is of great
importance in developing vigilance. The enemies of socialism never let up in their
schemes against the Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist conmunity,
but merely change forms and methods of struggle. They are trying to underndne our
might through joint efforts.

The 1930's were filled with significant events in activities of the Border Guard
Troops which still have been insufficiently covered in literature. Generalized
works of this period also are lacking.

Hithout laying claim to a comprehensive and detailed study of the problem, the
author makes an attempt to examine the situation in different sectors of the border

in those years; measures taken by the Communist Party and Soviet government to
strengthen the Soviet borders and prevent and disrupt provocations and conflicts on

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the Soviet border; basic forms and methods of struggle against border violators;,
and to show the heroics and selfless service to the Motherland by Border Guard per-
sonnel.

Conclusion

The 1930's were years of peaceful construction of socialism for the Soviet Union.
The rapid development of industry. agriculture. science and culture and the growth
in workers’ material welfare gladdened not only Soviet citizens. but all progres-
sive mankind. The Soviet people's successes convincingly demonstrated the enormous
advantages of the socialist system and the peeceloving foreign policy of the
Communist Party and Soviet government.

The strengthening of socialism generated anger and hatred in its enemies. Fearing
the revolutionizing influence of the 0883's example on the layers of the populace
being exploited. imperialists of all countries of the world joined in efforts to
fight the first socialist state in the world.

In beginning preparations for World Her 11. militant circles of capitalist states
stepped up intelligence activities against the Soviet Union and took advantage of
all means to retard socialist construction and weaken the USSR.

Aggressive forces attempted to use the territories of countries contiguous with the
Soviet Union. reactionary emigres and the counterrevolutionary elements remaining
in the USSR for antisoviet purposes.

The fight against forces hostile to the socialist system was felt most keenly on
the state border separating the two worlds of socialism and capitalism. Remnants
of the surviving counterrevolution were seated in border regions. Smuggling was
carried out to undermine the socialist economy, agents of imperialist intelligence
agencies were sent onto USSR territory for various purposes. and raids were carried
out by armed bands. The border was the line where imperialists felt the firmness
of the Soviet system and its ability to defend the achievements of the Great Octo-
ber reliably.

The situation was tense in all sectors of the state border in the 1930's and
required Border Guard personnel. local party and soviet entities and the workers of
border regions to have constant vigilance and take decisive actions to stop border
violations.

The situation was most difficult on the southern part of the border in the early
1930's. A fierce struggle was going on against bandit raids by the Basmatch.
chiefly from abroad. from the territory of Iran and Afghanistan.

The Basmatch appeared in separate centers in border regions of Central Asia at this
time and did not present great danger. Small Basmatch bands operated for a brief
time in border regions of Tajikistan and Kirghizia. The main centers of the Bas~
match bands formed in the sands of the Karakum. where the cattle-rearing bei of
Turkmenia and Kazakhstan sought cover. as did Baemetch bends intruding from the
territory of Iran.

Up to the middle of 1931 Busmatch bands consisting of the reactionary Tajik and in
part Uzbek portion of the emigration were operating actively in regions of Afghani-
stan bordering on the USSR.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The foreign Baamatch did not become widespread in regions of Afghanistan bordering
on the USSR. since the Afghan powers, fearing that the Basmatch would seize the
northern border regions. took effective steps against them. including even the use
of armed forces for neutralizing, disarming and dissolution of the Basaatch forma-
tions. The ringleaders of the Sasmatch and their foreign protectors were not able
to concentrate forces for an invasion of Tajikistan for a long while in connection
with steps taken by the Afghan government and major defeats of the bands inflicted
by Soviet Border Guard personnel. Losing the last hope for success. Ibragim-

Bek burst onto the territory of Soviet Tajikistan with the remaining bands on 30
March. but this adventure by the henchmen of the overthrown emir of Bukhara and
British intelligence failed. Ibragim-Bek was seized with the active assistance of
the populace and received his just desserts from Soviet justice. This basically
put an end to the Basmatch in Tajikistan.

The Basmatch bands which had come in from abroad and which were formed from the
remaining counterrevolutionary forces existed enormously longer in the vast Karakum
Desert. Soviet power was established here and measures taken to strengthen it
later than in the other parts of Turkmenia in connection with the difficult geo-
graphic conditions.

The reactionary foreign Turkmen emigres in Iran were not as limited in antisoviet
activities as in Afghanistan, although Iranian authorities took some measures to
restrict the formation and actions of Basmatch bands.

The Turkmen foreign bands joined under the leadership of Dzhunaid-khan in early
1929.

Soviet authority was firm in Central Asia, including in Turkmenistan in the 1930's,
but many social, political and economic probleas still had not been fully resolved
in Soviet Turkmenia by 1929. Individual cattle raisers in the Ksrakum Desert still
had not gone over to a socialist collective basis.

All activities carried out by Soviet authorities in the sands of Turkmenia in the
early 1930's had the purpose of creating maximum favorable conditions for the work-
ing populace and putting an end to the bai once and for all as a class of exploit-
era.

The bai did not wish to surrender their positions and, with the active support of
reactionary emigres from abroad, did everything to hinder the strengthening of
Soviet power and. when they became convinced of the futility of their efforts, they
tried to send large flocks of sheep and property plundered from the working people
illegally across the border in the accompaniment of armed bands. But the reaction-
ary forces were not able to carry out a single one of the plans. Time and the
socialist transformations accomplished in Turkmenia were working against the
enemies of Soviet power. The working people of socialist Turkmenistan stood firmly
on the side of Soviet power. In close coordination with local party and soviet
entities and with the actiVe support of the broad working masses. the Red Army.
Border Guard personnel and NKVD [People's Commissariat of the Interior] entities
successfully defeated the foreign and internal bands of Bssmatch.

Major operations were conducted successfully against Basmatch bands on the terri-
tory of Turkmenia in the fall of I930 and in'l93l. A deciding blow was delivered
against the last groupings of the Basmatch in the Karakum Desert by Red Army units.

:5

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
OUPU troops. Border Cuurd personnel and volunteer detachmants in September-November
1931. All major bands closely linked with foreign intelligence agencies were
eliminated as a result of this operation. The struggle continued against the
remaining internal and foreign Basmatch bands violating the USSR border in the
Turkmen sector until the end of 1933. By the fall of 1933 the territory of Soviet
Turkmenia had been cleared completely of the Basmatch. Scattered bands remaining
in the border regions of Iran did not represent serious danger. They were awaited
by inevitable retribution on Soviet territory. During 1934 some foreign bandit
formations still were trying to penetrate to Soviet territory, but in the majority
of cases the Border Guard personnel eliminated them on the border. Reactionary
forces took steps to revive the Basmatch in the latter half of the 1930's. but
failed.

The high mountain sectors of the state border of Kirghizia and Kazakhstan were
quieter in the 1930': than the southern sectors of the USSR border. although here
too Border Guard personnel had to carry on a heroic fight against various bands
along some axes. passes. canyons and smugglers' trails. The size of bands in the
eastern sector of the border was small. but the fight against them was difficult
under the high mountain conditions. Here the Basmstch. who knew their way around
well. tried to violate the border undetected. but in the majority of cases they
unmlnmu.

The number of raids dropped sharply as a result of the defeat of internal and

foreign bands in the border regions of this area. and by the late 1930's the bands
practically ceased their sallies onto Soviet territory.

The situation on the Soviet tar eastern border was the most difficult in the 1930's.
Until the occupation of Hanchuria by Japan. the Chinese government in ﬂanking con-
ducted a policy hostile to the USSR. And relying on their military—economic
assistance. the Nankingpoliticians systematically provoked incidents on the Sino-
Soviet border. using White Guard and local Khunkhuz bands for this purpose.

In the spring of 1929 wide-scale preparations unfolded atNanking's direction for
unleashing a conflict on the KVZhD [Chinese Eastern Railway].

The Communist Party and Soviet government took all steps to localize the conflict
artificially whipped up by the Chinese side.

From spring until late autumn 1929 the Soviet government refrained from vigorous
actions to stop the provocations, trying not to give cause for unleashing major
military actions on the far eastern border. The great steadfastness. courage and
self-control of Border Guard personnel and Red Army personnel disrupted the schemes
of the "bite Chinese provocateurs and imperialists of the United States. England.
France. Japan and Germany standing behind them.

After concentrating major forces by mid-September. Chinese authorities began exten-
sive preparations for an invasion of Soviet territory. but the armed conflict on
the KVZhD ended with a crushing defeat of the aggressor in the fall of 1929. The
enemy's main body was defeated on the vast border territory of Manchuria. Chinese
authorities were forced to sign a protocol on 22 December about restoration of the
situation on the KYZhD in accordance with the Sino-Soviet agreement dated 31 Hay
1926. But many thorny issues still had not been resolved right up to the invasion
of Manchuria by Japanese forces. and the Nanking government did not cease to pro—
voke incidents on the border.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IVA Us’lsvunu vua— use-m

The provocative netluns ml the white Chinese nutlmrltios created «I difficult situa-
tion on the Iar eastern border. but of greatest danger to the USSR was imperialist
Japan. which possessed major economic and military potentials. Aggressive forces
of Japan were conducting a policy hostile to the USSR. developing a plan for occu-
pation of the Soviet Far East. and conﬂicting provocationa systematically and on a
broad scale in all vast sectors of the far eastern border.

Japanese provocations at sea assumed special scope in the first half of the 1930's.
Under protection of the Navy. Japanese vessels plundered the maritime riches belong-
ing to the Soviet people. tried in every way to provoke conflicts. hindered the
normal activities of fishermen and interfered with navigation.

Up until September 193! the Japanese restricted provocative antisoviet actions
chiefly to the maritime borders. In the early 1930's the land borders between
Japan and the USSR were limited to a narrow strip between North and South Sakhalin.
The danger of provocations increased considerably in Septeuber 1931 with the Japan-
ese occupation of Korea and Hanchuria.

Having set up the puppet state of Hanchoukuo on occupied territory, the Japanese
immediately began preparing a base of operations on its territory for an attack on
the USSR. Construction of various military installations. highways and access
routes to the border began in the border areas. Troops of the elite Kwantung Army
concentrated on the territory of Manchuria. especially in areas bordering on the
USSR. Japanese intelligence began the wide-scale collection of espionage infom-
tion in the vast territory of the Far East. "the Japanese regularly provoked armed
conflicts on the border. Each year the scale of provocations rose and in the
sumer of 1938 a major armed conflict broke out.

The Comunist Party and Soviet government took various steps to prevent provoca-
tions and conflicts and to strengthen security and defense of the Soviet far
eastern borders. and they constantly tried to lessen tension on the border and
resolve thorny issues by peaceful means. At the same time. considering the growing
aggressiveness of Japan. the party and government strengthened the Red Army.
Pacific Fleet and Border Guard Troops in the Far East.

Measures taken by the Comunist Party and Soviet government to reinforce the tar
eastern borders permitted a successful repulse of arsed sallies by various bands
and regular units of the Japanese-Manchurian army and defeat of a significant group-
ing of Japanese forces in fighting near Lake Khasan. This demonstrated the

strength of defense of Soviet far eastern borders and the moral and military
superiority of the Red Army and Border Guard personnel over aggressor troops.

Security of the state border under the peaceful conditions of the first two five-
year plans was a vivid example of the acute class struggle which continued against
forces of international reaction. In this many-sided. difficult struggle the Bor-
der Guard personnel. Red Army units which came to their assistance and the local
populace of border regions demonstrated vigilance. high military and special
schooling. bravery. steadfastness. courage and heroism. Solidarity of the Border
Guard personnel and Red Army personnel about the Comunist Party. their utter dedi-
cation to the socialist homeland. allegiance to the military oath, deep faith in
the ideals of communism. indestructible friendship of all nations and nationalities
of the Land of Soviets. and the close ties of the Arm and people were clearly
manifested during the struggle against state border violators and the provocative
sallies by bands and regular troops of the aggressor who invaded USSR territory.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The reliable security and defense of Soviet borders in the 1930's demonstrated to
all the world the strength of the dictatorship of the proletariat and persuasively
proved that the borders of the socialist state are sacred and inviolable.

"...Today the situation is quite different than before on our borders." said CPBU
CC Politburo Menber, Chairman of the USSR Committee for State Security Yu. V.
Andropov in a report at the 20 December l967 ceremonial meeting dedicated to the
50th anniversary of state security organs. "We now neighbor with fraternal coun-
tries of socialism and other friendly states over enormous distances. but there
still are many sectors of our border where we must be especially vigilant. The
border still remains the channel through which our enemies try to send their agents
and carry out provocations and other subversive actions. If they fail in this. if
the majority of extraordinary occurrences on our country's borders go no further
than attempts to violate the Soviet border. it is only thanks to the enormous. per-
sistent work, heroism and high vigilance of our Motherland's sentries. the Border
Guard personnel. They perform their difficult service well."11

FOOTNOTES

1. See "Istoriya Konmunisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza" [History of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union]. Moscow. 1971. Vol. 4. Book 2. pp 520-
521.

2. Central Archives of Border Guard Troops (henceforth TsAPV). stack 14. list
22h. file 866. sheet [0.

3. Ibid.. sheet 16.
a. lbid.. sheet 12.

5. Ibid.. sheet 76.

6. The bai in Central Asia. Kazakhstan and in the Altay. and partly in the
Caucasus, is a wealthy, major landowner and rich cattle-raiser.

7. The bai-manap are the feudal aristocracy in Kirghizia. They were recognized
as having the right of exercising justice and of leadership in wartime among
members of their kind. The bai-manap possessed large herds of cattle and
vast pastures and took advantage of the cheap labor force of poor people in
their bondage.

8. See "Boyevoyput'sovetskikh pogranichnykh voysk" [Combat Path of the Soviet
Border Guard Troops]. Moscow, 1967. p 89.

9. "Pogranichnyye voyska SSSR. l929—-l938 gg.: Sbornik dokumentov i materialov"
[USSR Border Guard Troops 1929-1938: Collection of Documents and Materials].
Moscow. 1972. pp 713-7l4.

10. Museum of Border Guard Troops. folder 3, file 2. sheet 26.

11. Yu. V. Andropov. "Izbrannyye rechi i stat'i" [Selected Speeches and Articles].
Moscow. 1979. p 116.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. I981 39

6904

650: I80l/06lo son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PERCEPTIONS, VIEWS, COMMENTS

BOOKS means: INTERNATIONALISH AND THE SOCIALIST CW1“

Moscow OSNOVA BOYBVOCO SOYUZA in Russian 1981 (signed to press It Sep 80) PP 1-2. 271.
3-12, 263-270

(Annotation, Table of Contents, Introduction, and Conclusion of book by V. P.
Samoylenko]

[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: OSNOVA BOYEVOCO SOYUZA (Basis of the Fighting Alliance)
Publisher: Voyenizdat

Place and year of publication: Moscow, 1981
Signed to Press Date: lo Septuber 1980
Number of Copies Published: 30,000
Number of pages: 271
Brief Description:

This book reveals the content and principles of proletarian internationalisn. The
author shows socialist internationalisn as one of the fundamentals of successful
economic development and ideological-political unity of the socialist co-unity,
and discusses the essence of and practical military cooperation among the Warsaw
Pact umber nations.

This volune is intended for any and navy officers, personnel enrolled at higher
military educational institutions, as well as all persons interested in matters
pertaining to the international character of defense of the achievements of so-
cialism.

Table of Contents Page

Introduction 3

Chapter I. Proletarian Internationaliam 13

Essence, Content, and Criterion of Proletarian Internationalism 13
1.0

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Stages of Development of Proletarian Internationalism 25

Dialectics of the Objective and Subjective 65
Chapter II. Principles of Proletarian, Socialist Internationalisn 87
Equality and Equality Before the Law of National Detachments of the Worker
Class and Their Parties 89
Combination of National and International Interests of the Horker Class 98
Combination of Proletarian Internationalisn and Patriotism 107
Subordination of the Interests of the Struggle of the Worker Class in One
Comtry to the Interests of Its Struggle on a World Scale 113
Struggle Against Bourgeois Nationalism and Chauvinism 120
Chapter III. Socialist Internationalism -- One of the Foundations of
Development and Strengthening of Economic Potential l3l
Advantages of the Nations of the Socialist Conmmnity in Strengthening
Economic Potential 132
Equalization of the Levels of Economic Development and Defense Capability
of the Socialist Nations 145
Economic Integration of the CEHA Member Nations -- A New Stage in
Strengthening Economic and Defense ﬂight 159
Chapter IV. The Role of Socialist Internationalism in Forming and
Strengthening the Moral-Political Factor 180
Socialist Internationalism in the Structure of the Moral Factor 181
Significance of Sociopolitical and Ideological Unity for Strengthening
the Internationalist Foundation of the Moral Factor 210
Chapter V. Military Alliance of the Socialist Nations and Its Functions 236
Objective Necessity of Military Unity 236
The Warsaw Pact - Embodiment of the Social and Internationalist Nature
of Socialism 243
Functions of the Harsaw Pact Organization 256
Conclusion 263
INTRODUCTION

Never before in history has proletarian internationalism exerted such a powerful

and direct influence on societal development. Such great and determining processes
of the present day as strengthening of the world socialist system, cohesion of the
international Communist movement, the struggle of the working people of the
capitalist countries, the national liberation movement, the struggle of peoples
against imperialism, for peace, democracy and socialism, and defense of revolutionary
gains are taking place under the banner of proletarian solidarity.

bl
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR‘OFFNJAL.USE20NLN

"The principles of proletarian, socialist internationalism and peaceful coexistence,
advanced and scientifically substantiated by Lenin," states the CPSU Central Com-
mittee decree entitled "0n the 110th Anniversary of the Birth of Vladimir Il'ich
Lenin," "are being implemented in the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. The CPSU
and Soviet State have done and are doing everything possible to strengthen the
unity and cohesion of the socialist nations, to assist and support peoples fight-
ing imperialism, neocolonialism and racism, to strengthen peace and international
security, to end the arms race, and to achieve disarmament."1

Our party is constantly enriching Marxist-Leninist teaching on internationalism and
is exposing various attempts to refute or distort it. "He Soviet Communists," em-
phasized Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "consider defense of proletarian internationalism
to be the sacred obligation of every Marxist-Leninist."2

The problem of international relations always has been and remains one of the most
complex problems of development of human society. There are more than 2000 dif-
ferent nationalities and ethnic grOups on our planet. They speak different
languages, differ in level of economic, political and intellectual development, in
religious beliefs, traditions and customs, and are partitioned off by national
borders. The main complexity of relations between nations and nationalities lies in
the fact that they have never existed in pure form. Ethnic communities are forms

of existence of people at a specific stage of historical development, the content

of which is the socioeconomic, class relations characteristic of the given socio-
economic system. Division of people on the basis of color of skin and ethnic at-
tribute is ethnic division. But the centuries-long domination of a class-an-
tagonistic system based on private ownership established relationships of domination
and subordination, hostiﬂtysnd hatred between nationalities and ethnic groups.

The ruling exploiter classes have always sought to foist off their selfish aims as
national aims, to disunite peoples, to kindle distrust, and to set peoples against
one another. war, a product and constant companion of s class-antagonistic so-
ciety, has always been portrayed by the ruling classes as a necessary struggle
against aliens, against "infidels," dictated by "higher national interests." The
experience of history attests to the fact that entire peoples and nations have been
subjected to the poison of chauviniam and nationalism because, as is correctly noted,
nationalism is a venue which can poison the most enlightened mind.

Under the camouflage of national interests, exploiters pursue their narrow, selfish
class aims and perpetrate unseemly, antihumane actions and the vilest crimes against
mankind. Presently qukn widespread in the capitalist world are concepts the ad-
vocates of which declare nationalism and mutual hostility of nations to be one of
the primary causes of wars.

1n the contemporary era preparations for, execution or further consolidation and
development of transition from capitalism to socialism and communism, common to all
mankind, constitutes the essence and content of progress by every nation and
nationality. The relative historical stability of national-ethnic structures, how-
ever, gives specific features to the processes of social development and places on
them the imprint of considerable uniqueness. Interweaving of the general socio-
economic laws and pattenm of development of nations with their specific features,

42

FOR*0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which have a long history and unique experience, advances the problem of interethnic
relations to the ranks of the most important problems in a theoretical and practical
respect. The complexity of this problem is increasing in connection with the fact
that the transition of peoples from capitalism to socialism is taking place in a
situation of increasingly aggravated historical rivalry between the forces of
progress and reaction, socialism and imperialism. The aggressive policies of im-
perialism are aimed at weakening the position of world socialism by any and all
means, at crushing the national liberation movement of peoples, at preventing the
development of the class struggle of the worker class, of working people in
capitalist countries, and at impeding the irreversible process of the disintegration
and collapse of capitalism. Just as V. I. Lenin foresaw, in connection with ex-
pansion of the liberation struggle front and choice of the socialist road by more
and more peoples, the resistance of the bourgeoisie has become international from
national. In spite of the growing conflicts which separate the capitalist nations
and aggravate relations between them, the imperialists are endeavoring to unite
their efforts, in order to preserve and strengthen the exploiter system and to re-
gain lost ground.

The imperialists realize that the aggressive were they are scheming against the
world socialist community cannot be waged without uniting into military coalitions.
This is attested by the foreign policy concepts and military doctrines of the
imperialist nations.

U.S. military doctrine, which forms the basis of the military-strategic concepts of
NATO and other aggressive imperialist military blocs, has changed several times

in the postwar years. But one thing has remained unchanged: the 0.8. aspiration to
unite under its leadership all the countries of the capitalist world and to use
their territories and armed forces to wage wars against the socialist countries and
peoples which are fighting for freedom and national independence.

The U.S. military doctrine of "flexible response" was adopted in the 1960's as
official doctrine of the aggressive NATO military bloc. As we know, its component
parts include the strategic concepts of "guaranteed destruction" (annihilation of
the enemy by nuclear strikes), "counterforce" (destruction of nuclear weapons and
other military targets) and "escalation" (gradual broadening and sharpening of the
military conflict). At the same time the doctrine of'flexible response" was
augmented, at the insistence of the FRG, by the doctrine of "forward positions,"
which specifies advancing NATO forces right up to the borders of the socialist
countries for invasion of their territory and for swift escalation of a conven-
tional war into a nuclear war.

The present stage of aggravation of the international situation also proceeds from
a disinclination on the part of the most diehard imperialist circles soberly to
appraise the present world balance of power and their totally unrealistic calcula-
tions, which are dangerous to peace, of achieving military superiority over the
socialist countries and dictating their will to these countries. Engaging in a
noisy campaign claiming an alleged "military threat'to the Heat by the Soviet
Union and the Warsaw Pact, the washington meeting of the NATO Council (1978)
proclaimed a course of policy of renewed escalation of the arms race, to extend for
decades, with the objective of "obtaining a longer and sharper sword" and en-
deavoring to return to a policy "from a position of strength.“

43

FOR‘OFTWCIAL USEGDNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperialism is making desperate efforts on the one hand to strengthen its aggressive
militarycoalﬂﬁnnsand to draw additional countries into the dangerous game of ag-
gravating the international situation, and on the other hand to weaken the
defensive organization of the socialist nations - the Harsaw Pact. Western mili-
tary-political theorist T. Stanley stated in his book "NATO in a Period of Transi-
tion. The future of the Atlantic Alliance" that the best of all possible worlds
would be a world in which a united and cohesive West faced a Communist camp which
was split up into factions.

In their acts of ideological sabotage against the unity and solidarity of the
peoples of the USSR and the world socialist system, against the world Communist
national liberation movement, the ideologues of imperialism are using nationalism
practically as their main weapon. 2. Brzezinski, for example, openly appeals to the
West "to encourage pluralism through nationalism and separatism in the Soviet Union."
They are employing the most sophisticated techniques to disunite the peoples of the
world, to provoke quarrels between the peoples of the socialist countries and the
Soviet Union, to poison them with the venom of nationalism and chauvinism, to kindle
national enmity and distrust, with the aim of weakening the antiimperialist front.
Attempts by the ideologues of imperialism to poison the peoples of our country and
the other socialist countries with the venom of bourgeois nationalism constitutes

a particular danger in connection with the fact that rightist and "leftist"
revisionists have added their voices to the chorus. "The struggle against rightist
and 'leftist‘ revisionism and against nationalism continues to be of vital im-
portance. Bourgeois ideologues and bourgeois propaganda are today counting most
heavily on nationalistic tendencies and in particular on those which assume the
form of anti-Sovietism, in the struggle against socialism and the Communist move-
ment."3 This conclusion articulated at the 24th CPSU Congress continues to be valid
today.

The great-power, chauvinistic, militaristic policy of the present Beijing leader-
ship presents s great threat to the cause of peace and socialism. As has been cor-
rectly emphasized in CPSU documents, this policy is aligned with the position of the
world's most extreme reactionaries'and is openly directed against the majority of
the socialist nations. China's aggression against the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam reaffirmed the treacherous policy of the Beijing leaders.

"China's attack on Vietnam," stated a Soviet Government declaration, "once more
shows the irresponsibility of Beijing's attitude toward the fate of peace and the
criminal easy willingness with which the Chinese leaders resort to arms.

The incursion by Chinese troops into Vietnam, which only recently had fought off
external aggression, cannot be a matter of indifference to any honest, upright per-
son or any sovereign nation. These aggressive actions, which are contrary to the
principles of the United Nations, which grossly violate international law, reveal
to the entire world the genuine essence of Beijing's hegemonist policy in Southeast
Asia. Any connivance with such a policy is connivance with violence and diktat,
connivance with attempts by China's leaders to plunge the world into war."4

The political and ideological aspects of internationalism in the military realm are
in a close dialectical interrelationship with the scientific and technological revolu-
tion. Today it is becoming more obvious than ever before that not all socialist

44
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

countries are capable of resisting alone the united front of imperialism, which pos—
sesses the very latest weapons, including nuclear missiles. The socialist nations
can reliably ensure their security only under the condition of relying on the
unified military night of the entire community, and particularly the defense might
of the Soviet Union.

The coalition nature of another world war, if the enemies of peace and socialism
start one, urgently advances the demand of continuous improvement and strengthening
of the economic, political and military unity of the socialist countries in peace-
time, and the joint combat training of their armed forces.

Consequently, in present-day conditions it has become more essential than ever be-
fore to achieve the closest cooperation among the socialist nations. It is essen—
tial both for effectively accomplishing the tasks of building socialism and com-
munism and, to quote Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "to defend and strengthen peace as suc-
cessfully as possible, which is so needed by all peoples, to strengthen interna-
tional detente. and to offer an effective rebuff to any and all aggressive actions
by imperialism and to all attempts to do detriment to the interests of socialism."5

Precisely for this reason the problem of international relations merits serious and
profound study. Another important substantiation for this is the necessity of
elaborating scientifically validated ways of strengthening the night of the social-
ist community and its defense organization -- the Warsaw Pact - on the basis of
principles of proletarian and socialist internationalism. The problems of the
future are the concerns of the present. "At the present stage of this country's
development," stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "the need for further innovative
elaboration of theory is not diminishing but on the contrary is becoming even
greater. New possibilities for fruitful investigations both of a general theoreti-
cal, basic and applied nature are opening up at the juncture of various sciences,
especially the natural and social sciences. They shOuld be utilised in full
measure."6

It is no exaggeration to state that in recent years the problem of relations between
nations is one of the central problems in investigations both of foreign and Soviet
philosophers, historians, and economists. These investigations have extensively
elaborated the theoretical and methodological problems of proletarian, socialist
internationalism. This research area is extremely important, since it creates a
broad theoretical front on the basis of which concrete problems are elaborated
pertaining to development of the socialist conmunity, including problems pertaining
to its defense capability.

Many research projects have been devoted to investigation of the activities of the
CPSU and other brother Communist and worker parties of the socialist countries in
the area of strengthening proletarian internstionaliam at various stages of histori-
cal development. Of course interest in the past has always been connected with
people's need better to understand the future, to comprehend the causes of contem-
porary phenomena in international relations and to predict in what direction they
will develop in the future. Especially valuable in this regard are studies

devoted to investigation of the problems of proletarian internationalism during
World War 11. One must bear in mind, however, that this experience is separated
from us by a considerable time interval. In subsequent years many new elements have

65

FOR‘OFFMJAI.USE(MVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

appeared both in the development of international relations and in the problem of
defense capability of the socialist community. There arises the necessity of re-
interpreting a number of points, of penetrating anew and more deeply into the es-
sence of the increasingly more complex dialectical interrelationships between
genuine internationalism and the defense capability of the brother socialist
countries. "Cognition is a perpetual, endless approaching of thought to object,"
wrote V. I. Lenin. "One must define the reflection of nature in man's thoughts not
in a 'dead' or 'sbstract' manner, not without movement. not without conflicts, but
in a perpetual process of movement, the emergence and resolving of conflicts."7

In the Soviet and foreign literature there are many studies dealing with the prob-
lems of internationalism and strengthening the defense capability of the socialist
nations and their community as a whole. A number of these studies, however, in-
sufficiently reveal the dialectics of the relationship between proletarian, social-
ist internationalism and the defense capability of the socialist community. these
problems are examined in an isolated manner, as independent of one another.

In the 1960's and 1970's there were published a great many collective-authorship
studies, monographs, candidate and doctoral dissertations dealing with the problem
of the correlation between internationalism and defense capability of the socialist
community. These studies usually discuss, sometimes deeply and in detail. in-
dividual aspects and facets of this extensive and multiple—level problem. Ac-
knowledging the correctness of and need for a differentiated approach to study of
the dialectical link between international relations and the defense capability of
the socialist community, the author considers it extremely important to examine
this problem as a whole. 0n the one hand we have the requisite experience in
functioning of the socialist community and its defense organization for such an
investigation, while on the other hand the requisite theoretical foundation has been
created for studying this experience.

The aim of this study is to investigate the dialectical relations between the ac-
tually developing international relations and defense capability of the brother so-
cielist countries and examination of internetionalism as a factor in strengthening
all components of their collective military might in present-day conditions.

The main and determining thesis which permeates the entire study is the organic
unity of scientific objectivity and a high-principled evaluation of the phenomena
being studied, from the position of the worker class and the sociopolitical re-
quirements of the socialist society and its army.

Alongside analysis of the objective conditions of the military unity of the peoples
of the socialist countries, this study also investigates the subjective factor --
the practical activities of Communist and worker parties and government agencies
pertaining to conscious establishment of the unity of the international and na-
tional, the general and specific, the long-term and the temporary, the root and

the transient elements in the development and strengthening of this unity.

The socialist comunity is a model of new relations between countries, unprecedented
in history, relations of full equality, mutual assistance, and collective coopera-

tion for the sake of common goals. Standing shoulder to shoulder in the world
arena, the socialist nations assist social progress; their actions are in conformity

$6

FOR 051WCJAI.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the root interests of the worker class, working people, all the world's
peoples. He must state that if the imperialists have not unleashed another world
war, this is primarily to the historical credit of the socialist community. Hithout
it the entire countenance of our planet would be different. The Warsaw Pact member
nations have supported and continue to support development and deepening of the
process of détente and radical improvement of the international political climate.
This is strongly reaffirmed by the Declaration adopted at the jubilee conference of
the Political Consultative Committee held on 15 May 1980 in the capital of the
Polish People's Republic. "In the struggle for peace, security and detente,“
states the Declaration, "the members of the Warsaw Pact always have displayed and
continue to display consistency and high principledness, a constructive approach
and good will, boldness in advancing initiatives and realism in negotiations, and
willingness to consider the legitimate rights and interests of others."8

It is to the great credit of V. I. Lenin, the CPSU and the other brother parties
that they have demonstrated the essential, legitimate nature of the ailitary unity
of peoples which have taken the road of socialism and have defined the principles
and form of this unity. The logical process of their drawing closer together
"depends on the policy of the ruling parties, on their ability to preserve unity,
to combat exclusivity and national isolation. to consider col-son international
tasks, and to act in concert for the sake of accomplishing these tasks."9

Theory of internationalism and the fundamentals of scientific policy in the mili—
tary area are elaborated on the basis of synthesis of practical activities and in-
novative resolution of the problems formulated by practical realities. The

author was guided by the Lenin thesis that "the viewpoint of practical realities
should be the first and principal viewpoint of theory of knowledge."10 wherever
possible and expedient, the author has sought to refine theoretical syntheses and
conclusions into practical conclusions and recommendations.

The basic problems discussed in this volume are revealed in a close link with
critique of the gnosxologic and theoretical principles of bourgeois nationalism,
revisionism and Maoism, with exposure of the distortions by bourgeois. revisionist
and Maoist ideologues of the theory and practice of the CPSU and the other brother
Communist and worker parties in questions pertaining to unity of the nations of the
socialist comnunity and its defense organization - the Warsaw Pact.

FOOTNOTES

1. ”0 llO-y godovshchine so dnya rozhdeniya Vladimira Il'icha Lenina" [The 110th
Anniversary of the Birth of Vladimir ll'ich Lenin], Moscow, 1980, page 11.

2. "KPSS v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh a"yerdov, konferentsiy i plenumov Tax"
[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences and Central
Committee Plenuma], Vol 12, page 116.

3. "Materialy XXIV s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress], Moscow,
1971, page 21.

b. PRAVDA, 19 February 1979.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. I... l. Brezhnev, "0 pyatidesyatiletii Soyuza Sovetskikh Sotaialisticheskikh
Respublik" [0n the 50th Anniversary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics],
Moscow, 1972, page 30.

6. "KISS v rezolyutsiyakh...,” op. cit., Vol 12, page 156.

7. V. I. Lenin, ”Poln. Sobr. Soch.“ [Complete Works], Vol 29, page 177.
8. PRAVDA, 16 Hay 1980.

9. "KP83 v resolyutsiyakh...," op. cit., Vol 12, page 91.

10. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 18, page 1&5.
CONCLUS 10!:

world history attests to the fact that the problen of relations between nations can-
not be resolved in conditions of a class-antagonistic society. Aggravation of the
nationalities question in the contemporary capitalist world is a logical consequence
of develop-ant of the essence of imperialism. "Imperialisn is progressive op-
pression of the nations of the world by a handful of great powers...." emphasized

V. I. Lenin.1 National movements take place throughout the capitalist system in

two aspects: intrastate - in countries with a variegated ethnic composition, and
inter-state -- between imperialist powers and politically and economically dependent
countries standing at different levels of development.

Constituting a part of the struggle for democracy, national movements in the era of
revolutionary transition fros capitalise to socialise are linked historically with

the prospects of the struggle for socialise. for only socialisn brings an end to
man's exploitation by man, to all forms of national and ethnic oppression, ensures
genuine equality o f peoples, and creates realistic conditions for fraternal coopera-
tion among nations.

The experience of the USSR convincingly shows that only a socialist revolution
ensures close unification of all popular forces, headed by the worker class, with
the goal of putting an and to the capitalist system of exploitation and, together
with it, the systes of nationaland ethnic oppression.

The Soviet experience of establishment of a multinational socialist state as well as
resolution of the highly camplex nationalities question have gained worldwide
recognition and are of invaluable assistance to all those fighting for social and
national liberation. history has never before seen in the mutual relations between
dozens of nations and nationalities such a firn unity of interests and goals, will
and actions, such a spiritual kinship, trust and mutual concern as are constantly
manifested within the fraternal alliance of Soviet peoples.

"Consistent implementation of Leninist principles of nationalities policy," states
the CPSU Central Committee Decree entitled "0n the 60th Anniversary of the Great
October Socialist Revolution," ”is leading to further comprehensive drawing together

58

INUI OFFIC1A|.1EH!(NULY
FORtOFFKJALlEEZONLV

of all the peoples of our multinational socialist homeland. The Soviet Union offers
an attractive example of successful resolution of one of the most complex problems
of development of human society."2

Resolution of the nationalities question on the basis of Jarxist-Leninist principles
of proletarian internationalism has triumphed not only in the Soviet multinational
state but also on an international scale. The system of capitalism, social and
ethnic oppression and racial discrimination is opposed by a world socialist system,
in which mutual relations between countries are characterized by constantly grow-
ing political, economic and cultural ties, by development of integration processes,
vigorous exchange of knowledge and know-how, and close cooperation in the area of
foreign policy and military defense.

International events of recent years have developed under the determining influence
of the socialist system. Precisely this system constitutes the principal driving
force in man's movement along the road of progress; man's ideals are increasingly
more fully embodied in this system. It is situated on the front line of the
struggle against imperialism. The entire development of the contemporary revolu-
tionary movement is inseparable from the growing influence of the socialist
countries on the course of world affairs. Strengthening of the unity of the social-
ist countries and deepening of the fraternal friendship between their Marxist-Lenin—
ist parties are substantially increasing the unified might and influence of social-
ism on the course of international events.

Proletarian internationalism is the ideological-political foundation which unites
and cements these factors. Constituting a reflection of social reality, proletarian
internationalism is evolving and improving in the process of historical development.
In an era of revolutionary transition from capitalism to socialism, in the course

of building a developed socialist society in the USSR, establishment and consolida-
tion of a world socialist system, the range of influence of internationalism on
societal progress is greatly expanding.

Today proletarian internationalism reflects the relations among the worker class

of all countries; among the world's Communist and worker parties; between the
worker class as a whole and forces fighting for national liberation in the former
colonial world; among the socialist countries. One specific feature of the

present situation is the fact that the ideas of internationalism are being increas—
ingly more actively perceived not only by the worker class but also by progressive
revolutionary democrats in the developing countries. In the last decades
proletarian internationalism has become a more powerful and effective weapon of

the worker class of all countries. Its basic principles have to a significant
degree been adopted by representatives of other antiimperialist, primarily
revolutionary-democratic forces. Today to speak of proletarian internationalism
means to speak of the solidarity of the worker class and Cummnusts of all countries
in the struggle for common goals. and their solidarity with the struggle of peoples
for national liberation and social progress.

In the socialist countries proletarian internationalism is developing into socialist

internationalism. Together with deepening of the objective process of interns-
tionalization of all aspects of societal affairs, the science of proletarian,

b9

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialist internationalism is being improved and perfected. Brother Communist and
worker parties view it as a unity of the objective and subjective, a unity of the
objective laws and patterns of building socialism and the activities of Marxist—
Leninist parties in conformity with these laws and patterns.

The mandatory character of the general laws and patterns of socialist revolution
and socialist development, discovered by the feunders of Harxism-Leninism and con-
firmed by the experience of socialist reforms. has been comprehensively reflected
in the documents of conferences of Conunist and worker parties. These

mechanisms were formulated by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. He emphasized that the

path taken by various countries toward socialism has been marked by such important
mechanisms, landmarks common to all of them, as socialist revolution in one form
or another, including the scrapping and replacement of the governmental machinery
of the exploiters; establishment of a given form of dictatorshnaof the proletariat,
which entered into alliance with other toiler strata,and liquidation of exploiter
classes; socialization oftheuwans of production and establishment of socialist
production and other societal relations in urban and rural areas; bringing cultural
assets within the reach of the broad worker masses. that is, a cultural revolution
in the Leninist meaning of the term. Power in the hands of the working people.
with the worker class playing a vanguard role, guidance of societal development by
the Harxist-Leninist party, public ownership of the means of production and, on
this basis, planned development of the entire national economy at the highest
technological level in the interests of prosperity of the entire people; implementa-
tion of the principle "From each according to his abilities, to each according to
his labor"; indoctrination of the entire people in a spirit of the ideology of
scientific communism, in a spirit of friendship with the peoples of the brother
socialist countries and working people of the entire world; and a foreign policy
based on the principles of proletarian, socialist internationalism are integral
features of the socialist society.3

Military unity and joint strengthening of the defense capability of the socialist
community constitute a most important mechanism. The defense of socialism is a
common international duty of the brother countries. Elucidation of general laws
and patterns is a result of synthesis of the enormous historical experience of
peoples and one of the outstanding achievements of Marxiat-Leninist theoretical
thought.

A strong imprint, however, is made both on the process of internal development of
the socialist countries and on the character of their relations with one another

by objectively existing differences in level of development of productive re-
sources, structure of production, social-class composition of population, and in
historical conditions. In connection with this it is essential, guided by the
general patterns and mechanisms of development of the nations of the socialist com-
munity, to take their specific national features into account. without considering
both these factors it is impossible correctly to develop relations between social-
ist nations.

The CPS!) and the brother Col-unis: and worker parties of the socialist conunity
consider the principle of cembination of the general and specific-national to be a

central aspect of internationalist policy. All the outstanding accomplishments of
the Soviet Union and the remarkable achievements of the brother socialist nations

50

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constitute genuine embodiment of innovative application of general patterns and
mechanisms of building socialism in each country.

The process of development of the world socialist system has shown that the problem

of combining international and national interests applies to both major areas of es-
tablishment of the new system, the internal processes of building socialism and the

external relations of the brother nations.

The last quarter of a century attests to the fact that in spite of certain difficul-
ties, the major trend in development of the world socialist system is the process
of drawing together of socialist nations and states, which is leading to their

economic, political and military unity and to growth and strengthening of all forms
of cooperation and interrelations.

tional to international interests and an implacable struggle against all manifesta-
tions of nationalism. The entire course of development of socialism has demon-
strated that policy which runs counter to these principles, policy in which na-
tionalist aspirations are paramount, in the final analysis does detriment primarily
to the interests of that country which pursues such a policy.

Consistent implementation of the principles of socialist internationaliam, which are
an expression of objective patterns and mechanisms, is a powerful factor in
strengthening the economic, sociopolitical and military might of each socialist na-
tion and the world socialist system as a whole.

Today one is hard put to name a problem in which the basic interests of the socialist
countries do not coincide. But this commonality is perhaps not so obvious in any
other realm of societal affairs as in the military area. In order to withstand the
threat of imperialism and the aggressive blocs it has fashioned. in order to

defend the cause of socialism and peace, the peoples of the socialist community have
established a defensive organization - the Warsaw Pact. This has raised the

defense capability of each member nation to a qualitatively higher level. Thanks to
unity, solidarity, and mutual support. the socialist countries have succeeded in
successfully resolving many major problems and accomplishing that for which they
have struggled for a long period of time.

The slightest departure by any nation from the principle of collective defense
weakens the entire socialist system and threatens the sovereignty of the brother

countries. This is why the Harrist-Laninist parties, governments and peoples of
these countries are making every effort to strengthen their unity, are increasing

their revolutionary vigilance, and are constantly concerned with improving col-
lective defense.

The Comprehensive Program is a qualitatively new stage in the development of
economic cooperation in the socialist community. It specifies concrete ways to
achieve intensification of cooperation in coming years and at the same time lays
the foundation for new. more effective directions and forms of interrelationships

51
FOR 0F11C1A1.US£10NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extending far into the future. The Comprehensive Program opens up the way for
fullest utilization of the possibilities of cooperation among the brother
countries in the interests of rapid utilization of the achievments of the scien-
tific and technological revolution and planned development of economically ef-
fective production in each country and in the comnity as a whole. Developing
the economic foundation of the socialist community and boosting its economic
potential, economic integration is raising its economic power to a new and higher
level.

The moral-political potential of the socialist comunity is increasing year by
year; a social structure of a single type has been established in this comunity,
comprised of the worker class, a peasantry unified into cooperatives and the
toiling intelligentsia. An ideology of Harxism-Leninism, socialist international-
in and friendship of peoples has been established. processes of exchange of
material and spiritual goods and cadres are taking place intensively, and the
mutual influence and internationalization of the entire way of life of the peoples
of this comunity is becoming strengthened. There is taking place an intensive
process of realization by the masses of the correctness, justice and vital necessity
of joint defense of the socialist comunity, an awareness which, to quote V. I.
Lenin, "is of enormous significance and guarantees victory.“

Guided by the principles of socialist inter-nationalism, which have been tested and
proven in a practical manner, and carrying out the military-patriotic and
inter-nationalist indoctrination of the masses, the brother Conunist and worker
parties are successfully accomplishing the tasks of collective defense of the so-
cialist comunity. The brother countries are pursuing a unified, coordinated
policy on fundamental points of international affairs. Virtually all important
problems which are of cannon interest are discussed collectively. Meetings of

the leaders of the ruling parties have assumed particular significance; at these
get-togethers leaders formulate and solve important, long-range problems and
elaborate methods and means of a unified strategy of the socialist conunity. The
Warsaw Pact organization is the main center for coordination of foreign policy ac-
tivity.

Strengthening of the moral-political potential, unity and cohesiveness of the so-
cialist countries is also proceeding in the direction of ideological coopera-

tion. The brother parties are iormulating and accomplishing tasks of joint
theoretical elaboration of the most important problems in the area of building
socialism and communism, the strategy of defense of this process, as well as prob-
lems pertaining to the struggle against anti-Comunist, bourgeois ideology, against
rigidst and "leftist" opportunism and baurgeois nationalism, and matters pertaining
to indoctrinating the peoples of the countries of this connunity in a spirit of
socialist internationalism and patriotism.

The socialist people's armies and the Warsaw Pact Joint Forces are the object of
special concern on the part ofthc Communist and worker parties of the Warsaw Pact
nations. With the objective of increasing the defense might of the Warsaw Pact
Organization, considerable work has been recently accomplished on improving the
military comand and control agencies of this defensive organization, on furnishing
the brother armies with the latest combat equipment and weapons, on exchanging ex-
perience and know-how on military organizational development, training and interna-
tionalist indoctrination of the fighting men of the brother armies.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proletarian, socialist internationalism is a most important factor in strengthening
all components of the defense capability of the world socialist system and con-
stitutes a sure guarantee of the sovereignty and prosperity of all nations of the
community. The CPSU has time and again stressed the importane:of unified actions
by the brother countries in the international arena and the importance of combining
in a coordinated foreign policy firm resistance to aggression with a constructive
policy of peaceful political settlement of critical international problems.

The jubilee meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the Warsaw Pact mem-
ber nations is new and persuasive evidence of the fact that the nations of this
community are unswervingly following their high-principled course of foreign policy.
"The strength of our policy," stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in his address in Harsaw,
"lies in the fraternal unity of our countries, our parties, our peoples, in our
faithfulness to the great ideas of Harxism-Leninism and the principles of socialist
internationalism. The strength of our policy lies in the fact that it is in con-
formity with the vital interests of hundreds of millions of people throughout the
world, everybody who wants peace and not war...."5

The great principles of proletarian, socialist internationalism are exerting in~
creasing influence on international affairs. They express an objective trend to-
ward unity of the socialist countries, a trend which is a logical pattern of their
development and is invincibly moving forward, for it is backed by the profound in-
ternational and national interests of the entire community.

The Warsaw Pact member nations are doing everything in their power to ensure that
their alliance is strong and invincible and continues in the future to be a
reliable shield protecting the revolutionary achievements of sacialism.
FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works]. Vol 27. page 63.
2. "0 60-y godovshchine Velikoy Oktyabr'skoy sotsialisticheskoy revolyutsii.
Postanovleniye TsK KPSS“ [0n the 60th Anniversary of the Great October Socialist
Revolution. CPSU Central Committee Decree], Moscow. 1977, page 12.

3. See L. I. Brezhnev, "Delo Lenina zhivet i pobezhdayet" [The Cause of Lenin Lives
on and Conquers], Moscow, 1970, page 67.

4. Lenin. op. cit.. Vol 61. page 121.
5. PRAVDA, 16 May 1980.
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat. 1981

3024
cso: 1801/061 5"”

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY