APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00OBOR000100020000-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020006-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8261
2 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 5/79)

ll S.)()ﬂiT’PUBLJC/NTHCIV$ RESEJNRCJiISERNﬂCIE

—
FOR omcm us: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020006-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JFRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Bxcerptl in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation use summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied ssappropriste in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT Illa AID IBGULAIIDIS GOVIIIIIO OUIIISIIP 0P
HATIIIALS IBPIDDUCID IIIBII IIQUIIB TIA! DIBSIIIIATIDI
0? 1318 PUILICRTIDI I! IISTlICTIDIUIOI7IBIAL 088 OILY.
l OIAPNI A A ' “'90" “0- 3 Icewieu' e Access-es No.
2.3:? ‘° ' ms L/ 8261

‘n M I' J“! . l‘ .
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS. (POUO 5/79)

    
 
 

 

to Prion-in. (hesitation lieu.
. humus; mun-amen Nasse ssd MJneu l0. Protect/feather! Unit No.
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clsba Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201
I). Spousal“ Ouaslsailos None sud Manes
As above

I! Smie-rmuy Notes

    

M. Absuaels

The report contains information on the Soviet silitary and civil defense

establishments. leadership. doctrine. policy. planning, political affairs.
organization. snd equipsent.

 

. In - s and ecu-ant Ass sis. s- oearvlsisu ' l-v

USSR

Nilitary Organizations
Military Facilities
Hil itsry Personnel

”I lJninaen/Opertdd Tam

"e. 1 MA“ hell/hens, ISC

' “"“"”'""" w
m omcm. use om. mm... a...“ .. m
Copies Available Pro. ms W“

' ”“‘""" "'“' ”" m toss am as seamen
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8261
2 February 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(P000 5/79)

Couteurs

Canaan of 'FOREIGN MILITARY REVIEW
(mnmm VOYENNOYB ODOZRBNIYB. Oct 7B)...................

Soviet Progress and Political. Policy animd
(ZARUBBZHNOYB VOYIIINOYB 0302mm“. Oct 78)...................

Count. on U. 3. Anna Pore“ Coma and Control
(V. thupov; mama VOYDMYB onozmm. Oct 78)......

Cantata on U. 3. Mad Form in South mm
(N. Kuhn; mama mm 0302mm. Oct 78)........

Conant. on NATO hployunt of “nut: Cantu.
(V. Vourov; manners vomm 030mm. Oct 78).......

Gonna on ch. 0. S. Swath 1'1“:
(1. bro-av; mm mm: 039mm. 0e: n)... M.

Count. on 0.3. Naval linen and Porn
(V. Scopmwgmm mm 030m. 0:: 78).......

Book Duct-u. Drill ruining ruched-
(mm W mm. 1973)....oooooooooooooooooo'oo
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

CONTENTS OF 'FOREIGN MILITARY REVIEH'

Moscow ZARUBEZRNOYE VOYBNNOYE OBOZRRRIYB in Russian No 10.
Oct 78 signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 1-2

[Indicated in the table of contents belov are the full text
translations (*) and the excerpted translations (**) which
will be published in this series and an excerpted translation (***)

which will be published in the JPRS 5000 series of the TRANSLATIONS 0N
HESTBRN EUROPE.I

[Text] CONTENTS Page

*Great October's Course . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
GENERAL MILITARY PROBLEMS f

“U 8. Armed Forces Connend and Control--V. Gidaap ov . . . . . . 9
*Anerican Forces in South Korea--R. Hishin . . . . . . . . 16
*China: In Alliance vith the Reactionaries--Yu. Patrov . . 23

GROUND FORCES

Logistics Support for an PR6 Division in Coahat-eYa. Ivanov. . 29

.Th. COIplny in ﬂight COIbIt--A. KOI'COOV s e a a a a a a s 36
Sveden's Araored Bquipnent--Ya. Viktorov . . . . . . . . . ‘l

Directional Frag-entation Hine--V. Opilat . . . . . . . . . ‘6
AIR FORCES

***The Norwegian and Danish Air Forceso-l. Sikolin . . . . . b9 4
tinsing Sinulators to Train Aaerican Air Force Ilight ;
Crevs--G. Osipov. R. Kolesnikov . . . . . . . . . '
ﬂPilot Survival Aids--0. Oblipov, V. Hikhaylin,
K.V10dilirov.........o.o.......o..
Safety 608810.“-Ve ”thin a a a e a e s e o o e a a s a a a e

1
FOR OFVICIAL USBlan
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

NAVAL FORCES

*COmbut Employment of Aircrnft Carriera--V. Voatrov . . . 69

*1'Ill'".3.7lll FII‘L‘t--I. Kl‘ll'ellnv a l s e s s s s a e 76
The Italian Lupe-Class Guided Missile Frigate--
N. "110‘, I e e e 0 e I 0 I 0 0 0 I O 0 O 0 78

The Aegis SAN Systen--V Nikolnyev . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Check Your Knowledge. Capitalist Country Frigates . . . . 88

MILITARY ECONOMICS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

Artillery and Small Arne Neapons Production in the PRC--
V. Gorokhov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

Great Britain' a Supply of Energy-Producing Raw Materials--
Ye. Nikolayenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
*Nnvnl Bases and Porte in the U. s.~-V.Stepanov . . . . . . . 90

INFORMATION, EVENTS. FACTS

The Increasing Power of Israeli Aviation . . . . . . . . . 103
The NATO Allied Naval Exercise Bright horizon
The Nansa ECN Aircraft

ThelLS.Navy'e Submarine Ocean Surveillance Systems Center
A Sieulator to Train Forward Artillery Observers

A New Hind Tunnel

A New Nozzle for ICSN Engines

Using Uraniua Cores in Armor-Piercing Subcaliber Shells
FOREIGN MILITARY NEWS ITEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
ARTICLES IN POREIGN JOURNALS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
COLORED INSERTS (unnuahered pages)

The Swedish srnv-ioaa Main Cosbat Tank

The Aeorican England CGZZ Guided Nissile Cruiser

The Italian Lupe-Class Guided Missile Frigate

The Israeli Air Force's Kfir CZ Nulti-role Tactical tighter

COPYRICNT: “Zarubeshnoye voyennoye obosreniye". 1978

9001
CSO: 1801

3 . ., .
ma omcrusss 0er 5’ g.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SOVIET PROGRESS AND POLITICAL POLICY REVIEWED

Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE in Russian No 10.
Oct 78 signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 3-8

[Articlez "Great October's Course"]

[Toxtl The worldwide historical significance of 0ctoher--the
nnln event of the 20th Century--consists of the fact that it
fundamentally changed the course of nankind's development and
convincingly revealed the revolutionizing power of the ideas
of Marxism-Leninisn. The October Revolution--accosplished by
the working class of Russia in alliance with the peasantry.
under the leadership of the Bol'shevik Party created by the
Great Lenin--opcncd a new epoch in aankind's history--the
epoch of the transition fron capitalisn to socialise, the
epoch of the struggle for the liberation of the workers tron
inperialisn. for the cessation of wars between nations and
for socialise and connunisn.

The world liberation mission of the working class was enbodied
in the victory of October. Soviet power actually ensured true

freedon and denocracy for the workers and it aroused the light?"

energy of the nasses. Under the leadership of the Connunist
Party. our country's workers have successfully handled the
priaary. aost complex task of the socialist revolution--the
task of construction. They inplenented Lenin's plan for
constructing socialise. a plan which encoapassed all the nain
spheres of social life and which transformed the land of the
soviets into a nighty socialist power. Our country did not
sinply fight for its freedon and independence during the grin
years of the Great Patriotic Her. it also aade a decisive

contribution to saving world civilisation from fascist slavery..

The Party's consistent inplenentation of the plan developed by
V. I. Lenin for creating a new society ensured unprecedented
rates of develop-ant for the econony. science and culture and

It provided a successful resolution of the nationality problen.'

3 _
.ron orucw. use our . ' -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our country presently has enormous economic. scientific and
technological potential at its disposal. lts defense capability
is strong and reliable. The Srviet people are firmly resolved
to devote all their strength to the struggle for the complete
triumph of communism°s ideals.

The society of developed sociallsm.--today's highest achievement
of social progress--which has been built in our country. has
become an outstanding triumph of Lenin's ideas. L. I.'Brezhnev.
general secretary of the CPSU Central Committee and chairman of
the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium. comprehensively described

the processes which completed the construction of developed
socialism in our country. He drew a conclusion which is of
important theoretical and practical significance: "...the stage
of the mature. developed socialist society stands out as a
necessary link in social transformations and as a relatively
long strip of development on the path from capitalism to
communism. Moreover. the knowledge and use of all the resources
of developed socialism is. at the same time. the transition to
the construction of communism."

This new stage in the history of our motherland is reflected in
the new USSR Constitution. whose first anniversary was recently
celebrated by the Soviet people. The adoption of the USSR
Constitution--an inspired manifesto for the epoch of communism's
construction--was a powerful stimulus for a new upsurge in the
creative activity of the masses in accomplishing the historic
plans outlined by the 25th CPSU Congress.

Our state has a firm foundation to successfully accomplish these
tasks. It has never before possessed such powerful economic,
scientific. technological and spiritual potential as it has
today. under the conditions of mature socialism. It is suf-
ficient to mention some data to show the distance separating

the current stage of socielism's development from its initial
stage in our country.

It now takes less than a month to obtain the same volume of
gross social product which was produced during the entire year
in 1936. Since that time, the power-worker ratio has increased
by almost a factor of 8 in industry and by a factor of over
IS in agriculture. During this same time. there are 36 times

as many specialists with a higher and secondary education in
industry and 47 times as many in agriculture: the percentage of
workers with a higher and secondary education has increased from
less than 8 percent to 73.2 percent.

The Soviet people's standard of living has changed radically. _
for example. lb.9 million square meters of houses were built in

a .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1916, while the country received over 110 million square

meters in 1977: per person expenditures and benefits from

the public consumption funds were 21 rubles and they reached

380 rubles last year. The process of material and cultural

growth was accompanied by the people's spiritual improvement ‘
and by the formation of their socialist consciousness.

The Soviet economy i.s developing at higher rates than is
production in the capitalist countries. During the past 7
years, the average annual rate of growth for industrial output
in our country exceeded the similar index: by a factor of 2

for the US. by a factor of 3 for the Common Narket countries and
by more than a factor of 1.7 for Japan. The steady growth

of the Soviet economy is primarily a result of the utilization
of the objective laws and advantages of the socialist economic
system and a result of the planned management of the economy.

The Communist Party and the Soviet government are devoting
special attention to the practical implementation of the
party's agrarian policy. The program developed by the March
1965 CPSU Central Committee Plenum scientifically reflects
the new conditions and requirements of socialist society.
"The modern agrarian policy is the party's Leninist strategy
and tactics in the area of agriculture under the conditions
of developed socialism." comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasized in
his report."0n the Future Development of USSR Agriculture,"
at the 3 July 1978 CPSU Central Committee Plenum.

The July CPSU Central Committee Plenum was a new, important

stage in accomplishing the party's strategic mission--to

achieve a reliable supply of food for the country' s population
and a reliable supply of agricultural rev materials for industry.
It concentrated the party's attention on solving the most urgent
problems of agricultural production and eliminating its bottle-
necks; it also defined the main direction for the future develop-
ment of agriculture and the sectors supporting its industrial- '
ization and its scientific and technological progress.

The plenum evaluated the results of the country's agricultural
development during the past years. The average gross yield.
of agricultural products for all categories of farms during
"1971-1977 vas: 189. 6 million tons of grain, 7. 91 million tons
of raw cotton. 88. 2 million tons of potatoes and 23.3 million
tons of vegetables. During this same period. meat production_
increased to 16 million tons. milk production increased to

88. 8 million tons and egg production increased to 53’.5 billion
units. The sale of meat products to the population through
state and cooperative retail outlets almost doub ed from I965 - :
through 1977 and it exceeded 10 million tons a year on the- average.x,

,.

Waﬁﬂi§T3=NwWaLZLLm - w
.

.’..

asaahs

é
.5 } .
soa-osrrcm. use our, », ' .‘ , .- 7-,;

i

.a, .

r-n -.

r.

.. .‘4'e_' .

-Q$V . ﬂ
..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Milk sales to the state almost douhled--fron 15.6 to 30 million
tons; butter sales to the state increased from 702.000 to

1.276 million tons and egg sales increased from 10.3 to 36
billion units. Per person consumption of neat and meat products
(with a growth in population of over 28 nillion people) increased
by 16 kilograms and was 57 kilograms in 1977.

The nain task which the party is assigning to agriculture is

to achieve a comprehensive, dynamic develop-ent for all its
sectors and a reliable supply of food and agricultural raw
materials for the country so that the growth in their production
will ensure a further. significant inprovement in the people' a
standard of living. In connection with this, plans call for
bringing the average annual gross grain yield up to 238-243
million tons in 1981-1985 and up to an average of 1 ten per
person throughout the country by 1990. By the end of the next
five-year plan, meat production must be brought up to 19.5
million tons. It will also be necessary to greatly increase
the production of silk and eggs. The accomplishment of these
plans will nuke it possible to raise per person consumption

of the most valuable food products and it will nake it possible
to approach scientificallyvbased standards by the and of the
11th Five-Year Plan.

The July CPSU Central Conaittee Plenun was a najor event in the
life of our party and state. Its decisions clearly defined

the paths for the future develop-ent of our agriculture on
behalf of a significant increase in the people' a welfare.
Conrade L. I. Brezhnev' s report is of enornous theoretical and
practial significance. The report' s propositions and conclusions
are a new, major contribution to the developnent of a Leninist
agrarian theory under the conditions of developed socialise.
They are mobilizing millions of Soviet people to inplenent the
program planned by the party for the develop-ant of agricultural
production.

The workers of city and country received the decisions of the
July CPSU Central Conaittee Plenun with profound satisfaction
and patriotic enthusiasm. The confidant voice of the Soviet
people can be heard tron one end of our notherland to the
other: "He will acconplish everything the party has planned!"

The Great October Socialist Revolution was the kind of event
in world history-which has profound. lasting consequences for

mankind. 1t lit up the paths to the future for the people
of many countries. Along the international consequences of
0ctober.which have formed the character of, our epoch. the nest
important is the beginning and the developnent of the. world
socialist systen. The experience of history has shown.' that the

6
roxtonrcm 0530!!“ . 94-23;}, 5,; ‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comprehensive. fraternal cooperation between the socialist
commonwealth of countries has become a powerful factor in
accomplishing their national and international missions. in
defending their revolutionary achievements and in the struggle
to secure the peace and security of the people. The fraternal
socialist countries--members of the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance (CHEA)--are successfully accomplishing the creative
missions facing them of socialist and communist construction
and they are increasing their economic potential. Based on the
agreements reached by the leaders of the fraternal parties in
the Crimea.as well as at other meetings. cooperation is being
consolidated within the CNBA framework on a multilateral and bi-

lateral basis for the purpose of realizing the measures of
specific. longterm programs.

0n the background of the crises and worsening contradictions

in the capitalist world. the confident. dynamic growth of

the economies of the CHEA member countries convincingly
demonstrates the advantages of the socialist states' social

and political system and the effectiveness of their strengthening
mutual cooperation. In comparison with 1975, the national

income of these countries increased by 12 pennnt; in 1977 and
industrial output increased by 12.h percent compared to 1975,

the overall volume of their foreign trade turnover increased

by 26 percent in 1977 and exceeded 158 billion rubles.

Compared to the precrisis level of 1973. the volume of industrial
production in the developed capitalist countries increased by

7 percent in 1977 while it increased by 32 percent during the
same period in the CMBA member countries.

The flights of spaceships with international crews verb important
events in the practical realization of the program for multi-
lateral cooperation in the exploration of outerspace; these

crews were made up of citizens of the CHEA member countries:

the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia, Poland and the 608. The
successes in developing the economic system. science and
technology and the expansion and intensification of compre-
hensive. mutual cooperation are strengthening the power and

prestige of the socialist commonwealth and they are increasing
its influence on the course of world events.

Great October had an enormous effect on the development of the
national liberation movements: it aroused the consciousness of
colonial peoples and helped them achieve large successes in .
their struggle for liberation from the oppression of iﬁperisl-y
ism.’ Since World War II and the soviet Union's.victories over.“
fascism, over 2 billion people have thrown off the yoke,of,

colonialism and they have achieved national inde‘endemee,“*?en§-“'

of the liberated countries are rejecting the cap tslistcpith H

7 - {.1 v.1.I
son orsrcmt-uss our“ .. 1

<
,3

‘
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

of development and. taking their bearings on socialism. they

are setting the construction of a society free from exploitation
as their goal. The sociallst countries are faithful and reliable
friends of ﬂmsc states and they are rendering them all possible
assistance and support.

Naturally. imperialism has not reconciled itself to this course
of development for the liberated countries. By making use of
their positions--which are still extremely strong--within the
former colonies. the imperialists are trying to do everything
possible to preserve them and. where possible, to strengthen
and expand them. This tendency is especially noticeable on
the African continent. The US has become the main instigator
of neocolonialisn in Africa. It is conducting a policy of
armed intervention and open interference in the affairs of
African states and suppression of the national liberation
movement. This is specifically attested to by the armed
intervention in Zaire's internal affairs by a number of
western countries under the political and military leadership
of Washington and also by imperialism's plots to include
several African states within the sphere of the aggressive
NATO bloc's activities and by attempts to put together so-
callcd "inter-African" armed forces to suppress the liberation
struggle on this continent.

However, the imperialists are forgetting that such a policy is
doomed to failure in our epoch. Nobody will be able to break
the will of the independent states and freedom loving people
of Africa and other continents nor will they be able to break
their.determination to defend their independence and free
internal development. The historic victory of the people of
Vietnam is an example of this.

The Great October Socialist Revolution marked the beginning of

a new stage in the development of the international workers
movenent. The successes of the construction of socialism in

the USSR. and then in other countries. promoted an increase

in the political maturity of the working class in the capitalist
states. The level of organization within its ranks increased
significantly. A force.--the international communist movement--
which is playing a great role in history. was formed.

Capitalism is more and more clearly showing its worth as a
society without a future. The chronic. feverish activity in

the economic system. unemployment. price increases. inflation.
shady political machinations. the corruption of high ranking
figures. the abuse of power. the increase in tripe and the
flagrant violation of human rights in capitalist society--all ﬂ
of this means that the objective economic and sdcio‘political

s _ . .. ,
roe orncua. use 0er - ' '. p; .15 - 4:
Hlk OFPlClAh USE ONLY

prerequisites for the transition to socialism the reached

a high degree of maturity. The desire of the nasses for

radical changes In growing in capitalist countries: the

connunist parties of these states are trying to inprove the

strategy and tactics of their revolutionary struggle. They .
are achieving a unification of all denocratic forces in the

struggle against the predominance of nonopolies and for

democracy and socialism.

The birth of Soviet power was narked by the adoption of Lenin's
Decree on Peace which defined the main trend in the state's
foreign policy from the first day of its existence. The con-
sistent course of peace and friendship between peoples which

is being conducted by the party stone fron the very nature of
socialism. The CPSU has continually devoted and continues to
devote its prinary attention to the issues of ensuring a firn.
reliable peace. The tireless activity of L. I. Brezhnev.
general secretary of the CPSU Central Connittee and chairnan

of the USSR Suprene Soviet Presidium. has won the enornous
respect of the people of our planet: he has nade an outstanding
contribution to the cause of international detente and universal
security. The principles of peaceful coexistence are winning
sore and nore supporters in our tine as the only realistic and
rational principles in international affairs. This reflects

the changes in the balance of power which are taking place in
the world. and prinarily the increase in the power and authority
of the Soviet Union and the entire socialist connonwaalth.

The succesres achieved by the forces of the national liberation
novenent and the international workers novenant are also pronot-
ion an affirmation of the principles of peaceful coexistence
between states.

During recent years. we have all been witnesses to the positive
changes in international relations. The favorable affect of
the relaxation of tension is especially noticeable in the
situation which has developed on the European continent; the
people of this continent are now living in their fourth decade ;
without a war. The Final Acr--which was signed in August 1975 .
h: Helsinki and which brought the work of the Conference on H
European Security and Cooperation to a closa--was a great
political victory for the forces of peace.

a

The progress achieved in the area of detante lust be continually
supported. strengthened and expanded by enriching the practice
of peaceful consistence and cooperation.

During the years which have passed since the Ialsinki Conferanea.'
a large nunber of international treaties and agraanants have . ‘
been concluded with the participation of the bqviat Union; these

treaties and agraanants directly respond to the goals of building1

a fire. legal foundation for the policy of dattnta. - j;
’03 OFPICIAL US! ONLY 5' '; V _.,- “id

' 1‘ =‘-‘ -' ",..:"H‘

7. ‘ e. i..." 5’

. l . .. ,~._,, ...t. V .. sale-m. .'£u~’4$ean..fvl‘- ‘ ink-awn“ 75er
l y viviély in
a lougteru, 15-10:
tive and

n be «can cop ci
which adopted
a significant quu
This donaoront decision

ctcnte (I
auditions. c
curb ch urns race on
a conprehcusive
a videopread o
a special

itnry iauuco
stung

on tho Iii
ad cacutity

.IC. I

c achicvcnont
e otrcnschcning of p
FOR OFFICIAL URI-2 ONLY

however. stopping the ares race and disarmament are not simple
matters. Many recenl cases testify to the fact that the enemies
oflhuontecwelumumlngnore active in the world political arena.
In a uunher nf western countries. there are influential forces
which are trying to return the world to the "Cold liar." They
are representing the interests of the people who are earning
their living from the arse race and from the worsening inter-
national situation. Afraid to openly state the real reasons
for their violent action against the process of noraalisatien
in the world's political clinate. these forces are unleashing
a slanderous propaganda campaign against the USSR. The true
purpose of the trumped up anti-Soviet stories is to serve as

a snake screen covering the plans of reectionaries in the
Vest. plans directed at undermining detente.

China's foreign policy is causing more and more alarn anong
peace-loving people. having betrayed the principle of friend-
ship and solidarity with the socialist countries. the gevernnent
of this country is now joining the forces of reaction in the
world arena, while subjecting the socialist accoaplishnents of
the Chinese people to great danger. An ”escalating rapproche-
ment" is taking place in NATo's relations with China. The
Pentagon is actively encouraging the attraction of China to

this aggressive hloc. Peking's leaders are preaching the in-
evitability of a new world war. sabotaging the cause of dis-
arsenent in every way possible, forning blocs with the nest
reactionary militaristic forces and trying to undernine detente.
Seeing the Soviet Union and its peace-loving policy as the

aain obstacle to the conduct of its course. Peking has saalously
undertaken the forsation of an anti-Soviet front.

However. the conhined forces of reaction are opposed by a eighty
coalition of chenpions for the cause of peace. denecracy and
progress. headed by the Soviet Union--a coalition which has

the people's well being as their goal and not destruction and
the annihilation of people. -

The Coabined Arned Forces of the warsaw Pact nesbsr states play

a nest inportant role in defending peace, socialist acconplish-
nents and security anong people. They are opposing the sale
force grouping of the neJor inperialist powers which asks up

the aggressive Atlantic bloc and they are reliably ensuring the
inviolability of our borders and the stability of the revolution-
ary acconplishnents of the socialist connonwealth countriei.

The Soviet Araed Forces fore the basis of their fighting
strength: they have all the aodern neans of arnad conflict

at their disposal. They include the strategic nuclear forces.
which serve as a reliable shield for the world socialist systsn..

ll . u
rosemcmossomf .‘

s
1
'A .
J
‘1" r
s
n
a

‘ .
-.. -r... . a>— ”mmﬁ-‘v-s Bit-41¢ Ate-at»: £4-

V

,vs. .

”@941” ti.»—;

‘7‘ 5.

“ﬁnancial?"

,r ,
A l
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"The Armed Forces responsibility to the party and people is
great." Mar 50 D. F. Ustinov. member of the CPSU Central
Committee Politburo and USSR Ninister of Defense. pointed out.
"They are accomplishing a noble mission. They are serving
lefty goals. This responsibility. this mission and these
goals inspire personnel to continually improve their combat
expertise."

Like the entire development of Soviet society. the life and
activity of our Armed forces proceed under the growing influence
of the ideas of the 25th crsu Congress and under the symbol of
the struggle to fulfill its decisions. The servicemen of the
army and navy completely recognize their responsibility in

the cause of defending the motherland--thc creation of Great
October. They are achieving new successes in combat and
political training and they are more fully discharging the
requirement of the Communist Party-~to increase the efficiency
and quality of combat training and to work better today than
yesterday and better tomorrow than today.

Comrade L. l. Brezhnev's substantively profound reports and
speeches and also his books "Malaya semlya" and "Rebirth" have
aroused a new surge in political and combat activity among all
the defenders of the fatherland. Accepting Comrade L. l.
hrezhncv's advice and instructions as the party's combat order.
Soviet servicemen ere directing their efforts toward accomplish-
ing their assigned missions in a worthy manner. toward achieving
new successes in military labor and in further increasing combat
readiness and vigilance with respect to the aggressive intrigues
of imperialist circles and toward reliably defending the great
accomplishments of socialism. democracy and peace.

Our country is confidently following Oreat October's course.
United around the Communist Party. the Soviet people and their
valiant Armed Forces are doing everything so that our socialist
fatherland will achieve new victories on its historic path to
the complete triumph of communion.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubeahnoye voyennoyc oboxreniye". 1978

9001
080: 1801

12
PORiWPIOUu;USBllﬂ3
FUR "Fl-'HIIM. "58H ONLY

COMMENTS ON ".8. ARMED FORCES COMMAND AND CONTROL

Hoscov.2ARUBEZHNOYR VOYBNNOYE OBOZRENIYE in Russian No 10.
Oct 78 signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 9-16

[Article by Hajcanv. Gidnspth "0.8. Arned forces Connand
nnd Control"|

[Text] Anericon specialists understand by the tern "Con-and
and Control System" the totality of technical equipnent.
skilled personnel and the nethods and procedures for operating
it which nust ensure the connender constant supervision over
his forces and facilities in all situations by providing his
vith all the data required to sake operational decisions and
get orders (connands) to the executors. The connend and con-
trel systen is regarded as an independent organisational unit.
In addition to the eleacnts cited above. it also includes
different subsystens. the necessary facilities. equipnent.
etc.

As reported in the foreign press. the entire leadership of the
Anericnn Arned Forces is based upon the Horld Hide Military
Con-and and Control Systen (wwuccs). Based on the videspread
enploynent of nodern connunicationa equipnent and conputer
technology. it unites the senior national and nilitary con-end
and control agencies. The systee began to be created in the
60's when. due to the adoption of a new nilitary doctrine vith
the "flexible felvon|0"strategy as its basis, the govern-ant
and Pentagon approved new principles for developing and organ-
14in; um araed forces according to specific sissions.

ﬂu mul of this reorganisation was the creation of ”balanced"
annaforces capable of conducting both general nuclear var and
liaited vars with and without the enployaent of tactical nuclear

uenpons.

In accordance vith the new directives of the politico-nilitary
leadership. the n8.Araed Forces were divided up. free an .

1: _
rot omcm use om

 

w. = .. .. V. -~e:'r-r“-r...34 actﬁxLAn-sléam
FOR DFFICIAL USE ONLY

organizational point of view. according to specific operational
and strategic missions in the following manner: strategic offen-
sive forces (icnn's. SSHN's and strategic bonbers): strategic
defensive forces (ihe forces and facilities for defending the
American continent against missile. space and aircraft attack):
general purpose forces (land forces. the Air Force excluding
strategic aviation. the Navy excluding sssu's): the forces and
facilities for strategic air and seaiift: and the arsed forces

reserVe .

The foreign press emphasizes that the change in strategy CTlexible
response" in place of “massive nuclear ”retaliation") and the
approval of new principles for military organization (the appear-
of new components earmarked to accoaplish quite specific operational
and strategic missions alongside the classical ferns of force
organization-~the services and branches of the arsed forces)
brought about the need for creating a truly worldwide systen of
command and control for the armed forces. a systes which is
responsive to the aggressive roles of Asericen inperialisn,whose

forces are already deployed on all the world's continents and
oceans in peacetime.

The cosponents of the World Hide Military Conaend and Control

System are: the Joint Chiefs of Staff Main and Alternate Coa-
aand Centers and the JCS Airborne Con-and Post (the ac: ucc

and ACC and the JCS ABMCP): the aain and alternate consend

posts of the services and Marine Corps: the coasend post of the
specified consands (Strategic Air Consend--8AC. Aerospace Defense
Consend--ADC and the Air Force's Military Airlift Connend--MAC),
the unified con-ands in strategic areas (European. Atlantic and
Pacific. Central and South AIericen) and the unified Readiness
Connnnd.

The JCS connand and control elenents (the MCC. ACC and ABMCP)
are incorporated in the National Military Conaend Systee (RMCS),
which is the hub of the HHMCCS. it is equipped with electronic
coaputers. display equipsent and high speed sessege handling
equip-eat which nokes it possible to siaultaneously receive and
process data. in the opinion of Asericen specialists. the
national systea is the bridge which links the senior ".8. politics-
ailitnry leadership (the President. Secretary of Defense and
Chairnnn of the JCS) with the other eleaents of the WMMCCS.

The JCS Main Connend Center is designed for peacetiue con-end
and control of the arned forces (it was built in 1962). In
aid-1916. it was relocated to a new. specially constrocted
facility located in an underground part of the Pentagon (the
overall cost of the work was $15.‘ sillion). The center is not
protected against nuclear attack.

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY

\
_.-t r

7:. .a- , u- «Sawmills-w

Ftu‘ ' 4 L-.- va- :O- \-.‘ 6 “rd" :' "‘
FOR (ll-'FIG‘AI. USE ONLY

A large hall (or conducting emergency meetings is located in

the middle of the Mac. It is equipped with six large screens
which display incoming data: specifically, data on the location
of enemy misslles and other equipment as well as other informa-
tion required for decisionmnking A large table is located in
the center of the hall: members of the JCS and the senior mili-
tary leadership sit around this table. Each of their positions
is equipped with microphones and secure telephones; with these
telephones. as emphasized in the American press. it is possible
to establish immediate communications not only with the commanding
generals of individual commands but also with the commanders

of major ships. to addition to this hall. there are a number of
rooms where groups of specialists assemble and evaluate incoming
information. Small sleeping quarters have been set up for
personnel to rest in.

The center operates around-the-clock. Several shifts pull
duty: these shifts are made up of specialists from the Joint
Staff and the Defense Intelligence Agency (13-16 officers and
nco's headed by a colonel). The HCC receives operational
reports from the services. main commands.u.s.military attaches
and embassies abroad and also information from diverse CIA
sources and separate reports originating from the Hhite house.
the State Department and CIA. The center has direct communi-
cations to the governments of several countries. Its equip-
ment provides automated collection. processing and display of
current situation data on the screens and it provides suppla-
mentary reference information on the most urgent individual
issues. Standard programs for computing options for the employ-

ment of armed forces in different situations are stored in the
center's computer.

The JCS Alternate Command Center is located in the foothills

of the Blue Ridge Mountains (90-95 km northwest of Usehington).
According to American press reports. it is hardened against
nuclear attach and has a self-contained power station and water
supply and ventilation systems. The acc operates aroundothe-
clock: it is not fully manned in peacetime. It is equipped
similar to the main center. All information is sent to both
centers simultaneously: this makes it poseibla.to exercise
command and control of the armed forces from the act when
necessary. Hork has been undervay at the alternate center
since 197‘ to connect its equip-ant to the automated data pro-
cessing system located in the Pentagon. Approgimately $3 million

were allocated to accomplish this program in the 1977.78 fiscal
year. . . ‘ '-€

s-‘

unra- mum} W»..- .

The Jcs Airborne Command Post was created in 1‘62 and it'is-.
presently set up on the B-‘A. Altogether. thrde.aircraft'haveaé;‘
been outfitted: they are based at 9ffutt APB (debreska)."1he.

  

deu - A.
\-

   
 

15 1_“. “!:- " - tiy--JV¢:3L

". \ :d L 1‘ ‘ a)". ' r"

c}?

 

.' A. i use“. . when” ﬂaw
FOR 0P?IClAL USE ONLY

‘3
situation. one
AFB (Herylend) in re

luty at Andrews
n heard; the ot

consisting of 15-11 een pulls coebat
C-l35) hee __

An operations group
Old equipeent (from the 8
this equipaent

duty on the ABNCP.
y installed on the eirctoitz
i: coeuunicat one

tione

one end Harine Corpe ere loeeted

in the Pentagon.
ol Syetee (DACCS) ia

Cont:
ite eieeion coneiete oi
the Aggy coeeend

nt of
ting date for

the Arey Co
procoeeing en

The Depettee
deployed at
collecting.

eleeent.
e tvo-etoey building con-
let (an atee of 550 equate

eand and eonttol convolae and
loyed here. 1h

edquertere COIII

The AP he
f a main hall en

d on the

- the rec: vaa built haee
he neccs.

ee eieeione ea t
hAVIC) ie located at the level
ad proceeeieg h

The Navy Internet
ite eieeioe coneiete of eutoeat
end coettol.

no Connend Poet;
of ineoeing data in three ereae:_
eupport and planning force develop-eat (ever

ereive on e deily heeie).
derehie etteehee ,x

the Aeetieee lea
coeteol

in the foreign pteae.
ing the eoeeend,

   
 

he reported

epeeial eigniiieenee to further ieptov

and coeeunicetione eyeteee for attetegie-otteneive‘ioteee end-
deet'e coeeande (or ere) to_e}14£oeege-- u

' eh"tiee neite-- :

to getting the Preei
tight dove to lean 1a _ o ;
vithie the ehotteet poeeible.tipe, :Iheee ore.

~16 «;;;s.;. -‘
m onxcxettusz7mtxa .: . "

gu,:,,c ﬁennas§.:=.a,,ar

..
3.4

  

‘ -.t‘ -'.
.- ‘-.‘ v.4.u-n.

. .JA-JI
FOR ill-'I’ICIM. "SI-I UNLY

control and communications system is considered the most highly
developed command. control and communications system of the
specified and main commands.

CINCSAc's Command Post is located underground near Offutt APB
(Nebraska). Six h.8 x 6.8 n screens have been set up in it

to display the current situation; based on programs or queries.
diverse data can be displayed on these screens with the projectors.
The average time lag from the time of the query to its display

on the screen is approximately 15 seconds. The CF has a self-
contained life support systen and it operates around-the-clock.

All incoming information is processed by the 66SL automated
command and control system (ACCS)--CINCSAC's ptllar means of
command and control. The main missions of this Acc are:
autonated calculation of lean and strategic aircraft opera-
tional readiness status. evaluating the actual force combat
readiness status. planning logistics support and transmitting
operational orders to launch missiles and aircraft. Orders

and reports are transmitted along cable lines via AUTODIN
(Automatic Digital Network) automatic switching centers on
secure. high speed printer. Noreover. orders can be transmitted
as a collective call. to a group of addressees or to an indivi-
dual correspondent. In the long term. plans call for using

the SAC Automated Total Information Network (SATIN) acts.

The main mission of the SAC underground C? is to receive

timely warning of a possible attack on the United States and to bring
strategic offensive weapons to maximum operational readiness.
while launching the strategic bombers at the same time.

CINCSAC's ABNCP is allocated an important place in the SAC
command and control system. Five 80-135 aircraft have been
earmarked for its deployment; they are based at Offutt are

and, since 3 February 1961, they have been taking turns pulling
around-the-clotk airborne duty with an operations group on
board. In the opinion of the American press, this CD is able
to assume command and control of SAC forces in the event the
ground command and control posts are out of commission.

Foreign specialists believe that command and control over the
Ican'a and strategic bombers will be exercised from CIICSAC's
AINCP immediately before and during a nuclear war. In peacetime,
the operations group on board the ABNCP consists of 11 officers
and 5 radio operators; it is headed by a duty general to whom
emergency powers are delegated. When a situation deteriorates.
its complement will be increased. -

‘ a
‘ “tumult-L

Accomplishment of the missions assigned to the asset for command’
and control of SAC forces during a nuclear var sill be ensured

 

17 ,- . ..
res orncm. use our . 7 -‘ _ , ‘

 

' u: :.. .‘ :‘ " "‘ - “"" 't.‘
a...» .7 . ;.. . ,ur, '- um. .-.v. uh)» .Aatxa-Alah-uasu 2.0.5.. £43?“ “a
Filli ill-TWIN. "SK UNLY

by the utilization of cxncsnc'a ABNCP aircraft. the ABNCP's
for the eastern and western areas, the airborne iCBH launch
control points and radio relay aircraft (altogether 27 26-135
aircraft).

If an emergency situation arises. the ABNCP aircraft and the
radio relay aircraft are launched and. according to data iron
the foreign press. they are able to ensure the tinely transv
mission of the appropriate commands from CINCSAc's ABNCP to
the command control postsfor ICBM's and strategic bonbers.

CINCSAC can also use the bunkered CP's of the 15th Air Arsy
(March APB, California) and 8th Air Aray (Barkadale APB,
Louisiana). as well as the coupler in Heatovar (Hassachusette).
as alternate command and control posts.

The immediate delivery of orders from the senior politico-
military leadership to SAC nuclear weapons carriers is ensured
by the utilization of specially built comnunications systens,
of vhich the most important are the 596L and the 687i.

The h9bL systen is a backup means of transmitting JCS and
CINSAC orders to all con-and and control elenents--right
down to 1033 launch control sites and SAC aircraft on the
ground and in the air-~under eaergency conditions with radio
relay missiles (Hinutenan-Z). Special equipment designed to
transmit previously recorded (voice) orders in the very short
wave band are installed on then instead of nuclear warheads.
The radio relay nissiles can he launched on conoand free the
Jcs not and free SAC connsnd posts. After the lissilaa are
launched and arrive at their assigned trajectories, the
order is imnediately transmitted on ten set frequencies.
The signals' area of audibility covers the entire territory
of the Anerican continent.

The 687L system is designed for coamand and control of SAC
forces if short wave and very short wave radio coauunicatione
are interrupted by the effect fron eneny high altitude nuclear
bursts. Its special feature is transmitting coanands vie
telegraphic and telephonic coseunicatiens aquipnent operating
in the long ways and very long wave hands. CIUCSAC has the
capability of transaitting combat orders via four powerful
ground transceiver centers; one of these centers is located on
the Pacific coast (Baretov. California); the second is in the
central part of the country (Grand Island. Nebraska); the
third is on the Atlantic coast (Norfolk, Virginia); and the
fourth is on Puerto Rico. The sytem's receivers are at the.
CP's of all SAC large units, units and subunits.~ﬁ, '? -
FOR UFFICIAL USE ONLY

The VAS lPrimary Alert System] (telephone) system for declaring
alerts also belongs to the primary system: in addition to the
declaration of an alert. operational orders can he transmitted
via this system by voice and reports on the operational readi-
ness status of missile and air units can be received on it.
This system connects the GP (ACP) with missile and air wings
and with loan launch control sites.

In the opinion ofU.S.militsry specialists. the Giant Talk

short ane radio-telephone communication system is able to
provide CINCSAC with stable command and control over all

missile and air units vithin the continental United States and over-
seas nnd also over SAV aircraft in the air.

The Green Pine system is used for command and control of SAG
aircraft in the Arctic: this system provides very short wave
communications for the SAC CF (AC?) and the air army command
postswith aircraft via a network of ground radio relay stations

located in the northern regions of Alaska, Canada, Greenland
and Iceland. It is connected with the SAC CP and AG? by

ground (underwater) cable lines.

The commanders in chiefs of us.Armed Forces in the Atlantic
and Pacific exercise operational command and control over the
SSBN's on combat patrol in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

Command and control is provided by long wave communications
centers--four of them are located on us.territory (the main

one is in Catler, Maryland)--and also by using the TACAHO
system which is designed to maintain stable command and control
of SSBN's if the ground long wave communication centers are

out of commission. The TACAHO system consists of ten specially"
earmarked radio relay aircraft: via their equipment. JCS

orders are transmitted to the SSBN' s in the long wave and very
long wave bands. Equipping the aircraft with veryshort wave,
short wave. medium save. long wave and very long wave trans-
ceiver equipment ensures continuous communications with shore
and airborne command posts. directly or via satellite. In
peacetime. these aircraft are operationally subordinate to

the appropriateu.s.Armed Forces CINC in their area and they
periodically carry out individual patrols in a prescribed area.

CINCNORAD‘s (the specified North American Air Defense Command)
Main Command Post is the main command and control element for
strategic defensive forces. It is located in a _granite cliff

in Cheyenne Mountain (Colorado), at a depth of approximately
500 m. It consists of 11 rooms vith stockpiles of food, water,_
its own poser station. etc., vhere 750- 1000 people work in
complete isolation. -

19
.308 OFFICIAL USE ONLY-'

a...
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A specialized 425L automated system supports the operations

of the NORAD nain CP; this system automatically collects.
processes and displays data on the aerospace situation and

it automatically transmits warning of an attack to over 200
headquarters and over 260 separate sites. All incoming infor-
nation is processed. collated and displayed by a computer on

2 general situation screens and 15 operator displays. At the
sane tine. the data is automatically transmitted to the display
equipment of the command DONE of the JCS. SAC. the Canadian
Defense headquarters and other connands. While compiling infor-
mation on the enemy and friendly weapons status. the computer
develops options for repelling an air raid and commands for
employing air defense forces.

The 625L system is equipped with automated ballistic missile

and aircraft defense command and control systeas. Specially

earmarked channels of secure telephone and digital conmuni-

cations and the automatic switching centers of the A0100!“

and AUTOVON (Automatic Voice Network) systems are used for

command and control. A ZO-channel closed circuit television

network operates within the NORAD CP. -

The main warning center of the Civil Preparedness Agency (civil
defense) and a regional center of the Defense Communications

Agency are located in the underground complex along with the
NORAD CP.

NORAD Alternate Connand Posts are located at zglin (Florida)
and North Bay (Ontario. Canada). The former is located in
shove-ground buildings and is not protected against nuclear
attack. The second AC? is located in the side of a mountain
at a depth of approxiaately 150 m and it is hardened against
nuclear attack.

The formations. large units and units of the0.3.Armed Porces
general purpose forces are combined into five unified commands
according to their operational and strategic missions: the
unified Readiness Com-and in the continental as (it consists
of all Army and Tactical Air force coahat ready large units
and units) and four unified area commands of the US Armed
Porces (European. Atlantic. Pacific and Central and South
American).

Hain and alternate cr's have been created and are operating'
for command and control of the forces included in these com-
aands. The former are designated for command and control of
forces in peacetime. during periods of a deteriorating inter-
national situation and during limited wars. At the_thraat;of
general nuclear missile war. plans call for conducting leader-,
ship of the general purpose forces from the eltsraats;coimaad.“ .
post. ‘ ‘*“‘ ' -"*.7i"'

-¢_-—.L-——-———..-a-—- .._. --. .

' Avii-axha'aina her . . .:.

    

' ~ . A l . . t,
20 '-;y’ - ' 2,37;<"}
roe onrcm use out! ‘ " ' " “ '

, ' . -. .7 .2 _»‘.
., '..a‘-. . A‘ - 1- my {1\-';; a)!
‘ - ‘. ‘. : ~ A ‘2. .

 

‘95.”

, - I“ g 1': W ’, ...,...:. - :.- '
mama; and was acmtbeéﬁr "“WNVFMW
FOR m-‘Plcnu. use ONLY

Plans call.for exercising command and control of Readiness
forces from the main and alternate (airmobila) CP's; these
CP's are equipped with the 492L automated system. It supports
the accomplishment of the following missions: planning the
deployment of Readiness Forces in possible areas of conflict.
planning and conducting strategic transfers of Army and Tactical
, Air Force large units and units, both within the continental
United States and to overseas theaters and planning and supervising opera-
tional and combat training for headquarters and forces.

In the European region. a main GP and an alternate ABNCP (BC-135
aircraft) are used for command and control of U.S.Arned Forces;
in the Atlantic region, a main CP (thelLSNavy's main naval

base at Norfolk) and a seaborne alternate C? on a flagship

are used; in the Pacific region. a main 6? (honolulu, havaii)
and an ABNCP (EC-13$ aircraft) are used.

HHHCCS operations are supported by the Defense Communications
System and by communications systems of the services and unified
and specified commands.

Thus, while conducting active preparations to unleash aggressive
ears, the Pentagon is creating a system of strategic command

and control for its armed forces; this system is a poverful com-
plex uniting elements of both national and military command

and control. This structure conforms to the overall tendency
touard a merger ofU.s.national and military command and control;
in the opinion of American specialists, this tendency is
responsive to the missions of centralized leadership of the
armed forces and of all the country's physical and manpover
resources under the conditions of nuclear missile warfare and

it also enrures incredible profits for the monopolies vhile
preparing for this kind of var.

COPYRlGuTx "Zarubeshnoye voyennoye obozraniye". 1978

9001
080: 1801

21,
m omcrsx: ussouua

 

 

ism - knees-ands.“ M m;w ‘
you OFFICIAL US

30ml

, .1' v ' ‘ . "
4 .. I 'V ' 0 ’- y u
,AJ : aa&&

a
8 policy
1c tendencies.

ugche!h1‘
.putrint °“-

nditut" "‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As reported in the foreign press. the annuallhs.military budget
has presently reached n record figure-~over $130 billion; the
weapons arsenal in being reinforced with new weapons of nose
destruction: vast. long term programs for nodernicing the Anerlcan
Arned Forces and NATO Allied Forces have been developed: measures
have been taken to sake the politico-nilitsry blocs (NATO. ANZUB.
CENTO) and bilateral military alliances more active and stronger:
the export of weapons to reactionary regineu has expanded; etc.

All of this testifies to the (act that the chaepiona of tension
are creating diverse obstacles on the path to a solution of the
cardinal problen of nodern tiees--curbing the arms race. It is
specifically their fault that it has not yet been possible to
conplete the developnent of a nutually acceptable Soviet-Aperican
agreement on strategic offensive area iinitation.

The resolve of thelLS.lendership to not only preserve but also
expand the Aeerican nilitary presence in the nest inportant areas
of the world renains one of the ‘rey features oflLS. global politico-
nilitary strategy.

Maintaining forces and military bases on foreign

territory near the state borders of the USSR. the other
socialist countries and the independent developing states serves
the United States as a means for achieving expansionistic military. political
and econonic goals. with its overseas force groupings. the
Pentagon is attempting to realise the notorious strategy of
"credible deterrence" which is prinarily directed against the
Soviet Union: it is carrying out a neocolonial policy within
whose frasework national liberation love-eats are suppressed.
reactionary puppet regiues are installed and entire peoples and
states are enslaved.

The nest significant groupings oflLS-Arsad Forces abroad are con-
centrated in the countries of western Europe. According to
Depart-eat of Defense data. there are 300.000 an and officers
there. There are also numerous as Arusd Porcss in the countries
of the western Pacific--approxisately 130.000 sea. They are
equipped with the nest up-to—date weapons. including nuclear
weapons.

TheU.S.Armed Porces in the vestarn Pacific are represented by

Arsy and Air Force large units and units located in South Korea.
Japan. raivan and the Philippines and also by the 1th fleet which ;
includes conbat ships of different classes. aviation and Harines. ;
' a
After the defeat of Anericsn inperialisl in Indochina. "the {or- 'i
vard line oilL8.dersnse in the Paciiic” saved to the east on the 'i

‘3
1

c“ l")-

d

.
n-r‘. --

23 ,
roe orncm use ONLY '

J.

:0 ". ~ru' I

.,_..: p .' - u
. .‘ . . . . . a
- ,v m'. __ 2!. w ‘ ‘ Jar": . ‘.'..":.”‘ J c
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

southern flnnk end it now runs along a line tron South Korea

yin Japan (Okinawa) and Taiwan to the Philippines. Horeover.
there was a further lnprovenent in not only Japan's but also
South Korea's strategic role. The Anerican negatine TIN! wrote:
"The Korean peninsula was and is the key to stabil"y in North-
east Asia... Looking ahead to the post-Vietnan era. the creators
of Aserican strategy are already planning a defense line in
Northeast Asia. a line which passes through Japan. Taiwan and
South Korea. The United States has major economic interest in all these
countries and it is linked to then by official. nutual defense
treaties.” The increased nilitnry and strategic inportance of
Northeast Asia found its official reflection in "Pord‘s" so-
called "Pacific Doctrine."

The Aserican nilltary presence in Korea has a long and extrensly
dlsnal history. Looking at the Korean peninsula as a convenient
bridgehead uhich could he used to conduct offensive operations
deep within the Asian continent in case of war and which could
be used to exert politico-nilitary pressure on neighboring
countries in peacetine. the United States sent its forces to Korea in-
nediately after the end of world Her I! in the Far last.

The landing of American Occupation Forces consisting of three
infantry divisions of the 24th Arny Corps began on 8 Septenber
1965 in the Korean port of lnchon. The innodiatelL8.objectiwe
was to accept the surrender of the renains of the Japanese
Ksangtung Aray--vho had laid down their arse under the attacks
of Soviet forcsso-within Korean territory south of the 38th
parallel. Subsequently. they were to ensure fulfillnent of
the decisions which were nade in conjunction with the U88!

and the other Allies and which were directed at creating a
single. independent. denocratic Korea, which is what the
progressive patriotic forces of the Korean people were striving
for.

however. with the help of the occupation forces, the agencies
of deaocratic self-go.ernnent (people's connitteee),which had
appeared in South Korea. were elininated and the activities of
left wing political organirations were linited in every way
possible. At the sane tine. reactionary political figures and
groupings were nobilirsd and united: these reactionaries were
ready to serve Aaerican inperialisn and they expressed the
interests of the local bourgeoisie. landowners and the upper
crust of the bureaucracy.

to order to consolidate the influence of bourgeois reactionary
forces in South Korea. the occupation authorities quickly set

about forning arned forces and a police force nade up of lorean
nationals. In Novenber 19‘s. the headquarters of the Anericen
Occupation Porces established a "National Defense Depertnent'rl

2a ._
roe om'cm use 0er , ' - ‘; ‘, ~"

~-.-.s-4.c -' aiubv’v‘
mu “WWII“. “N's ONLY

\ (Schh‘ck) . \

r Gcnvrn
orucd torcc9 a

In the

lore. and. v
p [to Illltary po tore.
f can: colnand t of 0.3.?orcoo in t
0 vote Irena convict y 11 to n
c used co b t cup bility ha 9 ppet :tuy an
t hdzuvnl of occupa-
I he
7

ounces
'0 Rep bl£c of Koran}.
1 315.000 Inn.
tho tact:-

.0001101,
I: at tho DPIK'o

brook out

0
0:0 chic-to

. the bore}: Korean p . .
the advancing uni-y 3 oupgggog.‘
FOR “FFIGIAL 05h ONLY

The subsequent course of the
inpoocih

North Korea.
era that it one
in 1953. they Vere

nvlnccd the aggreae
lltnty victory over the leK and.
mlatlce egreenent which is still in force up to

sign on or
[e prevent tine.

: should he pointed out that the American force
manner during the one by enploying the barbarian
i thousande of neopl

ntremcly fierce
scorched earth“ tactic.

ere killed nnd shined;

During the past quarter of a century.
of thelhs. Armed Potcee
icnl nucpoeee. the
e policy directed

strength
however. to

defend South Koren ete
s inteteete i

pledges to
ide noeitione end (ecu. .

our vorldv

Atned Poceee ﬁf::...-- "
in South Koren "ere neinteinins the helence of power in en
of the world who: the intereete o! Chine. t e 0883. Jepen end
the United State " Consequently. the ptottected Aeoticen eilitety
nineule ie not ceueed by the ieeeinety
licy ie uni-

preeence on the
eeeiveneee” of the DPR!‘ (ite pence loving no
the ”eecurity" inteteete of the
lfuoee the lying bourgeoie propegende ie
one vhich

ttyin; to
fore the

The foreign
in South Koren is prone
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

The coenander oiILS.Arned Forces in South Korea is also the
coanander of UN Porces. At the same tine. "with the concurrence"
of the Seoul rulers. he exercises operational control over the
South Korean Arned Forces The Anerican generals have con-
cantrated in their hands the functions of developing overall
directives on methods for waging war. coapiling specific plans
for conhnt operations and organising personnel training and
indoctrination both for their forces and the puppet forces.
American supervision and influence on the South Korean Arny

is prinarily exercised by the let Corps Group headquarters

and the nilitary assistance advisory group whose representa-
tives are located in all South Korean large units and units.

The m8.Arny in South Korea stands at over 32.000 non. According
to data free the foreign press. they are aede up of: 3th Arny
headquarters. lst Corps 0roup headquarters. 2nd Infantry Divi-
sion. Ath Missile Connand. 38th Air Defense Artillery Brigade.
11th Army Aviation Group. 2nd Engineer Group. 19th Support

Brigade. signal units and units of the other branch ares and
services.

These forces are equipped with loo tanks. 6 Sergeant guided-
Iissile and honest John free-flight rocket launchers. 10‘

field artillery guns (including 203.2-an and lSS-an howitzers).
145 SAN launchers. a significant nusbar of TOW grcu'a, Arny
Aviation aircraft and helicopters and other aodern weapons and
conbat equipsent.

The 0th Arny headquarters is located in Seoul. Its connanding
general also carries eat the duties of coasander ofu.s.Arned
Forces in South Korea and as coasander of the UN Forces. As
pointed out above. the South Korean Arnad Forces are subordinate
to his. Altogether. over 670,000 servicemen of the Anerican

and South Korean forces are subordinate to hia.

The lot Corps Oroup headquarters is located at Uijonghu (Ca-p
Red Cloud). This conhined fornation of Anarican and South
Korean forces was created in 1971. The connsnding officer of
the corps group is directly subordinate to the 0th Arny Coneandar.
South Korean officers are assigned as the corps group deputy
coaaander and as chiefs of several of the group's staff sections.
The let Corps Group consists of the 0.8.2d Infantry Division
and 12 South Korean divisions. General Stilwell. a forest co-ander
of the 0th Aray. acknowledged that. with a personnel-strength

of 105.000 nan. the lat Corps Group is one of the vorld'sslargedth,'
field ar-ies. lts forces are deployed at forvard lines south ”“
of the deaarcation line on the axis Seoul-Pyongyang. - ‘

«a
i

27
see omcm. use new .

I
‘.
|
9
.i
i
i
f,

'a ' 0-,5 .,_ A

. .n at“ .. u-.- .a-. «moi: enleé-ezzt‘MﬂblehnnittA‘l V V m
FOR “FPICIAL "SK ONLY

The ml infantry Division is located in the second echelon of
the lat Corps Group. at a distance of 20-25 kn free the demarc-
ation line; it occupies a natural corridor which is suitable
for operations by mechanized forces. Part of the division's
forces (up to tuo battalions) is located in innediate proxinity
to the desercation line near Tsnnunjon where the Military
Armistice Com-lesion Headquarters is located. The 2d Infantry
Division headquarters is garrisoned at (Tongduchonni) (Camp
Casey). Organizationally, the division consists of six infantry
and two tank battalions and also reconnaissance. coebat engineers.
army aviation and signal battelions.four field artillery bat-
talions, one nixed Chaparral-Vulcan air defense battalion and
logistics support subunits. The large unit is naintainsd at

a high level of combat readiness: it is 100 percent nanned and
equipped. Altogether. there are approximately 15,000 officers.
sco's and B" in the dint-ion.

The 5th Missile Coennnd includes subunits of Sergeant operational-
tactical guided missiles and honest John tactical free-flight
rockets. its headquarters is located near Chunchon (Camp Page).

of the lat Corps Group and the honest John free-flight rockets
are designated for fire support of the South Korean lst Field .
Army. i

The 38th Air Defense Artillery Brigade unites several independent

Nike Hercules and hawk SAM battalions. lts headquarters and .
connsnd post are located near Osan Air Force Base. In coordina- ;
tion with otheru.s and South Korean air defense forces, the 1
brigade covers the most important force groupings, fixed mili- 5
tary facilities and administrative and industrial centers.

With a personnel strength of 7.000 nan. the Air Force is the
most important component oflLS.cembat strength in South Korea.
It is represented by the 316th Air Division whose headquarters
is located at Osnn. The division includes two air wings. three
tactical air force fighter squadrons and subunits of recon-
naissance, transport and other auxiliary aircraft. It is areed
with 60 P—k Phanton tactical fighter bombers. Your air force
bases are primarily used for combat unit basing: Dean. Kunean,
Kwangju and Taegu. The main eissions of the 315th

Air Division are to provide close air support for Alerican
and South Korean forces, support air defense and conduct air
reconnaissance.

The us Navy does not have any combat large units and units par- ..,
menently_deployed or based in South Korea. although 7th Yleet ._ *

military ships. including strike aircraft carriers. and.sssault.,._ x;
units of the 3d Karine Division fro. Okinawa will.veryggrequentlyxﬁth:

J L;
t J.’

  

28.. f. ‘.':”'I;‘ :1}-

roa orttcm. m om ~ ”Lid
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conduct visits to the peninsula to accomplish so-called "special
missions." An operations staff (approximately 230 nenrﬂtogeUHr)
is the permanent operational agency of the US Navy in South
Korea. It participates in overall operational planning. organ-
izes combat training for fleet and "urine forces in South

Korea. ensures the proper readiness of bases for American

ships on the South Korean coast and monitors and directs the
activities of the South Korean Navy.

when describing the fighting strength and personnel strength

of the American force grouping in South Korea. foreign special-
ists point out that this is only the "advance guard." "the
first echelon" of the forces earmarked to wage a war against
the DPRK. As confirmed in the American press. the "main forces"
are concentrated in the "rear area": namely: a Harine division
in Japan. an infantry division in hawaii. a divisions and

l brigade in the continental US and also 29 squadrons of
combat aircraft and ships of the 3d and 7th Fleets. when a
conflict situation arises or when special arms exercises are
being conducted. the Americans practice priority transfers of
several components of their "rear area reserves" to South Korea
to reinforce the forward grouping on the peninsula.

For example. when one of the largest American-South Korean
exercises code-named Team Spirit-78 was being conducted in
harch 1978 to work out "combat operations under conditions of

a second Korean war, in addition to the headquarters and forces
which are permanently deployed in South Korea, the following
were brought in: units of the 3d Marine Division (Okinawa)
and of the 25th Infantry Division (Hawaii). a battalion of

Lance operational-tactical missiles (08). 3-52 heavy strategic
bombers (Guam). F-lll and P-d fighter bombers (OS and Okinawa).
the Midway and Kitty Hawk attack aircraft carriers. nuclear
powered submarines and other combat ships of the 7th Fleet.

The Pentagon annually spends an average of 820.5 billion to main-
tain the entire contingent of forces that are prepared to con-
duct military operations in Korea.

The fighting strength of the enumerated Army. Air Pores and levy
forces is multiplied many tines over by the nuclear weapons which
are concentrated inu.s.depots and on ships. According to data
from the foreign press. of the more than $.000 units of nuclear ,
munitions deployed in the Pacific. 700-1000 munitions with a

total yield of at least 20 megstons are stored directly-in South
Korea. These are aerial bombs. missile werheadg.-artillery , .
sh\;ls for the 203.2-mm and lSS-mm howitsers. nuclear land mines ‘
and mines. ? ’ '

29 x 7 ' ' -- .
moment use cam ' 1.-

 

5-:
.
at? ‘1‘“

cause 0! 990°°

I...
n .CCO

AgcrlcOB :0“
"b11cz'

{@Inﬂlaiﬂ‘.

oPod 5! Li'“"“.°t
ave
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

Accelerated and purposeful engineer preparations of South Korean
territory for troop combat activity and the comprehensiVe stream-
lining of the entire infrastructure of the southern part of the

peninsula are integral parts of the widespread progran of pre-
parations for war.

This. in broad outline. is the past and present of the American
military presence in South.Korea. The question arises: How long
will the penceloving Korean people be deprived of the opportunity
of uniting thenaelves into a single. independent. peacc1$v1ng
state due to the-American occupation of thd southern part of the
country? The Un.governmant could provide an answer to this
question. It knows very well that the overwhelming majority of
the South Korean population is demanding the-withdrawal of foreign
forces; the DPRK. the countries of the socialist connonwealth.
many developing countries and the progressive forces of the
entire world are striving to achieve this. This deaand found

its reflection in a special resolution of the 30th Session of

the UN General Assembly. '

Democratic forces and seriously rheughtful political figures in

the united States Itself are coming out more and more actively for the with-
drawal of Americans fron South Korea. A public opinion poll

conducted by the Louis harris Service in May 1975 showed that
52 percent of the Americans were egainstU.s.military interference
in Korea. Rank-and-fila Americans are condemning thelLS.govern-

ment's policy of supporting the extremely reactionary regime of
the Seoul dictator Pal: Chang-hui.

Evidently. after considering the trend in the development of views
on the Korean problen within the country and in the international
arena. the currentU.s.President, J. Carter. promised during his

election campaign to withdraw all ground forces from South Korea
if he came to power.

however, this promise has not been carried out up to the present
time. The essence of the decision made on this issue by the
Pentagon and Congress boils down to the fact that the withdrawal
of forces will be accomplished gradually and it will be completed
in approxieately five years. The evacuation of the first echelon
consisting of one battalion is planned for the end of 1978. Plans
call for withdrawing another two battalions in 1979. The dead-
Iineefor -the withdrawal of the remaining forces have not been
announced. All the weapons and conhat equipment of the units

and subunits being evacuated will be turned over to the puppet
army. The withdrawal of ground forces will be balanced by a
significant increase in the Air force stouping andvby new 40-
liveries of arns to the South Korean regime. Special attention
will be devoted to increasing the capability-for conducting re-

connaissance and logistic support for the forces remaining in
South torea. 31 '

FOR OPIICIAL 088 OILY '

uv.

~ - . .1- ~ attic}... 5'.‘ at one!“ amide-Mn. reﬁnement seas“.
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The extreme caution and sluggishness which is being shown in
implementing the decision to withdraw American ground forces
from South Korea is primarily explained by theU.s.uncertsinty
about the stability of the antipopular South Korean regime
and the ability of the puppet ruler Pakiﬂmng-Mﬂ ensure
the interests of American imperialism in the absence of "the
foreign bayonets" which serve as a support for his power. In
connection with this. theU.s.government has again allocated
enormous monetary resources to arm Seoul.

In the 1978-79 fiscal year. $1.165 billion will be allocated to
the military assistance program for South Korea. The Senate
Foreign Affairs Committee approved the program which provides

for deliveries to South Korea. free of charge in the amount of
$800 million ($275 million was granted as credits). of any
military equipment required to "compensate" for the planned
withdrawal of ground forces. Altogether. the South Korean
authorities count on receiving $1.5-2 billion from the Unitsttetes
to fhmncethe second five-year modernisation plan for the
"National" Armed Forces (1976-1980).

The Americans are solidly strengthening Seoul and not rushing

the withdrawal of their forces from South Korea also because
Japan is very sensitive about the issue of eU.S.military presence
on the Korean peninsula. Hashington is trying to prove to its
main Pacific ally that the planned action will not lead to a
"force imbalance" and threaten the very existence of the South
Korean military police state which Tokyo sees as a "cordon
sanitaire against the penetration of communism from the north."

At a bilateral Japanese-American meeting on "security treaty”
issues, which was held in honolulu (hawaii) in January 1978.
the representatives from Hashington assured their Japanese
colleagues that the United States did not intend to reduce its military
presence in the Japanese Islands and the western part of the
Pacific and it did not plan to withdraw its armed forces from
South Korea in the near future.

Accordingly. the favorable attitude toward the u.s.military
presence in Asia on the part of China also influences the
Pentagon's plans and concepts. According to American press
reports. the Chinese leaders convinced the President's national
Security Advisor. 2. Brsesinski--who recently visited Seijing-
not to withdraw American forces from South Korea.

Fianlly. the idea of reducing the scale of thelLS.military pre-
sence in South Korea was met at bayonet point by'many shameless
us.eiliterists since. in their opinion. it runs counter_to the.

32 1
son omcm: use our ' ” -

. -: Fr
‘1' - . '.1 ’m‘ a? :11:

"4 I‘m a .3)! '

 

sen. -_- ,.-. ......'\:. h. ﬁlming”;
VON ()l-‘PICIM. USE ONLY

spirit of thelh5.Asinn-Pacific Ocean strategy. the meaning of
which was expressed by H. Brown. the Secretary of Defense.

in his speech in Los Angoles in February 1978: “We are and
will he the main power in the Pacific Ocean. He cannot be
strong in Europe and weak in Asia. After all. our strength
in Asia influences our strength in Europe and vice verse."

Consequently. the widely publicizedU.s.intention to withdraw
its ground forces from South Korea is actually a political
trick. It cannot lend anybody astray since it is completely
obvious that, when approaching the Korean problem. the issue
must be the complete, immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of all foreign forces from South Korea. the dissolution of

the so-called "UN Command" and replacing the military
armistice agreement with a peace treaty. This is the only key
to creating favorable conditions to convert the armistice in
Korea to a stable peace and to accelerate the unification of
both parts of the country. The mmx government's efforts,
which are receiving the full support of the Soviet Union and
the other countries of the socialist commonwealth, are directed

at achieving these conditions.

COPYRIGRT: "Zarubazhnoye voysnnoye obosreniye", 1978

9001
680: 1801

33 g

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ‘;;-1
. ' “1.". a .
' ‘ “ ixiu“rr “"“

0‘» u - ,‘.».‘.

Mu-.s»::rmuéasharmgneuuensm;saga mawagic
VOR OFFIC!AL USE ONLY

Runotnn no 10. 0c: 18

rut: Catticto 1n

“Ute of Air:
Sgccialtoto"l

lTe:t\ General-purpose nave
the rating circle: of the United States an
ad he attack1ns nuclcu
I utt-

t the
on is nttcrnf: c .
or. donut-incd above all by chci

craft carriers
. broné rung

t nur
consta‘ targets.

curricro are
a highly prop.

striking fora. at so:
{otcon in nuclonr

tho Into
stratogtc
on in V10: ﬁa-

Aircraft
rad rotorvc of

vars and

of thc an: of nssrcuut
on. in locul warn.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

build one more ship or this same type. As the atomic aircraft carriers
join the fleet Midway type ships will be deactivated. In the future
the leaders of the Defense Department and 0.5. Navy, giving as their
reason the high cost of atomic aircraft carriers. plan to build ships
of the some class with smaller displacement and conventional power
plants. At the sane tine the existing aircraft carriers are to be
nodernized to extend their service life to 60 years.

The English Navy's only aircraft carrier. the Ark Royal, is to be with-
drawn into the reserves in the early 1980's. The French Navy has the
multipurpose carriers Clemenceau and Pochc.

Ten of the 16 aircraft carriers belonging to these countries are per-
nsnently stationed in the Atlantic (including the 6th Pleat's two
carriers in the Mediterranean) and six are in the Pacific (two of then
in the 7th Fleet). In extraordinary conditions. according to the
assessnent of the 0.8. military-political leadership. 85 percent of
the American aircraft carriers should be in full combat readiness.
Hith the beginning of war they will operate as part of the NATO strik-
ing force in the Atlantic (6-5 carriers). NATO striking forces in the
Southern Europe theater (2). and 7th Fleet (3-4 carriers). It is
planned to use the English aircraft carrier together with the American
ones as part of the NATO striking forces in the Atlantic, while the
French carriers will operate in the Mediterranean.

when the atoaic carrier Karl Vinson is built the u.s. naval command in-
tends to create four atosic aircraft carrier groups (two in the Atlantic
and two in the Pacific). In the opinion of American specialists. it
will be possible to use then as means of "rapid reaction" and shift
then on an operational basis to regions of heightened tension or send
theain toreinforce existing groupings.

As a rule. aircraft carriers and their escort ships operate as part of
sultipurpose (striking) carrier groups. Foreign military specialists
believe that it is necessary to assign up to four atomic guided missile
cruisers to escort an atomic aircraft carrier. and up to 10 surface
ships of the cruiser, destroyer, and frigate classes for a conven-
tional aircraft carrier. In addition. atoaic torpedo boats are in-
cluded in the escort and deployed in the sectors where a seating with
enemy submarines is most likely. In view of the shortage of atomic
ships a mixed cosposition is allowed for the escort with atomic

guided missile cruisers and Spryuens-typa destroyers.

Judging by material in the foreign press, when cosbat actions begin
it is planned to use the aircraft carriers for the following primary
missions: winning and keeping superiority at sea. covering nuclear
strikes against sea and coastal targets, operating blockadss in sea
regions. defending sea lanes in the ocean, supporting the. landing of
landing parties. and aviation support for the action of ground forces. e"
in coastal sectors. . '

 

35 I . . V7125;-
ron omem as; ONLY 3‘1:.-‘7 jg!” -_-.: ‘
FOR (WPICIM. USE ONLY

winning and holding superiority at sea assumes achieving superiority in
the air. at sea, and under the sea of sufficient time and scale to
carry out the necessary operation. Judging by material in the foreign
press this is the primary mission of the American Navy. The naval come
mand expects to accomplish it primarily by multipurpose use of aircraft
carriers which can. under current conditions, fight against aerial.
surface. and underwater enemies.

Modern American aircraft carriers can operate in the assault and anti-
sub nodes at once or in either node separately. The combined mode is
considered basic for winning superiority at sea. In this case the

air wing will include heavy RA-SC vigilant ground-attack reconnaissance
planes (one squadron. three planes). A-6 Intruder and A-7 Corsair-2

ground—attack planes (three squadrons. £0 planes). P-b Phantom-2 or
F-lé Tomcat fighter planes (two squadrons. 24 planes). 5-3 Viking
nntisuh planes (one squadron, 10 planesLSH-3Seaking entiaub helicopters
(one squadron. eight aircraft). 8-2 hawkeye longvrange radar surveil-
lance pianes (four). aa-ss Prowler electronic suppression planes. and
KA—6D Intruder refueling planes (four).

The striking variation assumes concentration of primary efforts on de-
livering strikes against shore objects and supporting ground forces.
This variation is possible only after superiority at sea and in the
air has been won. In this case the number of ground-attack planes is
increased through a small reduction in the number of fighters and anti-
suh planes.

Judging by material in the American press. the antisub variation of
carrier use is envisioned to defend ses lanes and to support strategic
troop movements. In this case. the air wing may include up to 36
antiaub planes and helicopters (that is. about 60 percent of the total
number of aircraft on board).

Foreign specialists believe that the possibility of varying the compo-
sition of the air wing to respond correctly to the expected threat is
an important advantage of the multipurpose aircraft carrier. In their
opinion. this kind of operational flexibility can be achieved by mov-
ing the base of aircraft from one aircraft carrier to another or by
flying them out from shore_sirfields.

One of the missions to be accomplished while winning superiority at
sea is fighting groups of enemy surface ships. Carrier-based ground-
attack aircraft and the surface ships and atomic submarine of the
escort forces are enlisted to participate in this operation. ’ ‘

Carrier-based ground-attack aircraft are viewed as the.chief means of
striking enemy ships at sea. They can use air—to-surface guided-l -' .
missiles and bombs. According to information in the foreign press;‘j‘4

the ground-attack planes are capable of delivering effectivafstriges 1

against surface ships in a radius ofil,300-1.300fkilompters.gfconaide

ing that tha_aircraft carrier group can travel pp: 0 60Q miles (about

p

1.110 kilometers) in Zoghours, given favorahle conditions 1g

  
  
  
 
  
 

. a

. V r ‘4?
FUR GFFICIAL UﬁE uNLY

In lhls line can effmzliw-ly mmllur .1 water area of about 3 million
square kilometers. Foreign military specialists also caliulate that
atomic aircraft carriers can wage continuous cosbat actions for about two
weeks with two flights daily by each plane.

The primary method or action by carrier‘based aviation against ships at
sea is messed. low-altitude strikes (run several directions. The actions
of the striking groups of carrier -based ground-attack aircraft are sup-
ported by organizing advance detection and tracking of enemy surface
ships and guiding the planes to the targets.

in the interests or increasing the capabilities of aircraft carrier
forces in the battle against groups of surface ships. the American cos-
nsnd plans to are all carrier-based ground-attack and antisub planes,
base patrol planes. cruisers. destroyers. frigates. and atosic tor-
pedo boats with Harpoon antlship guided sissiles. These sissiles have
a firing range or iii) kilometers. As a result. the aircraft carrier
group will be capable of using several dozen such missiles against
enemy surface ships siamltaneously. This, foreign specialists believe,
will allow the ground-attack planes to deliver strikes against ships
without entering the tone of action of their air defense weapons, which
will improve the effectiveness of air strikes generally.

The foreign press reports that search-and-destroy groups of ships arsed
with ship-to-ship oissile complexes. artillery installations. and tor-
pedo launchers may also participate in strikes against ships at sea.

Carrier-based antisub ships and helicopters, surface escort ships.
stosic torpedo subserines, and base patrol aircraft are used to fight
submarines. These forces are capable of sonitoring the underwater
area in a radius of up to 200 miles (about 370 kilo-stars) fro: the
aircraft carrier.

when involved simultaneously in fighting surface ships and subssrines.
the aircraft carrier. in the opinion of NATO military specialists. lust
constantly change course and speed and sodify its order in forsetion.
This significantly linits the taking off and landing of the planes and
reduces the conbat capabilities of the carrier as a whole.

Judging by saterisl in the foreign press. where several types of threats
are present and the carrier's freedos of ssneuver because the decisive
factor in preserving its cosbat stability. the fight against surface
ships can be successfully waged by aircraft of the Harrier type. which
are capable of taking off and landing on the deck regardless of the
carrier's heading.

The delivery of nuclear strikes reseins the nest isportsnt sission of
carrier-based aviation after winning superiority at sea. according to
U s. and NATO naval specialists. The Asericsn cos-end considers eir-
craft carriers a reserve of strategic offensive forces. however. the
task of psrticipsting in a general nuclear offensive has not been fully
withdrawn from then and they practice it periodically during heed-
qusrters exercises of the unified and national arsed forces.

37 . q
10!. orrrcras 033 near ‘ 'u;‘- 7,-2‘,ff

9‘ 7;,

» ' I Lii.‘ -" ‘5‘.
- .:«:.~. r. n... '0'}. r-zrurhf'm. .. ﬂ;sh: -U {3waﬁbﬁ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when conducting blockade. actions the primary efforts of carrier-based
aviation and escort ships are to be concentrated on countering groups

of enemy naval forces. preventing their passage through straits and nar-
rows. delivering strikes against bases. laying ninefields. disrupting
sea lanes. and achieving tactical superiority in the air by using car-
rier-based fighter planes and siaultaneously delivering strikes against
enesy airfieids with ground-attack aircraft.

As the experience with carrier-based forces used by the United States in
the war of aggression in Viet Nam shows. nassed and echeloned actions by
carrier-based aviation say he carried out in delivering strikes against
hases. airfielda. and other land targets in the coastal tone.1

The defense of sea lanes is directly tied to winning superiority at sea.
in the opinion of the coanand of the U... Armed Pbrces. the course and
outcose of a war will depend largely on continuous aovsaent of troops.
weapons. and various supplies across the ocean to foreign territory. in
particular to western Europe.

Aircraft carriers continue to be the aain forces for solving this probles.
Their sission is to wipe out and neutralise forces capable of stopping

or significantly disrupting shipaents of crucial types of strategic raw
eaterisls. troops. and ailitary equip-eat. Foreign specialists consider
auhaarines arsed with winged nissiles and torpedoes to be the chief

forces that can operate aggressively on sea lanes. In this case. the
security of sea lanes will be insured primarily by aircraft carriers in
the antisub variation where the air wing has a sari-us nuaher of anti-
sub planes and helicopters.

The foreign military press observes that to support the crossing of
inportant convoys it is neat advisable to use an aircraft carrier group
which advances into the threatened sector and fights essay forces under
water. on the surface. and in the air and wipes than out or neutralizes
then on the approaches to the convoy crossing routes also.

According to the views of the American cot-land and the experience of
typical 0.8. Navy and NATO exercises such as ”Ocean Safari." "Open
Gate." "Dawn Patrol." "Safe Pass." and "Sardinia." aircraft carrier
forces are to be enlisted to support the landings of landing parties
and the actions of ground forces. In this case two or three aircraft
carrier groups are usually assigned to support the landing of a series
expeditionary division. The carrier groups give the landing detach-
aents cover during the sea crossing. win superiority at sea and in
the air in the landing region. provide all kinds of defense. and give
air support to the landing forces during the batt‘e for the landing.2

-—__—-

1 For eon detail on this issue see mums mm ososmm
No n. 1977. p 61. (editors). '

3 Concerning air support for a sea landing. see WWW! 7
OBOZRMIYB lie 12. 1977. p 71. (Bditors). '- - -

  

as .
res omcm. ass out! ,
. , , ‘ ‘-.‘2' «a:

,. _.; :33; "lift-:35 .3512 "mm;

lg:

 

.7.
.“ "1‘ .. ~s'.’.
,. ....'l...'....... ...-;-.--..a$s:&.sm.-¢rf.
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

Carrier-honed ground-attach aviation supports conhat action by ground
forces by delivering strikes Independently and in cooperation with tac-
tlcnl aviation against troop hattlc ioraatlons. missile launching sites.
artillery fire positions. connand posts. and radio and radar equipaent.
Calling attention to the importance of this mission. the 0.8. naval coon
sand believes that it can only he nerforacd after winning superiority in
the sea regions where the aircraft carriers oust be assembled to support
the actions of ground forces.

Thus. the American command considers aircraft carriers. which have great
capabilities for perforaing a broad range of sissions. to be the primary
means of waging battle at sea. At the sale tine. as foreign specialists
acknowledge. they have the following shortcomings: significant vulner-
ability not only to nuclear but also to conventional weapons which. if
they hit vital parts such as the catapults. aircraft arresting units.

or "island" [superstructure]. can lake it iapossible to use aircraft;
low level or fire safety: reduced combat capability during the taking
off and landing of aircraft. when the carrier nest aaintain a constant
course: significant dependence on Heather conditions for the actions of
carrier-based aircraft and on supply at sea for the aircraft carrier
group.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye Voyennoye Obosreniye". 1978

11.176
650: 1801

39.-
ros omcm. use on!

-.-I
. a . ' is
.975, g x . ~ '1'“ .’.E
...- if airpjigfg {(2.}

. . .. .' - 3- . ’,,.,.,
|..-. i'lv -..=. . . .. .-. . . 5.x. .44 ....e.‘._.;.-.J-.a... "3.04.353 :‘sdmumaeawehﬁ
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WNTS ON THE 0.8. 9' .Vliu'ﬂl FLEET

Moscow ZARUBEZIINOYS OYMOYB OBOZRENIYB in Russian No 10. Oct 73
algncd to presn 5 Oct 78 pp 74-76

[Article by Capt lst Rank 1. Kare-0v: "The 11.8. 7th Pleat"!

[Text] The ruling circles of the United States are using their opera-
tionnl fleet broadly and actively to carry out their plans of aggres-
sion against the independence and security of the vorld'a peoples.

The 7th fleet has a special place along these fleets. it was for-ad in
1943 to take part in conbst actions against the Japanese navy in the
western part of the Pacific Ocean. and after the war was left there to
support the interests of Anerican capitalists in the Far East and South-
east Asia. As foreign nilitary specialists say. this is the only fleet
in the 0.3. Navy vhich has been involved in conbat actions since World
Her I! (three years of the var of aggression in Korea in 1950-1933 and
sore than 10 years of participation in crisinal adventures in Indochina
in loot-1971.).

The "sons of responsibility" of the 7th Fleet covers the Pacific and
Indian Ocean and is lisited on the north by the Eating Strait . on
the south by Antarctica, on the east by the neridian 160' B. (960
kilo-tars east of the island of Goes). and on the west by the seridisn
90 2.

.
I
!
I
.

 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 

Judging by naterial in the Aserican silitary press, the 7th Pleat has
been given the following primary sissions: winning and keeping superi-
ority at sea, fighting the enssy fleet at sea and in base. supporting '
ground forces. supporting sas landing operations, defending ass lanes. ..
supporting the activity of atonic Iiesile sub-arises on cadet;.p_atrol ,
in the western part of the PacificOcaan. and dunstrstisgtbe list. ' ' '

silitary presence. .
‘fo accoqliah these aisaions the 7th that has ,ships'pf various classes. 5-“ I

aviation. and urines. ‘l'ha Ito-bar of'ships andp’ksonﬂiﬂgot'eon- . 1 '
stant. but rather depends on the situationfin gorgeous-engmire new! ;— . .
.bility.“ thus. in 1959 the fleet'had 12$ maggoporw»

not'counting lbrinas: in 19f9'the «Wham; ' ' " ' " ’ ', ‘
37.090, and ‘in 1971 teens-t nee ssfanipagajaa gum-east?-

‘ 3:33
30,-:- . . i- was

  

a
Fiili iii-'l-‘liZIAl. "iii-Z ”NIX

la the foreign mllltarv press. the 7th Fleet had 50 warships and auxiliary
vessels in l977. including two multipurpose aircraft carriers. five

guided missile cruisers. nine destroyers (sis of them with guided
missiles). six irigates, rive submarines (four atomic and one diesel).

and eight landing ships. The total number or personnel (with marines)
wmnhmtShMm,

One of the basic indexes of the fighting strength of a fleet is the num-
her of aircraft carriers. lhtring the period of greatest escalation of
the war in indnchlna the fleet had six. but after the war ended it was
officially announced that the Ith Fleet would have just two aircraft
carriers. Judging by material in the foreign press. in 1977 the fleet
included two multipurpose aircraft carriers. the Hidway and the Enter?
prise (the latter is atomic). An air wing is based on each of them.
Each wing has sevoral squadrons (3-é ground-attack, two fighter, and
two antisub airplane and helicopter squadrons) and individual aviation
detachments (reconnaissance. transport . refueling, radioelectronic
fighting. and long-range radar detection). The Enterprise takes 85-95
planes and helicopters on board, and the Midway takes 75.

The aircraft carriers are defended against enemy naval forces, above all
aviation and submarines. by escort ships, including guided missile sub-
marines. destroyers (some with guided missiles). frigates. and atomic
torpedo submarines. in the opinion of foreign military specialists.
with the adoption of Harpoon and Tomahawk winged missiles in the late
i970's and early i980's these classes of ships will also acquire of-
fensive (striking) capabilities.

The missions of actively fighting enemy submarines and surface ships,
escorting aircraft carriers through regions of high submarine danger.
and conducting reconnaissance are assigned to atomic torpedo submarines.
The diesel submarine which the fleet has is used for training purposes
and transporting and landing reconnaissance and sabotage groups.

11w flect's amphibious forces include a helicopter-carrying landing
vessel that carries )2 transport-landing helicopters, a helicopter
landing ship dock, three tank landing vessels, two cgrgo landing trans-
ports. and a landing transport dock. The primary mission of these
ships is to cross by sea, land. and support the actions of the two as-
peditionsry battalions. The latter are assigned from the 3rd Marine
Expeditionary Division. which is formed from the 3rd Marine Division
station on the island of Okinawa and an air wing located at the air
bases of iwahuni and Putema in Japan. According to the foreign press.
plans for the coming years call for including one general-purpose
anawa type landing ship in the fleet; this ship is capable of taking
on an expeditionary marine battalion.

The fleet has six mobile rear support auxiliary vessels to support the
actions of its warships: the auxiliary vessels are three high-speed
comprehensive supply transports. two ammunition transports. and one
provisions transport. The service forces also include base ships,
tankers. and ocean tugs.

61 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

. . - .. .
4‘»- . &-'-'..'I""
. t t. ..-»_ , J. _--

-~.’.-.-.- ”bu- ms. 7. .‘..'--“uhr'—r ..a..;.-.a.-u_.na M
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

The 7th Fleet aviation has. in addition to carrier-based aircraft. four

hase patrol nlr squadrons (with nine P-Jc Orion planes apiece) stationed
at air bases In Japan and the Philippines. Radar reconnaissance is pro-
vided by EP-lﬁ planes from the inland of Guns.

Organizationnlly. the forces of the 7th fleet are b oken into task forces
designated by 2-digit numbers in which the first nusber is always "7"
(nee diagram below).

Organization of the u.s. 7th Fleet

An'mmﬂymmni
) 7m: maumuv
' I” ‘

  
   

   

 
 

'23.)" 652.2"

' .a‘l alum:- II: 1

Key: (n) Contender of the 7th (f) 73rd (support forces);

Fleet: (3) 76th (sub-arias forces);
(b) Cruise Fleet Head- (h) 75th (escort ships);

quarters (on a missile (1) 76th (landing):

cruiser); (1) 77th (aircraft carrier);
(c) Task Forces; (k) 79th (serine):
(d) 70th (co-posits); (1) 71st and 78th (teaporary);
(e) 72nd (base patrol avia- (a) Operational Groups;

tion): (n) Aircraft Carrier.

The 70th Task Force (composite) varies in conposition depending on the
situation. It nay have several operational groups of different naval
forces (ship and aircraft carrier search and destroy groups. groups of
sineaveepers, sub-arines. and the like). It also includes the flagship
of the 7th Fleet with the headquarters on board (this is usually a lis-
sile cruiser). Unlike the other ships of the fleet which are replaced
every six months. the flagship stays in the task force for 2-3 years.
in recent tines the flagship has been the lissile cruiser Oklaho-a
City. a Galveston type ship registered at the Yokosuka naval base in
Japan. a '

The 72nd Task Force (base patrol aviation) operates both in the fleat'a
”zone of responsibility" and far beyond its boundaries. The foreign,~r
press has reported planes from airfielda in Thailand asking flight! to

the Sea of Okhotsk, the island of Diego Garcia, the Arabian §es.-and , -
the Tndian Ocean. The task force has about 60 orion type planes in

various sodifications. ' , a 'f : "', _',n V 7
‘ 42 l .. . = '. .'T>f‘1;
FOR OPPICFALIUSB‘OULY". " '. »~‘ “-‘if

    

: . - '1..A '3 #7’.¥£”J
M "afar, grid 3:5" m raga-M

ti
r
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 11rd Task Force (service forces) performs logistical missions for
fleet uhips at sea. Judging by information in the foreign press. the
73rd Task Force is capaule of supplying the ships of the 7th Fleet with
all supplies for a period of 1-2 months without returning to base.

The 70th Task Force (submarine forces) provides antisubnarine defense
for the fleet's aircraft carrier units and supports the reconnaissance
and sabotage activities of naval special forces and marines. It has
four atomic torpedo submarines and a diesel-transport landing submarine.

The 75th Task Force (escort ships) escorts aircraft carriers and land-

ing ships. provides them with air and antiaub defense. and gives mis-
sile and artillery support to sea landings.

The 76th Task Force (landing) is designated for sea crossings and land-
ing parties of marines on an enemy coast. It includes two Amphibious
Ready Groups (ARO's) of landing ships: group Alpha and group Bravo.
The Alpha group provides transportation and landing of a marine expe-
ditionary battalion by helicopters. The Bravo group will land the same
marine contingent (up to 2,000 men) with floating landing vessels.

The 77th Task Force (aircraft carrier) is the foundation of the fleet's
fighting strength. It has between two and six aircraft carrier groups
depending on the situation. The aircraft carrier group ordinarily in-
cludes a multipurpose aircraft carrier. 8-10 cruiser class escort ships.
a destroyer or frigate. and an atomic torpedo submarine.

The aircraft carrier task forces played an active part in the war of
aggression in Indochina. With 75-95 aircraft on each ship and an aver-
age of 1.6 crews per aircraft they were able to maintain a quite high
level of aviation use and carry out 100-120 aircraft missions per day
from the aircraft carrier. According to information in the American
press, each pilot averaged about 20 nissions a month. some as much as
28. Depending on the military—political situation on the Indochinese
peninsula and weather conditions, task force aviation carried out be-
tween 2.000 and 8.000 aircraft missions each month from 1965 to 1972.

During the 8-10 months when the aircraft carriers were included in the
7th Fleet they spent as much as 40 percent (and in some cease almost
80 percent) of their rise in the combat maneuver area. For emample.
during its 9.5 months in the western part of the Pacific in 1965. the
carrier Coral Sea spent eight months in the Gulf of Tonhin.

according to a report in the American journal OUR NAVY. in just one
tour in Southeast Asia (8.5 months) of the aircraft carrier Hancock,

the planes based on it performed 11}000 missions and dropped 9,140
tons of ammunition on Viet Nam. . 2 3 “

During the battle for [he Sash in January-April 1960, thh‘carriar-'. -;'">
based aircraft of the task force performed as amny aa’l;000'mdaaions.‘
a day just for bombing and - strafins.' and in 77' days carried out-‘m‘ore

' - ' -'v'/‘:u" .‘

‘3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than 25.000 missions. dropped 100.000 aerial bosbs of various calibers.
and expended about 700,000 shells.

Carrier-based aircraft were used extensively for the sassive sining of
the territorial waters of North Viet Nan between May and November 1972.
According to official Pentagon statements. 11,000 nines were placed.
3,000 on internal waterways and 8.000 in the territorial waters. The
foreign press obaerved that practically all the 0.8. Navy's aircraft

carriers and up to 95 percent of the flight personnel of carrier-based
aviation took part in conbat actions in Viet has.

The aircraft carriers of the 7th Fleet are periodically deployed in the
Indian Ocean. In the fall of 1971 during the Indian-Pakistani conflict
an aircraft carrier force including the atomic carrier Enterprise. a
helicopter-carrying landing vessel. a high-speed conprehensiva supply
transport. and seven escort ships cane into the Indian Ocean to blockade
India. The group operated in the Indian Ocean for a south. In 1973

the carrier Hancock was stationed in the Indian Ocean in connection with
the Arab-Israeli Her. In all. between 1971 and 1976 I3 Aserican air-

force carrier groups were sent to the Indian Ocean. 10 free the 7th Fleet
and three from the Atlantic.

The 79th Task Force (marine) is usually ssde up of units from the eerine
division on the island of Okinawa and a ssrins air wing in Japan. Two
expeditionary battalions free these units are constantly stationed on
the ships of the Amphibious Reedy Group (Alpha and Bravo) of the 76th
Task Force. The 0.8. Marines were used in Viet hen for actions on the
coastal flanks of ground forces. During the fighting sarine subunits
and units were landed on different sectors of the coast to reinforce
groupings of Aserican and South Vietnansse troops.

The 71st and 78th are tesporsry task forces. The 71st Task Force is
for-ed in case of an abrupt worsening of the situation in the Sea of
Japan and Yellow See. For exesple, in April 1969 a task force of four
aircraft carriers, a battleship. three cruisers. and 22 destroyers use
formed for a 'ﬂenonstrstion of force." The 78th Task Force (two heli-
copter-landing vessels, a sissile cruiser, e destroyer. a helicopter
landing ship dock. and seven ninesweepers) see forsed to clear ednee
from the territorial waters of Viet “as in February-July I973.

The ships making up the 7th Fleet are replaced each six soothe by
cachet-ready ships of the Pacific Fleet. The eight ships-peresnently
assigned to naval bases in the western part of the Pacific are sn.ex-
ception. There are six ships (the carrier Midway, the Oklahogpity -
the sissile cruiser that is the fleet flagship. two destroyers, and . ‘
two frigates) are based at Yokosuka. one prosisions transport is based
at Sssebo. and a diesel transport-landing'subserine is hosed st'Snbic
Bay in the Philippines. ‘ , . . ' - ' . ‘

At the present ties. to judgeIfroe reports in the foreign;pr3es.;thehi“rari-
question of persenaotly placing an Asericsp stonic-aircrait'édrrier in a ';
the western part of_the Pacific is under discussion._; ‘,:v» ” 1.: 5'

     

r ’M.°ﬂi¢1€¢§9§399!151235"L- - '
~ it. h ‘ 93:5}5-ihr-hhraifﬁﬁkc
«-;~.r¢.1” tsw”-;=EH&3.L€ '“' iitze ‘

.. -‘.,'._ .. .' .
{1&1qu ‘ri‘é s.
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

The chief naval bases of the 7th Fleet are Yokosuka and Sasebn in Japan,
Suhic Bay in the Philippines. and Apra Harbor on Tues. Its chief air
bases are Agana an Guam. Atsugi. Iwakuni. Mlsawn. and Putems in Japan,
and Cuhl Point In the Philippines. They provide supply and repair ser-
vices for airplanes and ships of all classes, including Forrestal type

aircraft carriers. The islands of Okinawa and Taiwan are also used to
base the fleet's forces.

The forces of the 7th Fleet carry on vigorous activities and joint can-
bat training with U.S. allies in Southeast Asia and the Far East.

Actions to win nupcrlority at sea in "regions of vital importance to the
United States" are worked on during virtually all large national and
combined naval exercises by the allied countries. The nest instruc-
tive in this respect were the Redex nodel exercises of the 7th Fleet.
held in the region south of Japan and east of the fhilippines.

At the klmpac exercise the naval forces of Australia. Canada. New
Zealand. and Japan were enlisted to work on defense of sea lanes. which
was also the subject of the Midlink exercise in which ships and air-
craft fron Great Britain and Iran participated.

Landing training is carried out during unit exercises by subunits and
units of the 3rd Harineoivision. landing and multipurpose exercises of
the 7th Fleet, and joint exercises with the navies of the allied coun-
tries. The Kangaroo exercise conducted near the east coast of
Australia by the navies of the ANZUS bloc was an instructive example
of landing exercises.

within the framework of "rendering assistance and moral support" to the
pro-American regimes in Thailand and South Korea, each year the number
of exercises in which the 7th Fleet and the armed forces of these
countries participate grows. The largest one was the Aaerican-Thai

exercise Sea Siam and the American-South Korean Hole: and Teen Spirit
exercises.

The facts given above illustrate the aggressive orientation of the mis-
sions performed by the v.3. Navy's 7th Fleet, the prisary striking
force of the Pentagon in the Pacific and Indian oceans.

COPYRIGRT: "Zarubeshaoye voyeanoye oboareniye", 1978

11.176

' C80: 1801

‘5
FOR OFFICIAL OS! OHLY
FOR 0??“ka USE ONLY

CW5 ON 0. S. “HAL BASES AND PORTS

Noscov ZARUBBZHROYE VOYENROYS OBOZRBMYB in Russien No 10. Oct 78

signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 98-402

[Article by Col (Ree) V. Stepenov: “hovel Beses end Ports in the

United Stereo")

[Text] within the systes of the U. 5. Armed Forces s significant plsee

is allotted to novel forces designsted to terry out the emusive de-
signs ited Ststes hove the sost poverful

of Aeericsn isperislise. The lln
sub-nines. eircrsft terriers. cruisers.
hosts end lsunches. lending end sineeveepins ships.
vessels.

hovel evietion hes terrier-hosed
fighters end sntisub.retonneisssnee end other ‘p

A fer-flung network of. novel hoses, hsse points, end other shore

instelletions hes been built to disperse the navy
these hoses on! insul-

bst trsining. end support everydsy setivities.

lotions ere locsted not only in the continentel pert

Ststes but also on fore

According to intonation in the foreign s t
and other novel shore instsllstions in the United Stetes ere concen-

trnted on the Atlsntic cosst. This is

theater of slot is essigned e spec

Iilitsry Conant
cosst: the u
Anspolis, Boston.
Portmuth. Philsdelphis.
FUN OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aooring places and repair facilities for a large nuaber of ships and
vessels or all classes. including assault aircraft carriers. The port
and base have a water area of 25.9 square kilometers.

New London and Charleston are the priaary bases of the atomic missile
subamrines. They provide bases. repair services. and supplies not only
for atomic aissile subaarines but also for all classes of surface ships.
The arsenal of Poseidon and Polaris ballistic missiles is located at the
Charleston Naval Base. and atonic missile and torpedo subnarines are
built near New London. New London is an important naval training center.
as well as a rear base for U. 8. Navy atonlc missile subaarines. The
port and naval base at New London can be used by ships with drafts of
9.2 aeters. The Newport Naval Base is one of the prinory training
centers for personnel of the U. .. Navy. A significant share of the
naval .ch001,.lncluding the naval college and aany special courses are
located here. in addition to scientific research institutions and rear
services agencies. The base has a total of about 6.500 servicemen.

Little Creek is the base of the aaphihioua forces of the Atlantic Fleet.
The waterfront is 1.2 kilometers long and the nations depth at the docks
is five actors. The base provides base services for landing ships and
transports and trains ground forces for landing operations.

The naval shipyard located at the Portsmouth Naval base specialises in
building and repairing atoaic aissile and torpedo submarines. It has
seven drydocks and 9 6 kilooaters of waterfront. During world liar ll
Portsaourh was one of the lost iaportant centers for the foraation of
convoys traveling free the United States to Europe.

There are five naval bases and base points on the Pacific coast of the
United States (with the exception of Alaska). They are the aain naval
base at San Diego. the Breoerton base point. and the naval bases at
Coronado. Los Angeles. and San Francisco. Coronado is the base of the
ll. 8. Pacific Fleet's aaphibious forces. The base has a waterfront of
about five kilo-stars and a channel 12.8 asters deep leading to the_
docks. The base provides base services for landing ships and trans-
ports and trains the ll. 8. Arsed Forces for landing operations.

The lass Angeles Naval base has a large nuaber of wall-equipped docks
accessible to large ships. The shipyards there are capable of build-
ing and repairing ships of various classes. Torpedo firing ranges are
located on the approaches to the base. The Ireasrton base point has
a naval shipyard. The U. 3. ,Pacific Fleat's arssnal of Polaris nia-
siles is located near the base.

Intensive vorh is now underway at Bangor (north of Ire-ertoo in ﬂash-
ington) to build a base to service the Trident atoaic mu. sub-
aarines. The U. 8. Congress appropriates aimificant mounts each
year for this construction project. In the 1976-377Ifi‘scal'year, for
eats-pie. [$0.5 aillion dollars was appropriated; in 1977-78 the-figure
was lZl.‘ lillion. ’

4.7. ~ _ _. .' '
roe orncm use my. 'x

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal ports in Alaska are located on the southern coast which
does not freeze and in accessible to ships year-round. The largest
ports are Anchorage (2.3 million tons). Ketchiksn (2.1 million tons).
Sksgway (1.5 million tons). Hrsngcl (1.0 million tons), Sitku (1.0
niilinn tuna). and Hhittier (700.000 tons). They play an exceptionally
ispnrtant role because the bulk of shipments from the United States to
Alaska. including nilitary shipsents.noves by sea transport.

Further development of the country's ports is being achieved by build-
ing new wharves and floating docks. equipping then with highly prou
ductive loading and unloading units. expanding the network of rail sid-
ings. building warehouse facilities and open areas for cargo storage.
and construction of outlying points to receive and transfer petroleum
products. The construction and equipping of container docks is re-
ceiving special attention.

Powerful shipbuilding and repair facilities which build and repair
large numbers of ships and vessels of various classes have been estab-
lished on both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the United States.
the Aserican press observes. In wartime it is expected that these fa-
cilities will be used in the interests of the U. 8. Navy.

COPYRIGHT: ”Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniya". 1978

11.176
C80: 1801
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotation, table 0

r contents and excerpts fro
Colonel General V. A.
176 pageq]

e]. V. V. Apakidze, Colonel
Bushmanov and Colonel R. G. Dukov under the general
editorial sup e1 General V. A. .
FOR UH’ICIM. USE ONLY

The Subunit Commuudvr'n Role in Preparing Responsible Por-
110111101 1'0!) ”311] EXUPCIUUUoo-eooeeeaeeeeooaaaaoeaeoooeoe
Demonnbl‘llbion Excrcluelleoocoeeoouceoeeooceoeoeoeeaeeeoe
Inﬁtructionul "UthOdU Exurc‘iUCereaoeeeeeoooeoseeoeoooe

Bl‘icrinKQOCOOIIO...00.00.....IIOOOCOIODOOOOOOOOC.‘OOOCO

Organization of Exarciacn in a Motorized Rifle Company....

Chapter II. Drill Movements and Marching Without Weapons
and With weaponaoeooooeosooooooosaacenotes-sotsoeeeooltoooo

Drill Movementu and Marching Without Noapona..............
Drill Standing Ponitiononoose.oooocoeeoeooeeeo-eouaoeeo
Instrucbion in Factns from "81:00.0...ooeooooooeoaoooco
Instruction in Marching at Parade Stop.................
Instruction in Facing in Marching......................
Instruction in Saluting from Halt and on the March.....
Instruction in Leaving a Formation and Approaching the

commanderOOOOOOOOOIDOOOO0.0000000...OOOOOOOOOOOIOOCO.

Drill Movements and Marching with Weapons.................
Drill Standing Position with Ueapoas...................
Execution of the Movement "Loosen (Tighten) slingsl"...
Execution of Movements with Automatic Weapon in Place..
Execution of Movements with Carbine and Automatic Rifle

in P1303000.eno.0...asoooooooooooeoeoaooeoeooooeoeeoe
Pacing and Marching with Weapona.......................
saluting With carbinOOOO0.000000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00......

Leaving a Formation, Approaching the Commander With
weapon and withdrawixlsoo00.0.9.0000...000.000.000.000

Chapter III. The Movements "Down!" ("On Guardl") and "Upl,"

RuBhes and Crawling...........................u.-..u.....

Chapter IV. Coordination of Dismounted Squad, Platoon and
Company Formations.........................................

Coordination of Squad Formation...........................
Squad Movement in Line Pormation.......................
Squad Movement in Route Formation......................
Change of Squad Formation..............................

saluting.0.000CCOIOCOO...0.0U.O'OOOCOOOOC..00....OCOOI.

Coordination of Platoon Pormation.........................
rlatoon Movement in Line Pormation.....................
Platoon Movement in Route Formation....................

salutingooooooooooeno...oooo00.000.000.00...0.0.0.0000.

Coordination of Company Formation.........................
Company Movement in Line Pormation.....................
Company Movement in Route Formation....................
Company "ovelent W119 salutinoooeooaooooeooooooooooeo

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!

c

13

14
15

83

81

$3R‘3‘38lg?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter V. Coordination of Subunit Formations with Novo-
ment in Vuhiolc”.OCIDo000.3000IIIOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCO0.0

Coordination of a Platoon Moving in Vehicles..............
Platoon Movement in Line Formation.....................
Platoon Movement in Line and Route Formations..........
Saluting by Pernonnel in vehicleaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeee

Coordination of a Company Moving in Vehicles..............
Forming Up a Company with Personnel in Front of

VehiclesIOO0.0000000DIOOOIOODO..0...‘..........OO....

Company Formations with Personnel in Vehicles..........
Saluting with Personnel in Vehicles....................

Chapter VI. Improving Drill Training Standards.............

Chapter VII. Marching Drill Rovieue........................

30810 Principles..........................................
Dismounted Marching Drill Reviews.................-.......
Company "arChins Drill ReVieWeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
Battalion Marching Drill Review........................
Regimental (School) Marching Drill Review..............
Drill ROVICWS in Vehicles.........o.......o......o........
Company Drill Review...................................
Bnttalion Drill Rev1eweeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeoeoo
Regimental Drill Review..............o.................
Officers. Drill Reviewa........oo......................

Chapter VIII. Evaluation of Drill Training.................

Testing and Evaluating the Coordination of Squad. 918300“:
Company (Battery), Training Subunit (Unit) and School
FormationBOOOOOOOOOI00.0.00000..OOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOO0.0

Evaluating the Satisfaction of the Requirements of the
Drill Regulations in the Daili Routine...................

Overall Evaluation of the Dril Training or a Subunit

(Unit)...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOIO.

Appendices:

The Organization and Conduct of Drill Training Compe-

tition for Best subuniteeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

2. Plan for a Company Drill Training Demonstration on the
OCvdsion of 8 Garrison Sparta Eventeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeee

5. Plan for Conducting Com any Drill Review..............

4. Plan for Conducting Regimental Drill Review...........

5. Outline Plan for Conducting Squad Drill Training

6

7

-.-.-
H
o

momiseaoooeeoeee0000.00.00.000000000000QOOOOOOOOOOI.

. Outline Plan for Conducting Platoon Drill Training

memioeSOOOOOCOCI.0.0...000......C....I............l..

. Instructions to Commanders Concerning Rules for Proper
wear of MilitargqUnirorm Dur Dril Review..........
Be L.y1n8 Out and nipping ‘ Dri 1 rioldeeeeeeeeqeeeeeee

52
FOR omcm. US! ONLY

-ﬁ.J0“-“~I..~_.'MHNJU.M~UJ

102

107
108
110

112
113

115
120
{53
124
127
133
I43
144
148

152

156
157
158

159

160
162
164
166
168

16

1170 ’
Fen nFPICIAL USE ONLY
The ImportanCv of Drill Training

As an Integral part of military combat training, drill training
nffectn nll nnpecto of the life and activity of military person-
nel. It tempera their will, improves their ability to maintain
full control of their body movements and engenders nttentiveness,
kccnnena of observation, a cellectiviat spirit and perseverance,
which promotes adherence to proper military procedures and the
strengthening of discipline.

Thr very fact or u soldier's finding himself part of a military
formation accnutoms him to concentration of his efforts and disci-
pline, while execution of drill commands forces personnel to obey
their commander.

Instructive in this regard is M. V. Frunze's view that we not in-
frequently see an attitude displayed toward military bearing,
formation discipline and external appearance as if toward some-
thing harmful, unrevolutionery and unnecessary, that internal,
conscious discipline must manifest itself in external appearance
and personal performance.

Now, at a time when subunits (podrazdeleniye) and units (chast')
are fully provided with all manner of complex technical equi -
ment, when we have seen a substantial increase in the role 0
collective weaponry in warfare, the level of drill performance
standards must be especially high.

Precision, coordination and synchronism in the execution of drill
movements elevates the s irit, inspires confidence in their move-
ment on the part of serv ce persoanel and develops in them profi-
ciency in execution and attentiveness.

Without properly conducted drill instruction it is iggossible to
train military personnel well for combat action in s ern warfare.

The basis for training subunit personnel for combined action has
been, is and will remain the formation. As no other form of in-
struction, it develops the sbilit to execute the will of the
commander in a rapid, precise, we l-synchronised manner. Drill
training is based on a thorough understanding on the rt of

service personnel of the necessity of precise action a the exe-
cution of collective movements.

Drill training disciplines personnel and helps them master the
various movements and actions and acquire the habits necessary

for tactical, fire and special training exercises as well as
other areas of instruction.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’ICIM. "SI-2 0’3”

Drill training uncompuusou individual drill instruction with and
without wen on; coordination of mounted and dismounted squad
(team crews, platoon, company (battery) battalion (artillery
battalion) and regimental formations; and subunit and unit
marching drill reviews. Drill instruction is conducted is
planned exercises and is deVelopod and perfected in the course
of all other training exercises and throughout the daily routine.

Experience indicates that hi h drill training standards for
service personnel may be ach evad

--by purposeful and proper planning of drill training and the
efficient organization and methodo ogically correct conduct of
all exercises;

--by conscious study and subsequent perfection of movements and
activities on the part of all service personnel in strict accor-
dance with the re?uirements of the Drill Regulations;

--by regular brie ings, demonstration instructional-methods exer-
class and regularly scheduled drill training exercises conducted
without long intervals between them;

-~by the refinement and perfection of drill training habits and
skills in the course of all training exercises and formations
and mOVenents occurring during the aily routine.

or great importance for the achievement of high drill training
ratings are the personal drill proficiency standards of officers,
warrant officers (praporshchik, michman) and NOOe (serzhant,
starshina)‘_and their ability to provide exemplary demonstrations
of drill movements and activities and to maintain a consistently
high level of exactingness toward their subordinates.

The personal example provided by officers warrant officers and
NCOs combined with a high level of methodical training--in this
direction lies the achievement of high drill proficiency standards
on the part of subordinates.

The instructor himself must have mastered to perfection that
which he teaches his subordinates and be in love with the mili-
tary profession. A most important condition for the conduct of
drill training exercises on a high level of proficiency is the
continuous improvement of their methodological mastery by offi-
ccrs, warrant officers and NGOs and the concern demonstrated in
this regard by senior commanders at all levels. Where daily
attention is devoted to the methodical training of commanders
in drill-related areas, there is built u a firm foundation for
the achievement of high ratings in subun t training. That is
why commanders have continually and perseveringly to improve and
perfect their methods techniques and training procedures.

 

‘In this and all subsequent instances, recommendations for

warrant officers and 8003 a l to an e ual de
rant officers and petty offggeis. q gree to naval war-

5‘
IORtﬂWICUM.USB(nﬂX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drill training is an nepcciully practical activity. Each move-
ment involVed muut be cheJopcd and perfected in the course of
repeated training exercises, which do not come to an end after

this has been accomplished. for otherwise its precision and beau-
by of execution wil be lost.

As a rule, drill training exercises should be conducted at the

level of squad (crew, team. group), platoon or company under the
leadership of the commander involved.

errors made by personnel may be observed and corrected in a
timely manner. But some commanders forget about this and take

subunit training as a basis. In this way mung undetected mis-
takes made by personnel in the course of indiv dual training be-

come ingrained and a drag on the process of training the subunit.
Also contributing to the successful accomplishment of the tasks

become not only a highly qualified specialist, but an outstanding
model of drill training excellence as well.

A large role in the improvement of drill training standards and
increasing the powers of self-discigline of military personnel is

alert. their efforts more concentrated, and compels them to dis-

ment programs and the widespread dissemination of the advanced
experience and knowled e of the leading methods specialists and
mo

els of drill protic ency exert a decisive influence on the
process of raising the level of drill instruction.

55 -.-_ ,
roe emcm. use our : ._

. .x‘-,.
._¢_,a;,_=
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Chapter I

Principles of Drill Training Methods
mum i'rinc [plea

ixcerpt] Drill training is an independent area of combat
raining and enters as an organic element into many other areas

of instruction, exerting thereby an influence on the development
of the knowledge, skills, habits and psychological stability es-
sential for military personnel in modern warfare. The guiding
principles of Soviet pedagogy therefore form the basis of drill
instruction.

A high level of drill proficiency on the part of officers, war-
rant officers and NCOs is of decisive importance in achieving
success in drill training and in their ability to execute in
exemplary fashion the movements and activities prescribed by the
Drill Regulations and to instruct their subordinates in the
methodologically correct manner.

It is not enough for a commander to be possessed of a high de-
gree of methodological mastery, good theoretical training and

practical skills; it is also important for him to know how to
stimulate the cognitive activity of his subordinates, and this
may be achieved by improving the quality of drill instruction,
developing in personnel the ability to think creatively and
helping them master the most effective movements and activities
during the course of instruction. The movements and activities
learned during drill training exercises should be practiced and

perfected in the course of tactical fire and physical training
exercises as well as during the routine of dai y life.

EVery commander should always remember that the bases of instruc-
tion are best laid in the first days of training. It is pre-
cisely at this time that is developed and then transformed into
habit a certain procedure in the study of drill movements and

activities as we 1 as activities with weapons and in military
vehicles.

we know that the limits to human knowledge are relative; it is
therefore necessary to strive to insure that subordinates do not
find themselves encumbered by today's lack of knowledge (or lack
of skill). It is not he who does not know but who searches out '
answers and pursues knowledge who is deserving of reproach, but
rather he who does not know but pretends that he does. ' '~

ﬂustery is understanding plus memory- seats of knowl e is'
this plus the application of knowledge to pristioe. edg j '

st .
son onic'mruss'onu 1

 

. -.' - '7 ' . .
‘. '- ‘.' :_ -- ‘34-,
, .
x {in-‘-
.

.A - .h‘u'i'--' v‘ ‘
- ~ . , - - .. ~ ._.i 'n“.':‘1".i)i‘v “ i
M. v . _ ... . ..>.c~;;z.'.’:-:e; Aw. wipwau‘s'nvmiﬂuahc-dmamtm w
it in Very important in the training process to establish con-
nections between the known and the unknown and between theory
and practice and arrive at the most effectivo forms and methods
of drill instruction.

It is also Very important to insure that each drill exercise is
conducted against the background of a comparison of results of
those competing with one another with its consequent elevation
of the competitive spirit. This creates the necessary precondi-
tions for a rapid mastery of tho training material.

Each drill exercise is a new step in the process of raising the
drill proficiency standards of individuals and subunits. The
depth of the knowledge thereby acquired and the thoroughness with
which habits and skills are developed and assimilated depend to a
great extent on the expert selection of instruction and training
methods adopted during the course of the exercises. Intensive,
unintorrupted activity on the part of personnel exerting their

utmost ufforts--this is the requirement today imposed on drill
training exercises.

The maintenance of constant combat readiness and the tightening
of military discipline are inseparably connected with good ind -
vidunl drill proficiency and a high level of teamwork and coor-
dination on the part of subunits.

Planning Drill Training

In his planning of drill training exercises, a commander should
be guided by the requirements of the combat training program, the
tasks and problems assigned the subunit in the area of drill
training, the provisions of the Drill Regulations, as well as by
the level of drill proficiency of the personnel involved.

The programs allow the subunit commander to determine the time to
be devoted to work on a particular training subaect and the areas
in this connection to be covered on the basis of the extent to
which the trainees are ready for it. So the number of exercises
and areas to be covered for each subject may therefore very. For
more thorough work on such complex drill movements, facing from
halt and in marching and others, the exercises have to be gone
over repeatedly.. It is impossible to go on to the next item on
the training agenda until all problems involved in the current
subject have been worked out. If for some reason one of the
items on the training schedule for a certain exercise is omitted
or is not thoroughly mastered, it should be worked out in the

time devoted to independent study and preparation or carried over
into the following exercise.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drill training exercises should be conducted regularly and at
uniform intervals in order to avoid the loss of skills acquired
during the preceding exercise. The commanders who achieve good
results in their drill training of personnel and subunits are
those who prepare plans in advance and who see to the reinforce-
ment of drill habits and skills during the course of other
exercises.

The conduct of drill training exercises should not be ermitted
schral days in a row or twice on the same day since f they
are properly organized and conducted they require great physical
exertion.

Experience indicates that the subunit commanders who have the
greatest success are those who plan drill training exercises once
or twice a week.

Just as with any other exercises, drill training exercises achieve
their goal when they are carefully prepared and provided with a
sound material base. That is why in the course of his planning a
subunit commander should call for instructional-methods or demon-

stration exercises with officers, warrant officers and NCOs and
hold briefings the day before.

As a rule, company drill training exercises are planned with all
platoons simultaneously and are usually conducted under the lead-
erehip of the company commander: one hour for platoon training

and, depending on the scale involved, perhaps two hours to be de-
Voted to the drill coordination of subunit formations. Exercises

within a military school (training unit) are conducted at platoon
level under the direction of the platoon leader.

Each exercise should consist of three parts:
—-an introductory part, which includes an inspection of external
appearance, movement to the exercise area on the drill field and
an explanation of the subjects to be covered and the goals to be
achieved by the exercise and training problems;
--tho main part of the exercise, which includes studying and
working out new movements element by element and then taken in
their entirety. The drill is conducted to the accompaniment of

, commando given by the commander or of drums and is executed in-
dividually, in pairs and b squad (platoon, company);
--the concluding part of t e exercise, in which it is recommended
that a critique be conducted, that the trainees receive an evalua-
tion, that the ones with the best performance be singled out and
that assignments for independent preparation be given.

58
roe OFPICIM. USE ONLY

- I ' n ' “ ‘- “I “:. 'p. -
I 1- .4 M v m- . — 2—1-1“ '-1."‘:." ‘--\"‘:-.‘u!-~:n 42‘: 4'"- '- “—1" '3-
L13"'-'-
FOR UFFIGIM. USE ONLY

Chapter VIII
I'ZVHlnntinn ul‘ llrll l. Training

In order always to know the degree of drill proficiency achieved
by individual service personnel and the ICVOI of drill coordina-
tion attained by their subunits, all commanders (loaders) should
conduct regular test exercises: the regimental commander within
the battalion, the battalion commander within the company and
the company commander within the platoon.

The drill training examination may also take the form of sched-
uled and unannounced marching drill reviews.

Eanuatlng the drill training of subunits and units (training in-
stitutions) involves evaluating the drill proficiency of individ-
unl trainees evaluating the precision and coordination of sub-
units and units (training subunits and institutions) and evaluat-
ing the execution of prescribed Drill Regulation procedures by

military personnel and subunits in the course of their daily
routine.

It is uccordinul necessary to devote two or three hours to an
examination of tie drill proficiency standards of an individual

company (battery), battalion (artillery batallion) or, equally,
of training subunits.

The subunits to be examined move with their weapons to the drill
field. As they arrive in the examination area they are formed
into a line formation of two ranks.

A subunit may in some cases be moved to the examination area in
advance and formed up in a manner directed by the commander COD!
ducting the examination. In both cases, upon the arrival of the
senior commander, the commander of the subunit to be examined
reports to him on the readiness of the subunit for examination
and presents him with a list of subunit personnel.

When an examination or test exercise is conducted during a course
of instruction, the subunit commander or the senior commander

evaluates individual performances and the precision and coordina-
tion of subunit movements and then enters his evaluation along
with his observations and comments in the combat training record.

employed in testing the proficiency or individual soldiers a

first-year students. These examinations are conducted both with
and without weapons.

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (H-‘I-‘ICIAI. USE ONLY

after being exnmlnnd fur their execution of individual drill
movements, students in training units and military schools are
examined in their methodological training and preparation.

An examination of the drill proficiency of individual company
personnel may begin with the company (battery) commander. do is
given his commands by the examining officer or an officer desig-

nated h him. All latoon leaders and the company (battery)
first szrgeant are ghen examined. They are given their commands
by the company commander. After these individuals haVs been ex-
amined, the examiner may keep one of the lateens for examination
and permit the rest otherwise to occupy t omeelves to the side.
The platoon leader gives the commands during examination of squad
leaders. while the squad leaders in turn give the commands for
examination of the individual soldiers (students).

An analogous procedure is followed in the examination of the pla-
toon and battalion.

The drill proficiency of individual personnel is examined and
evaluated on the basis of the following drill movements:
--dri11 standing position;

--facing from halt and in marching;

--perade step;

--naluting from halt and on the march;

~-approuching and departing from the commander;

--executing movements with weapons.

The external appearance of personnel is inspected during a

marching drill review and prior to the beginning of the examina-
tion for individual drill proficiency.

If an individual's external appearance is not in accordance with
the rules for wearing the uniform, if he is not wearing a neat,
well- ressed uniform and if his insignia of rank are not in con-
formi y with regulation requirements, he is not admitted to the
examination. In the case of other, minor deficiencies in external
appearance. an individual's rating is lowered 1 point.

Knowledge on the part of personnel of the provisions of the Drill
Regulat one is tested in the course of marching drill reviews.
examinations of individual drill proficiency and changes of for-

mution and that of officers (warrant officers, 800s and students)
when they give their commands..

The technique demonstrated in the execution of each drill move-
ment is evaluated as:

--"outstanding" if the movement is executed with precision, of-
fortlessly and confidently and is pleasing to the eye and in

strict conformance with the requirements of the Drill Regulations;

60
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--"good," if the movement is executed with precision. effortlessly
and in conformance with Drill Regulation requirements, but if

there was even only one mistake;
--"satiafactery." if the movement is executed in conformity with

Drill Regulation requirements, but with insufficient precision,
with some effort and tenoonecs and one mistake;
--"unsatiafactory," if the movement is not executed in conformity
with the Regulations or if there are two or more mistakes.

Most Common Mistakes
in the Execution of Drill Movements

   

  
   

 

Movements or Activities Deficiencies

 

 

External appearance in-
spected pr or to begin-
ning of examination.

External appearance of servicemen not
in conform ty with rules for wearing
the uniform. Uniform dirty, unpreesed;
position of insignia of rank not in
conformity with regulation requirements

Toes not on front positioning line and
feet not one step apart; chest insuffi-
ciently lifted. stomach insufficiently
drawn in. wrists held with palms to
the rear. Body not turned to the front

Arms away from body during facing from
halt. Pacing not executed with entire
body. Stationary leg not brought for-
ward by the most direct movement. Feet
spread too far apart after facing and
not aligned. Drill standing position
improperly assumed; head dro fgd. In
executing about face in mere g the
right foot is not brought out to the
left; individual takes too wide a
step. Body not held rigid in execut-
ing facing movement. Head drogggd.
Facing movement not executed t ugh
an angle of 90 or 180'. Back of co-
ordination in the movement of arms

and legs.

Body not positioned directly toward
the front. Knees bent; feet not
raised 15 cm above the ground; cadence
and uniformity of step not maintained;
arms not raised to required height or
and not noved as far as possible. ,
Lack of coordination in the move-ant.
of arms and legs.

61 . _ . g3 _ .3
- soacurxcnuyusstxax .__1 (T.§W-.,.’

.r 'A -- -‘ .,, efv'r
4 ‘_ _ - .~ '3‘“

e . .«V ‘ Z, '. f‘ ~: 'f‘f, i'»
- - ‘ -' . -' 5.5-" *' .».o'~" ‘---
was" . 2- -.-»-.c.-. 'J. awe-a» --.-: 34:. J-MWd

1. Drill Standing
Position

2. Facing from halt
and in marching

5. Parade step
POI! Ol-‘HiilM. USE ONLY

   
      
  
   
  

Deficiencies

nalute not held for 5-6 steps. Foot
does not strike the ground simultane-
ounly with the turning of the head
toward the officer. the MOVement cf
the hand to the headgear and the
halting of the movement of the left
hand. Right elbow not aligned with
and raised to the hei t of the
shoulder. Rand raise to the head-
gear from the side.

In ap reaching officer the hand is not
broug t to the headgear at the same
time the foot strikes the ground; mid-
dle finger does not touch lower edge
of headgear (visor); in departing from
officer hand is not dropped from head—
gear at the same time the left foot
strikes the ground; individual reverts
too soon to route step.

a. Saluting from halt
or in marching

5. approaching and de-

rting from an of-
icor.

6. hanual of arms at
halt and in march-
ing.

Individual drill proficiency ratings are composed of the evalua-
tions received by personnel for their execut on of each of the six
drill movements on which they were examined and are given as:
--"outstsnding," if no less than 50% of the drill movements exam-
ined were executed with an ”outstanding" rating and the rest with
a rating of ”good;” external appearance must have been evaluated
as ”outstanding;"

-~"good " if no less than 50% of the drill movements examined were
execute with ratingn of ”outstanding“ and "good“ and the rest
with ratings no lower than "satisfactory;' external appearance
must have can evaluated as "3004;"

--”antlefuctory," if an "unsatisfactory" rating was received for
no more than one of the drill movements, but not for external
apponranco- .
--'unaatiufnctory," if two or more "unsatisfactory" ratings were
received. ‘ n ”

Individual drill proficiency ratings for students initrainins L .\
unite (schools) are assigned taking into consideration their 1: .'_
acthodological training and are given as:_ .5 EA nigg‘t3;_.x ':*;

.' .n

62'
(:(Nl-thmllN‘l' IIEH ”NM

u-"eutntundiug," if the student's proficiency in individual drill
and methods training is evaluated as "outstanding;"

--"good," if the student's proficiency in individual drill and
methods training has been evaluated as “good;"

--"satinfactory," if ratings in both areas are "satisfactory."

The individual drill proficiency of line and training subunits
and units and subunits of military schools is rated on the basis
of the overall evaluations received by soldiers (students), NCOs,
warrant officers and officers and is given as:

--"outctanding," if 90% of the evaluations were favorable, no
fewer than half of the individuals examined having received an
"outstanding" evaluation;

--" ood," if 80% of the eValuations were favorable, no fewer than
hal of the individuals examined having received an evaluation no
lower than "good;"

--"satisfactory," if 70% of the eValuations were favorable;

--“unaatisfactory," if fewer than 70% of the evaluations were
favorable.

Testing and Evaluating the Coordination
of Jquad, Platoon, Company (Battery), Training
Subunit (Unit) and School Formations

The precision and coordination of subunit performance is evaluated
on the basis of four rating categories:

«the formation and reformation of subunits from halt and in
marching;

--mounted subunit drill movements with the performance of stan-
dard rating activities (mounting and dismounting);

--passing in review in dismounted and mounted formations;
--singing the marching song.

The grecision and coordination of subunit drill movements are
rate as:

--"outstandin§," if "outstanding" ratings are received in two
categories an "good" is received in two, with outstanding ex-
ternal appearance displayed by subunit personnel and proper com-
mands given by officers and N003 in a clear and precise manner;
--"good " if in two categories ratings no lower than "good" were
receive , "satisfactory" being received in the other two with
good external appearance displayed by subunit personnel and the

proper sommands given by officers and N609 in a clear and pre-
cise manner;

--"sntiafac or ," if "satisfactory" ratings were received in all
categories wit a favorable evaluation of external appearance
and proper commands given by commanders; -

--"unsntisfaetory," if an "unsatisfactory" evaluation was re-
ceived in one category. '

63
(MW [53 MY

    

HO ' .
we a:
. , r - .

. v A“ ,. ,. . , .. ..I S: 9-2::
‘ , «aura.....:xa~aW-;'::u:°rccn waved-meA Rwandan»: new
(IlNHRM‘lIIN'I' USI'Z UNI-Y

Evaluating the Satisfaction of Drill Regulation
Requirements in the Course of the Daily Routine

Satisfaction of Drill Regulation requirements in the course of

the daily routine is cvnluated on the basis of the external ap-
pearance of service personnel; their saluting; physical training
exercises; the morning inspection' evening rollcall; all subunit
formations and reformations both dismounted and mounted; the ad-
herence of subunits and individual personnel to Drill Regulation
requirements in the course of tactical-drill, tactical and other
exercises; and of tLe commands given by officers, warrant officers
and N003 and their clean, precise execution on the part of all
personnel and subunits.

Special attention is devoted to the movements of individual per—

sonnel their external appearance, their military bearing and
discipline, their exchanges of salutes among themselves and the
salutes they render their commanders and senior officers.

The drill training standards displayed in the course of the daily
routine are evaluated on the basis of the requirements as indi-
cated and are rated as:

--"outstanding," if all personnel display an exemplary external
appearance; if the military bearing and drill movements and
activities demonstrated by an absolute majority of personnel and
subunits in the course of the daily routine are correct and pre-
cise; if officers, warrant officers and N003 are exemplary in
their own performance; and if the latter constantly insist on the
utmost exactingness in their subordinates' adherence to regula-
tion requirements;

--"good," if there are no comments concerning the external appear-
ance of personnel; if the military bearing and drill movements and
activities demonstrated by a majority of personnel and subunits in
the course of their daily routine are in good conformity with the
requirements of the Regulations; and if officers, warrant officers
and N005 are exemplary in their own performance and insist on
their subordinates' exacting adherence to regulation requirements;
--"satisfactory," if the external appearance of personnel receives
a favorable evaluation; if not all individual personnel as well as
subunits display a military bearing and drill movements and activ-
ities in the course of their daily routine which are in conformity
with Drill Regulation requirements; and if all officers, warrant
officers and H003 set good examples for subordinates by their own
performance but are not always sufficiently exact .in their in-
sistence on precise execution of drill movements activities;
--"unuatisfactory," if personnel display an unkempt external ap-
pearance; if their uniforms are dirty and are not worn in con-
formity with the rules governing the wearing of the uniform; if
their military bearing is oer; if in their execution of drill -
movements and activities t ey display gross departures from Drill

64
mnmmmnmmlszlmtv

‘ \

- .‘ t n '. r. . ,: n” V ‘. , . . x 1,“,
n «3.3;,» :Lxxfut. .J.-.- ”a: ﬁanéﬁ’.u.1.w.~sunil-BM}. m.
.zm'luu‘aun‘l 12;! Hf.”

Luﬁuintiun requirnmnutn; and if officer”. unrrunl officers and
NCOu ru.l to Job u need Unnmplu for uubnrdinuteu by their own
performance and urr not exacting in their inuietenee on precise
execution of drill noVumunta and uetivitien. If u nubunit'a
performance dumenutrntee one of the above-mentioned deficiencies,
itn adherence to Drill Regulution requiremente in the course of
ltu daily routine must bu evaluated an "unnutiufnctory."

Overall Evaluation of Subunit (Unit) Drill Proficiency

The OVurull evaluation of a aubunit'n \unit's, school's) drill
proficiency and, to an equal degree. of that of training subunits
and units, is made up of three retingu: for individual drill pro-
ficiency, for prucinion and coordination of movement on the port
of the subunit (unit) and for execution in the course of the daily
routine satisfying Drill Regulation requirements and is iven as:
--"outntnndinm," if un "outstanding" is received for ind vidual
drill proficicxwy end for execution in the course of the daily
routine satisfying Drill Regulation requirements and no lower than
“good" for pruciaion and coordination in subunit (unit) movement;
--"good," if n "good" is received for individual drill proficiency
and for execution in the course of the daily routine satisfying
Drill Regulation requirements and no lower than "satisfactory" for
precision and coordination in eubunit (unit) movement;
~-"eutiefectory," if n subunit has received favorable evaluations
in all Categories;

--"unsutinfnctory," if an "unsatisfactory" rating has been re-
ceived in one of the rating categories.

COPYRIGHT: Voyeniadat, 1978

8965
030: 180]

65
(:OVPMNT 152 am