FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS U10613
21! JUNE 1982

Translation

THE COLLECTIVE DEFENSE 0F SOCIALISM
BY

MAR SU VIKTOR GEORGIYEVICH Kuuxov

FBIS FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
non:

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from Bngl ish-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and .aaterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the orzginal informtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OJNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS RBPRODUCED RBREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
THE COLLECTIVE DEFENSE 0F SOCIALISM

noscow ROLLBKTIVNAYA ZASBCHITA SO‘I‘SIALIZMA in Russian 1982 (signed
to press 11 Dec 81) pp 1-96

[Translation of book "The Collective Defense of Socialism", by Mar
50 Viktor Georgiyevich Rulikov, Voyenizdat, 100,000 copies, 96
pages; published in the series: 'Implementing the Decisions of the
26th CPSU Congress'; passages enclosed in slantlines printed in bold-
face. in italics when indicated by [it.]]

CONTENTS
Annotation ‘ 1
Introduction 1
Chapter One. Victorious Advance of Socialism 3

Chapter 'No. International Character of Defense of Socialist Achieveaents 15

Chapter Three. The Warsaw Pact - Reliable Shield of Peace and SocialiSn 30

Chapter Four. Fighting Alliance of Brother Armies 52
Conclusion 68
\
" a " [II - USSR - 4 F000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ANNOTATION

[Text] This volume presents the main points of the documents of the 26th CPSU
Congress pertaining to cooperation among the socialist nations in the area of
strengthening their defense capability: the author discusses activities of the
Rarsaw Pact Organization to ensure reliable defense of peace and socialist
achievements, and presents an analysis of the international situation, which
dictates the necessity of further strengthening the unity of the nations of the
socialist community. This book is intended for a broad readership.

INTRODUCTION

International imperialism, led by the United States, nurturing aggressive
plans against the USSR and the entire socialist community, is continuing
feverish war preparations. The military expenditures of the NATO countries
are increasing year by year. Growth of the war aachine of the imperialist
powers is being accompanied by retrogression by militarist circles in the
vest. particularly the United States. to positions of ”cold war" and "policy of
strength" [politiki sily]. The present 0.8. administration, to please the
narrow, selfish interests of the bosses of the military-industrial complex,
is intensively whipping up anti-Soviet, anticomunist ,hysteria, which has
taken on a particularly furious character in connection with the events con-
cerning Poland and Afghanistan.

Expanding the scale of militarist preparations and material preparations for a
nuclear missile war, the imperialists are endeavoring on the one hand to
strengthen their military blocs. particularly NATO. while on the other hand
they are endeavoring to weaken by any means the unity of the socialist
countries, including in the area of defense.

Assuming ever increasing significance in these ocnditbns isa mnsism cmpaignbythe
nations of the socialist community to streqahen the unity and cohesiveness of
their ranks. "We are fighting." emphasized CPSU Central Committee General
Secretary Comrade L. I. Brezhnev in the Central Committee Accountability
Report to the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, "for
the just cause of peace and security of peoples, for the interests of working
people. The truth of Marxist-Leninist teaching is on our side. Our strength
lies in unity and solidarity."1 Guided by this thesis, the CPSU Central Com-
ait:ee and Politburo devote unabating attention to strengthening friendship
and cooperation with the socialist countries and are doing enormous work in the
interests of developing and deepening our mutual relations with them. Like
work is being performed in the other nations of the socialist community.

The ideas of friendship and cooperation with the Soviet Union are stressed in
the constitutions of the brother nations. "This," stated L. I. Brezhnev,

"represents great trust in our country, and we respond in kind. The new USSR
Constitution proclaims friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance with the
socialist nations to be the cornerstone of Soviet foreign policy."2 Unity,
solidarity and comprehensive cooperation among the socialist countries,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UK Ufl’lt IAL UDI'. UNLY

grounded on the principles of proletarian and socialist lnternationnlrsm. con-
stitute a powerful weapon in their joint struggle for peace and international

detente, and in organization of effective resistance to any and all aggressive
attacks by imperialism and its attempts to infringe upon the interests of
socialism. to place an obstacle in the path of progressive changes in the
world, and to regain the role of rulers of th destiny of peoples.

For more than a quarter of a century now the Warsaw Pact Organization has

been reliably promoting successful implementation of collective efforts on the
part of the nations of the socialist community in defending the achievements
of socialism. The 26th CPSU Congress highly praised its influential and
beneficial role in international affairs and the fruitful activities of its
agencies in strengthening peace and general security.

Elaborating grandiose plans of economic and cultural construction and
directing the constructive activities of peoples, the Communistand worker
parties of the socialist countries are keeping a close watch on development
of international events and are taking collective measures to ensure that
their military-political defensive alliance possesses everything required for
reliable defense of the revolutionary achievements of socialism and world
peace.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
Moscow, [981. page 10.

2. Ibid., page 6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter One. VICTORIOUS ADVANCE 0F SOCIALISH

The Great O:tober Socialist Revolution ushered in a new era in world history,
the principal content of which is the transition of mankind from capitalism

to socialism. Socialism, peace, and freedom, inscribed on the banner of the
Great October Revolution. have become reality in countries which have em-
barked on the road of building a new society. The emergence and development of
a world socialist system is the main resu lt of the international con-
sequences of the October Revolution and a reliable guarantee of the further
advance of mankind.

in present-day conditions leading trends in societal progress are determined
more than ever before by growth in the might of the world socialist community.
It constitutes a most important factor of social progress and the principal
revolutionary force of the present day, demonstrating by its economic, socio-
political and spiritual development the great vital strength and triumph of
the ideas of Harxism-Leninism. "There is no country or group of countries,
no ideological or political current," noted L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU
Congress, "which has not felt the influence of socialism to one degree or
another."1 '

The world of socialism appears before mankind as a dynamically developing
social system. which has accomplished in a practical manner liberation of
working people from oppression and exploitation, which has secured their
sovereignty, flourishing of culture and increased prosperity of the masses,
eq\:a1ity and brotherhood of all peoples and nationalities. The indis-
soluble alliance of the nations of the world socialist community -- an
international alliance of a new type -- constitutes a reliable foundation for
successful development of these countries. Continuous and diversified inter-
action among equal secialist nations has become a practical reality in

their relations and has firmly entered the consciousness of the brother
peoples, who see in this an embodiment of Lenin's prediction that socialism
"is creating new, higher forms of human intercourse, where the legitimate
needs and progressive aspirations of the working-people masses of [any [it.l/
nationality will be satisfied for the first time in an international unity....“2
Together with the flourishing of eam socialist nation and strengthening of the
sovereignty of the socialist states, their interrelationships become in-
creasingly closer, and there arise more and more elements of commonality in

FOR OFFKJAL.USEGDNLY
I'UK UPI“ IAI. l-‘hf. UNI.‘

their policies, economics, and social affairs, on! the level of their development
«radually equalizes. Entering into and serving as a most important manifestation
of the overall process of the comprehensive drawing together of the brother coun-
tries is socialist economic integration. In the formation of its foundation: and
in its further development cooperation within the framework of the Council for
Economic Mutual Assistance (CEMA) is of great significance.

The activities of CEHA constitute a concrete embodiment of s new,

socialist type of international relations. Today we point with

legitimate pride to the major projects of the joint labor of the brother
peoples of the nations of the socialist community. They include the "Soyuz"
[Alliance] natural gas pipeline, which stretches almost 3000 kilometers, the
"Mir" (Peacel power system, expanded with new power transmission lines, the
Ust'-Ilimsk Pulp Hill, the Erdenet Mining and Concentration Combine in Mongolia
nickel plants in Cuba, plus many other constructiOn projects.

As we know, [the decisive battle front of competition with capitalism is to be
found in the domain of the economy and economic policy./ The successes of the
CEMA member nations in the economic domain present a vivid contrast with
those processes which are taking place in the world capitalist system, clearly
demonstrating the advantages of genuine socialism. In spite of the fact that
recent years have not been the most favorable for the economies of a number of
socialist nations, the rate of economic growth in the CEMA member nations in
the last decade was twice that in the developed capitalist countries. while
occupying approximately 19 percent of the world's territory and containing

10 percent of the world's population. the CEHA member nations today produce
approximately oneothird of world industrial output.

DiSCussing the competition between socialism and capitalism in the area of the
econOmy, we must remind the reader of a statement made by L. I. Brezhnev on
this subject in the book "Vozrozhdeniye" [Rebirth]: "There is taking place in
the world a rivalry between two social systems. It began during Lenin's life,
it is continuing today. and comparisons are unavoidable -- who has produced
how much steel, how much petroleum, how much electricity, grain, and cotton.
He resort to these calculations. as do our ideological adversaries. Forced to
admit that in many respects the Soviet Union has caught up with the United
States, for example, and has far outstripped that country in a number of

major economic indicators, our adversaries constantly emphasize those economic
indicators in which the largest capitalist power has not yet yielded
preeminence.

"At the same time they assiduously ignore and attempt to conceal from their
readers and listeners those historical conditions in which we and they were
existing. And yet in this, to quote their words, 'honest' competition one
side, protected by an ocean against enemy invasions, was profiting from every
war. while the other side was the target of constant acts of provocation, was
bearing the ponderous burden of wars and devastation, and in many areas was
forced to begin practically from zero."3

/‘l'he results of the constructive activities of the Soviet people] look partic-
ularly impressive in this light. In spite of the fact that out of the 64
years during which our nation has been in existence, approximately two decades

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
were devoted to wars which had been forced upon us and subsequent rebuilding
of the economy, Our country's percentage share of world output, which
amounted to approximately 5 percent before the revolution and about 1 percent
in 1922, has risen to 20 percent. Nor has world output been marking time
during all these years.

The scale of Our country's development during the years of the 10th Five—Year
Plan is impressive. During this period USSR national income increased by

400 billion rubles over the preceding five-year period. More than 1200 large
industrial enterprises came on-stream. Industrial output volume increased

by 717 billion rubles. Those branches which determine technological progress
were developing at an accelerated pace. Fuel production, generation of
electric power, and production of ferrous and nonferrous metals increased.

The advantages of socialism are particularly graphically evident in a com-
parison between the economic development of the Soviet Union and the largest
country in the capitalist world -- the United States. In the period 1970-
1979 national income in the USSR rose by 57 percent, and only by 33 percent

in the United States; industrial output grew by 72 percent and 61 percent
respectively. This fostered a substantial reduction in the gap in level of
economic development between the two countries. At the present time USSR na-
tional income comprises approximately twomthirds of U.S. national income.
While the Soviet economy has been steadily growing, the United States, as well
as the other leading capitalist countries, have experienced crisis-proportion
production declines three times in the last 10 years. Thus the hopes of
bourgeois political leaders and economists that the scientific and technologi-
cal revolution and state-monopoly control will save capitalism from profound
economic shocks were buried once and for all.

New prospects for building communism are specified in the "Basic Directions of
Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and the Period up to
1990,“ adopted at the 26th CPSU Congress. The significance of this document
goes beyond the framework of our country. This is determined not only by the
substantial percentage share of the USSR in the world economy and politics.
The [plan of peaceful construction/ advanced by the party, a plan of building,
a plan of productive activity by the people of a great socialist country,
expresses the great significance of the revolutionsry-transforming activities
of the CPSU: "Everything on behalf of man, for the benefit of man!“ Not one
capitalist country has such plans. Herein lies one more convincing evidence of
the triumph of the ideas and practical realities of genuine socialism.

The grand program of economic, sociopolitical and spiritual development of the

USSR for the 1980's, specified at the 26th CPSU Congress, is entirely directed

toward a peaceful building process. In the llth Five-Year Plan our country's

national income is targeted to increase by 18 percent, industrial output by 26
percent, and average annual agricultural production by 13 percent. At the same

time an entire system of measures was specified for improving conditions on and

off the job, improving housing conditions, providing foodstuffs and manufactured goods.
medical care and public education, as well as environmental protection.

Public consumption funds will increase by 23 percent during the five-year

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period. As in the past, a substantial portion will be expended on social
security, public education and health care, development of culture and the
arts, organization of rest and recreation for working people, and improvement
of public transportation services.

A special food program is being drawn up for the purpose of further raising
the living standards of Soviet citizens, a program which aims at securing a
substantial increase in agricultural production and securing a closer link
between agriculture and those branches involved in storage and processing of
and trade in agricultural commodities. The party considers continuation of a
policy of all-out intensification of agricultural production and its further
technical retooling on the basis of new technology to be the main prerequisite
for boosting agricultural productivity.

There is a large volume of work to be accomplished in the forthcoming five-year
period in the area of capital construction. Work will be continued on in-
proving the distribution of productive resources both in previously developed
and in new regions. Plans call for increasing their comprehensive development
and specialization and for measures to be taken to make economic interrela-
tions more efficient. Such territorial-production complexes as the Hestern
Siberian, Sayan, Angara-Yenisey, Timan-Pechora, Southern Yakut, Pavlodar-
Ekibastuz, Southern Tajik, and others will undergo further development. There
will be extensive work in progress on the economic exploitation of a vast zone
adjacent to the Baykal-Amur Mainline.

Present and future achievements of the Soviet Union as a component part of the
world community of socialist nations signify further strengthening of the posi-
tion of genuine socialism and /growth of the economic might of the entire
socialist community./ Party congresses held in the brother socialist

countries have shown that the CPSU and the other I ‘ing Communist and worker
parties are following a course of policy aimed at transforming the 1980's into
a period of intensive production and scientific-technical cooperation among cne
socialist countries. Great significance in accomplishing this task is at-
tached to such important questions as bringing the structures of economic
mechanisms closer together, further development of direct links between
ministries, associations and enterprises participating in co-production, es-
tablishment of joint firms, and other forms of uniting our efforts and
resources.

We must state that the effech of such cooperation is expressed not only in
economic indicators. Coordination of plans and direct links between thousands
of enterprises and organizations actively promote formation of the socialist
way of life and foster indoctrination of the broad masses in a spirit of col-
lectivism and socialist internationalism. Outright financial grant assistance
to Vietnam. which in 1979 was the victil of barbaric aggression on the part of
China, and to Kampuchea, which had been reduced to ruin by Beijing's henchmen,
serves as a vivid example of manifestation by the peoples of the brother so-
ciaiist nations of their characteristic spirit of collectivism and interna-
tional solidarity.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Mutual relations among the member nations of the Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance are not limited to the domain of the economy. They are also
characterized by political and cultural ties which are constantly growing
stronger, and by close cooperation in the area of foreign policy. Cooperation
among the brother socialiSt nations is embracing more and more new domains. A
graphic example of this is successful implementation of the Interkosmos Program.
As was emphasized at the 26th CPSU Congress. cosmonauts of the natiors of the
socialist community are working not only for science and the national economy.
They are also performing a political mission, demonstrating the strength and
indissolubility of the friendly relations among the socialist countries.

An influential and beneficial role in European affairs, as well as in interna-
tional affairs as a whole, is played by the [military-political defensive al-
liance of the socialist nations -— the Warsaw Pact 0rganization,/ which was
established more than a quarter of a century ago, and particularly its Politi—
cal Gonsultative Committee (PCC). The documents and recommendations adopted
by the FCC and the initiatives which it puts forward are constantly discussed
at the most important international forums. The Committee of Ministers of
Foreign Affairs and the Committee of Ministers of Defense are also working
fruitfully within the framework of the Warsaw Pact Organization. Pence
initiatives by the allied nations, acting in a united front in the interna-
tional arena, exert considerable influence on the foreign policy of the
capitalist countries. Constituting the nucleus of the system of collective
security of the socialist nations, the Harsaw Pact Organization has time and
again exerted-a sobering effect on the imperialist warmongers.

Creation of a military-political defensive alliance of socialist natiOns was
dictated by the necessity of resisting the aggressive aspirations of im-
perialism. Its activities are grOunded on the Leninist principles of peace-
ful coexistence of nations with differing social systems and the principles

of proletarian, socialist internationalism, equality before the law, respect of
the independence and sovereignty of nations, and noninterference in one
another's internal affairs. The main goal and historic mission of the Harsaw
Pact Organization is the Struggle for peace and security of peoples. The
fraternal alliance of peoples of the nations of the socialist community has
been effectively performing this noble mission during the entire period of its
many years of existence.

The 26th CPSU Congress highly praised the role which the Warsaw Pact is
playing in defense of the achievements of socialism, preserving and
strengthening international security. "...The military-political defensive
alliance of the socialist nations." states the CPSU Central Committee Ac-
countability Report, "is faithfully serving the cause of peace. It has every-
thing it needs in order reliably to defend the socialist achievements of

peoples. And we shall do everything to ensure that this continues in the
future as well!"‘

The strength of the ties of friendship among the brother socialist nations is
determined to a considerable degree by the fact that a [new type of inter-
governmental relations, unprecedented in history/ -- genuinely just. equal.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and fraternal - has formed between them. These relations, which are steadily
developing on principles of socialist internationalism, became possible thanks
to a commonality of root goals and interests of the peoples of the nations of
the socialist community, a societal system, ideology, political and economic
systems of the same type, and thanks to the unity and cohesion of the ruling
Communist and worker parties and a correct ratio of international and national
interests in their policy. "Relations betwecn nations have long been called
international," L. I. Brezhnev stated in this connection at the 26th CPSU
Congress. "But only in our time, in the world of socialism, have they genuine-
ly become relations between peoples. Millions and millions of people par-
ticipate directly in them. This, comrades, is a fundamental achievement of
socialism, a great service of socialism to mankind."5

A decisive and ever increasing role in forming the entire aggregate of inter-
relations among socialist nations is played by the /brother Harxist—Leninist
parties./ Their indissoluble alliance comprises a solid foundation, a living
soul, the community's guiding and organizing force.

Annual get-togethers between L. I. Brezhnev and the leaders of the Communist
and worker parties of the brother socialist nations. which have become a fine
tradition, constitute an effective political instrument which promotes
strengthening of the position of world socialism. Major Questions pertaining
to bilateral cooperation, general problems of the socialist community, and
fundamental questions of international affairs and foreign policy of the so-
cialist countries are discussed in the course of these meetings, and new
decisions and initiatives are drawn up and coordinated for joint action in the
international arena.

Major tasks pertaining to the development of cooperation among the socialist
nations were discussed at meetings held in the Crimea in the summer of 1981.
Questions pertaining to intensification of the economies of the brother na-
tions, specialization and co-production in various branches of production oc-
cupied the attention focus. The will of the socialist countries to do every-
thirg possible to resolve complex international problems on the basis of the
peace initiatives advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress was confirmed during these
talks. Leaders of the brother parties and nations stated a warning in con-
nection with the danger which could arise as a result of implementation of
U.S. and NATO plans to deploy new 0.8. missiles in Europe, as a result of
escalation of military budgets and the decision of the u.s. Government to
produce neutron weapons. The 1981 Crimean meetings confirmed the will of

the nations of the socialist community to strengthen their unity and not to
slacken efforts aimed at ensuring reliable defense of the achievements of so—
cialism and at strengthening peace and the security of peoples.

The practice of holding multilateral conferences of secretaries of the Central
Committees of the brother parties, at which the present world situation is
analyzed, ways to achieve further expansion of joint ideological activities
are detailed, and the tasks and goals of ideological cooperation are con-
cretized has also become an important form of international ties. Such forms
of relations as visits by delegations and working groups representing central
committees, local party agencies, establishments, educational institutions. and
friendly armies are becoming more and more widely practiced.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Unswerving adherence to the principles of socialist internationalism and
uniting of the efforts and resources of the brother peoples enables Communist
and worker parties successfully to carry out plans of building socialism and
communism and to look with confidence to the future. This is particularly
important in view of the fact that in recent years the brother socialist
countries have been compelled to carry out constructive tasks in conditions
which have become more complex. Endeavoring to impede the objective caurse of
history, to regain their lost position and to achieve superiority over the
socialisc nations, the imperialists are pursuing an extremely dangerous, ad-
venturistic policy in the international arena. Continuing further escalation
of the arms race, they are at the same time mobilizing all means of ideological
struggle in order to undermine the confidence of the masses in genuine so-
cialism and to intoxicate their consciousness with the poison of anti—Sovietism
and anticommunism.

The imperialists and their accomplices are systematically carrying out hostile
campaigns against the socialist countries, are slandering and distorting every-
thing which is taking place in these countries. Exerting ideological pressure
on the socialist world, they are counting on its internal “erosion." At the
same time international imperialism is attempting to drive a wedge into the
unity of the nations of the socialist community and to undermine the ideological
and sociopolitical cohesion of peoples which are proceeding along the path of
building coumuniSm. The Beijing leaders, who have become direct accomplices

of imperialism in the struggle against genuine socialism, the world Communist
movement and other revolutionary and progressive forces of the present day, are
marching shoulder to shoulder with imperialism.

The events of recent years once again confirm that the well-known Lenin thesis
that "the more we are victorious, the more the capitalist exploiters learn to
unite and shift to more resolute attacks"6 has retained its validity right up
to the present day. A graphic example of this is the events in Poland. In-
ternational imperialism, directing the actions of domestic antisocialist
forces, undertook an attempt to undermine the foundations of the socialist
system in this country and to turn it into a focal point of tension in Europe.
Reactionary circles in the West. stepping up the hostile campaign against the
socialist countries, seek to utilize the events in Poland in order to discredit
the ideals and principles of socialism. They are counting on a development

of events in Poland which could lead to a change in the correlation of forces
in Europe and in the world as a whole, and to a weakening of the socialist
community. Polish Communists and all elements of the Polish people who are
faithful to the principles of socialism are working to overcome the crisis
situation. The meeting of top officials of the Warsaw Pact member nations
which was held in Moscow in December 1980 became an important political sup-
port for socialist Poland. This meeting demonstrated that Polish Communists,
the Polish worker class, and the working people of this country will always

be helped by their friends. The subsequent development of events has confirmed
this. In a situation where the U.S. Government, by means of economic and
political blackmail. is attempting to force the Polish Government to give up
the measures it had taken to normalize the situation, the Harsaw Pact countries
are giving Poland comprehensive assistance and support.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

The imperialists and their accomplices should have long since comprehended

the [ruitlessness of their hopes of succeeding in turning back the course of
history and desrroying the achievements of socialism. "The history of world
socialism," stressed L. I. Brezhnev in the Central Committee Accountability
Report to the 76th CPSU Congress, "has seen all kinds of trials, it has con-
tained both complex and crisis elements. But Communists have always boldly
met the enemy's assault and have emerged victorious. This is the way things
have been and will continue to be. Let nobody doubt our common resolve to
secure our own interests and to defend the socialist achievements of peoples!"7

Mankind sees the socialist community as the vanguard of social progress.

Guided by the principles of proletarian internationalism, the CPSU and the
other brother parties of the socialist nations are persistently and con-
sistently implementing a policy of /expanding cooperation with countries which
have become liberated from colonial oppression] and which have entered upon the
path of independent development.

The powerful upsurge in the national liberation struggle evoked by the great
October Revolution, which became even more intensified with the formation of

a world socialist system, has led to the elimination of colonial empires and
the formation of more than 100 young independent states. The processes which
are taking place in these countries affect the destiny of dozens of peoples
who together comprise more than 50 percent of the world's population. Some of
the liberated countries decline the capitalist path of development and set as
their goal the building of a society which is free of exploitation and

orient themselves toward socialism. The number of these countries is grow-

ing, and the progressive reforms being carried out in these countries are
deepening.

or enormous importance for the fate of national liberation revolutions is
their link with genuine socialism. Liberated countries have true and
dependable friends in the person of the Soviet Union and the other nations of
the socialist community, friends who are ready and willing to give them help and
support in their development along a progressive path. A total of 1180 in-
dustrial enterprises, electric power stations, water engineering, agricultural
and other projects for the national economy have been constructed or are being
constructed in the governmental sector of liberated countries with the as-
sistance of the USSR. These include metallurgical enterprises designed for an
annual production of 26 million tons of steel. and electric power stations
with an aggregate generating capacity of more than 15 million kilowatts.
Projects to build 69 irrigation systems, to put into exploitation approximately
740,000 hectares of new land, are being constructed with Soviet aid.

The Soviet Union has also greatly assisted in training indigenous cadres in
developing c0untries. Each year 70-80 thousand citizens of these countries
receive various forms of production, vocational-technical, secondary specialized
and higher education and training within the framework of cooperation with our
country, which exerts considerable influence on qualitative renewal of the
social structure of previously backward countries.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The socialist community is giving economic and technical assistance to a total
of 78 developing countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. As of 1 January
1979 2685 industrial and other facilities had come on-stream in these countries
with the participation of CEMA nations. Tens of thousands of specialists from
the USSR and other socialist nations are working at construction sites in the
countries of Asia and Africa, in industry and agriculture, at hospitals and
educational institutions in these countries.

Together with the other brother countries, our country also helps strengthen the
defense capability of the liberated nations when they make such requests. We
know, for example, of what enormOus significance has been the selfless inter-
national assistance by the USSR and Cuba to the peoples of Angola and Ethiopia
in defending their revolutionary achievements and in repulsing aggression
against these African nations organized by imperialist circles. The resolute

position taken by the Soviet Union helped prevent imperialist military interven-
tion in Iran.

Our country is rendering great assistance in defending the achievements of the
April revolution to the people of friendly Afghanistan, against which im-
perialism unleashed a most genuine undeclared war. This assistance, given at
the request of the Afghan Government, is fully in conformity with the treaty

of friendship, good-neighbor relations and cooperation between the USSR and the
DRA signed in 1978, and with the letter and spirit of the United Nations
Charter, which recognizes the inalienable right of individual and collective
defense to a nation Subjected to any form of armed attack (Article 51), that is,
the right to request and receive assistance, including military. from other
countries. In rendering such assistance to Afghanistan, the Soviet Government
is guided by the definition of act of armed aggression ratified by the UN
General Assembly. As we know. according to this definition, aggression covers
not only a direct attack by the armed forces of one nation against another, but
also the infiltration of armed bands, irregular forces or mercenaries which
perpetrate acts of employment of armed force against another country.

The consistent campaign being waged by the USSR and the other nations of the
socialist community to eliminate focal areas of international détente is of
great importance for retaining national independence by liberated countries and
their movement along the path of progress. The USSR and the other nations of
the socialist comunity seek to achieve a just political settlement of the
crisis in the Near East and resolutely support the struggle of the Arab peoples
to liquidate the consequences of Israeli aggression, against the anti-Arab Camp
David separate peace deal, and for implementation of the just demands of the
Arab people of Palestine. Young nations and fighters for national independence
in other regions of the world as well have a firm and consistent defender of
their interests in the nations of the socialist community. This also applies
in full measure to Southern Africa, the peoples of which are struggling

against apartheid and for the liberation of Namibia, which is being illegally
held by the racists of the Republic of South Africa; and to East Africa, where
the question of the necessity of armed defense of the revolutionary achievements
of the peoples of Ethiopia ind Mozambique is still on the agenda; and to
Southeast Asia, where plans for new aggression against Vietnam, Laos and
Kampuchea are being nurtured to the noisy accompaniment of the anti-Vietnam and
anticormunist campaign being waged by the imperialists and by Beijing.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IJSE ONLY

The Soviet Union and the other socialist countries support the nonaligned
movement, which recently entered the third decade of its existence. Recently
we have witnessed stepped—up attempts on the part of the imperialists and
China to emasculate the antiimperialist thrust of this movement, to split its
ranks, to place them in opposition to the socialist community and other
progressive, peace-seeking forces. These attempts are receiving a proper
rebuff, however. The nonaligned movement is continuing to play an important

role in the struggle against imperialism and colonialism, against war and
aggression.

The great life-giving strength of Marxism-Leninism, which is constantly ab-
sorbing the diversified international political experience of the worker class
and all working people, is with each passing year becoming increasingly more
determining in evolution of the world revolutionary process. [The achievements
of genuine socialism [real'nogo sotsializma] are exerting increasingly greater
influence on the course of the class struggle in the capitalist countries,/
forcing capitalism to make certain social concessions to the worker class.

The struggle of the worker class of the capitalist countries against the
omnipotence of the monopolies, for the rights of the working people, for

peace and security of peoples is steadily continuing to intensify under the
influence of these factors and the deepening general crisis of capitalism.
Actions by the working people have begun to be characterized by great scope
and diversity of forms.

The international worker class and its political vanguard -- Communist and
worker parties - approached the 1980's with confident stride. They are
presently active in 94 countries. In the last 10 years approximately 800,000
new fighters have joined their ranks in Western Europe alone. The interna-
tional Communist movement, at the headwaters of which stood V. I. Lenin, has
for decades now been the most influential political force of our era, ad-
vancing forward the entire development of mankind.

Expressing the interests and aspirations of the broadest segments of the
population, Communist and worker parties are moving in a united front to
champion preservation of the fruits of detente and advance of the cause of
disarmament, and are raising up the masses in the struggle to free mankind from
the threat of a nuclear missile catastrophe. This consistent campaign by the
Communists, as was stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress, serves as a "great
unifying element and powerful factor in further cohesion and growth of the
prestige of the world Communist movement."8

The successes of the world Communist movement, the attractive force of the
ideas of Marxism-Leninism, and growth in the prestige and influence of genuine
socialism are evoking fierce resistance on the part of the class enemy. The
bourgeoisie and its ideologues, opportunists and revisionist: of every ilk are
stepping up the struggle against the Comnmnists. They are attempting to
falsify Harxism-Leninism, to emasculate its revolutionary essence, to find
"contradictions" [protivorechiya; also translates as conflicts] between the
theory of scientific socialism and the practical activities of the socialist
countries, and to discredit the socialist way of life.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the capitalist countries reactionary circles are endeavoring to discredit
the policy of the Communist parties, to shift them into the channel of social-
reformism. and to isolate them from the people. Bourgeois propaganda, in its
endeavor to undermine the political prestige of the international Communist
movement, is claiming the existence of disagreements in its ranks, which are
allegedly of an insuperable nature. Giving a rebuff to these fabrications. the
26th CPSU Congress stressed that differences in approaches to solving concrete
problems and debates between Conmnuiist parties are caused primarily by the
complexity and diversity of the tasks facing them.

"Our party." the CPSU Central Committee Accountability Report states in this
regard, "proceeds from the position that differences in opinion between Com-
munists are surmountable, of course if they are not fundamental differences
between revolutionaries and reformists. between creative Marxism and dogmatic
sectarianism and leftist adventurism. Here of course there can be no com-
promises -- today, just as during the time of Lenin. But when Communists are
fighting for a common revolutionary cause, we proceed from the position that
patient comradely discussion of differing views and positions optimally cor-
responds to their common goals."9

In the past as well, Communist parties had differing opinions on various
questions. Time and practical experience, however, have again and again con-
firmed the vitality of Lenin's statement that many disagreements "can and
definitely will disappear: this result will be produced by the logic of joint
struggle against a truly formidable adversary, the bourgeoisie... "10 The Com-
munists always have responded and continue to respond to the intrigues of im-
perialism and its accomplices with international unity of their ranks and by a
consistent struggle against bourgeois ideology, revisionism and dogmatism,

for the purity and innovative development of Harxism-Leninism, for close co-
operation of all revolutionary forces and effective solidarity with genuine
socialism, against all manifestations of anti-Sovietism.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 79.

2. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete works], Vol 26, page 40.

3. L. l. Brezhnev, “Leninskim kursom: rechi, privetstviya, stat'i,
vospominaniya" [Following a Leninist Course: Speeches, Messages of Greeting.
Articles, Reminiscences], Moscow, 1979, Vol 7. page 95.

a. "Materialy...." op. cit., page 6.

S. lbid.

6. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 40, page 244.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

"Haterialy...," op. cit., page 10.
Ibid., page 18.
Ibid., pp 17-18.

Lenin. op. cit., Vol 39, page 255.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Two. INTERNATIONAL CHARACTER OF DEFENSE 0F SOCIALIST ACHIEVEMENTS

K. Marx and F. Engels, the founders of scientific communism, proceeding from
the experience of the class struggle in conditions of premonopoly capitalism,
reached important theoretical conclusions on the [necessity of arming the
worker class and creating its military organization for defense of socialist
achievements against domestic and external enemies./

As we know, these theses were stated by K. Marx and F. Engels at a time when
there had not yet occurred any victorious socialist revolutions and the task
of comprehensive elaboration of a teaching on defense of the socialist state
was not on the agenda. The new historical conditions of the era of imperialism
and proletarian revolutions demanded further innovative development of the
Marxist military-theory legacy and elaboration of concrete questions pertain-
ing to military organization of the victorious proletariat and armed defense
of its revolutionary achievements. And this task fell to the lot of our Com-
munist Party and its founder and leader, V. I. Lenin. It was resolved in an
organic link with development of the theory of socialist revolution. Leninist
teaching on dictatorship of the proletariat and on the conditions of its
achievement and consolidation constituted for the party a point of departure
for the formulation and comprehensive elaboration of military questions.

V. I. Lenin, on the basis of a thorough analysis of the development of
capitalist countries at the stage of imperialism, reached the conclusion of
the impossibility of the victory of socialism simultaneously in all countries
and substantiated the possibility of such a victory initially in a few or
even in one single capitalist country. This victory. he stressed. will

cause "not only friction but also a direct endeavor by the bourgeoisie of
other countries to defeat the victorious proletariat of the socialist state.

In these cases war would be legitimate and just on our part. It would be a war
for socialism..."1

The theoretical conclusions reached by V. I. Lenin were fully confirmed by
the subsequent course of historical development of mankind. With the victory
of the Great October Socialist Revolution. the defense of socialism became an
immediate practical task. a most important component part of the struggle of
the working people for socialism. As V. I. Lenin foresaw, the forces of
domestic and external counterrevolution immediately proceeded to act in a
united front against the achievements of the working people. International

15

FOR OFFKJA1.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

imperialism was the organizer of the armed struggle against the young Soviet
Republic.' The imperialists of Germany, Great Britain, France, the United
States, Japan, and other countries united in their endeavor to strangle the
world's first socialist revolution. They not only gave economic and political
support to the overthrown classes of capitalists and landowners and armed the
domestic counterrevolution, but also threw against the young Soviet Republic
regular armies numbering in the thousands.

Thus life once again confirmed the correctness of one of the most important
theses of Harxism-Leninism, which states that the bourgeoisie will never agree
voluntarily to yield power to the working people, that it will endeavor to
strangle the revolution at all costs. "The transition from capitalism to com-
munism," wrote V. I. Lenin, "is an entire historical era. Until it ends, the
exploiters will inevitably retain hopes of restoration, and this /hope [it.]/
will be transformed into lattempts [it.]/ at restoration. And following the
first serious defeat, the overthrown exploiters... will throw themselves into
battle, with redoubled energy, with fury and hatred grown a hundred times over,
to gain the return of the 'paradise' which has been taken from them..."2

Elzﬁorating the theoretical and practical problems of organizing defense of
the achievements of the revolution, V. I. Lenin comprehensively revealed the
specific features of wars in defense of socialism. Pointing to their class,
revolutionary, just and general national character, at the same time he
substantiated the /integral unity of national and international tasks in the
matter of defending the achievements of socialism,/ dictated by a commonality
of class interests of the various national detachments of the proletariat and
the coalescence of their goals in the struggle against capitalism.

V. I. Lenin considered unification of the efforts of the workers of all
countries, their fraternal solidarity and mutual assistance to be an essential
condition for gaining victory over the bourgeoisie. "Capital," he stated,

"is an international force. In order to defeat it, an international alliance
of workers, an international brotherhood of workers is needed."3 Historical
experience shows that as the front of the liberation struggle broadens, as
class battles in the capitalist countries intensify, and as additional

peoples escape ﬁnm mepower of capital, the bourgeoisie resists with increasing
tenacity and unifies its efforts more and more closely on an international
scale. This in turn demands a closer unity of peoples which have taken the
path of socialism and further consolidation of all international revolutionary
forces. "...Standing against the enormous front of imperialist powers,"

V. l. Lenin stated in this connection, "we who are fighting imperialism com-
prise an alliance which requires close military unity, and we view all
attempts to disrupt this unity as an absolutely impermissible phenomenon, as
betrayal of the interests of the struggle against international imperialism."a
At the same time V. I. Lenin emphasized that for the working people of Russia
preservation and strengthening of the Soviet State is not only a national duty
but also constitutes fulfillment of one's international duty to the worker
class and the working people of other countries, optimal support of the world
revolutionary movement. Responding to a demagogic attack by a group of
“leftist Communists," he wrote in May 1918: "It is [mandatory (it.]' to defend

16

FOR‘0FFKIAL.USE(NVLY
the /socialist [it.]/ homeland namely in the interests of 'strengthening the
tie' with international socialism. He who would have a frivolous attitude
toward defense of that country in which the proletariat has already won victory
destroys the tie with international socialism."s

[During the years of civil war and foreign military intervention, the worker
class placed the great force of proletarian solidarity in opposition to counter-
revolution./ Its international solidarity constituted one of the most im-
portant sources of victory over the united forces of imperialism. A political,
economic and military alliance of Soviet republics -- a genuine embodiment of
Leninist principles of proletarian internationalism - became unified and
strengthened in the flame of civil war. For the first time in history an
organized military force was in the hands of the worker class, a force which,
international in origin, became a mighty bulwark protecting the achievements of
socialism in the struggle against the imperialist aggressors, an obstacle in
the path of their bandit policy and predatory wars of plunder.

The Great October Revolution also constituted a school of internationalism for
millions of working people in other countries. It evoked an unprecedented

surge of internationalist solidarity on the part of the international proletariat.
The working people of England, Germany, France, the United States and other
countries saw in the Land of Soviets a support of the world revolutionary move-
ment and a faithful ally in their struggle against the rule of capital. "Not

one soldier. not one cartridge against Soviet Russia!" "Peace with Russia!"
"Hands off Soviet Russia!" -- the workers of many countries came to the defense
of the cause of the Great October Revolution under such slogans as these.

The finest representatives of the working people of a number of countries in
Europe and Asia took active part in armed defense of the socialist achievements
of the Russian proletariat. At that time more than 250,000 internationalist
fighting men joined the Red Army -- Poles, Hungarians, Bulgarians, Serbs,
Croats, Czechs, Slovaks, Romanians, Germans. Mongols, Koreans, Chinese, and
representatives of other peoples. Dozens of international units operated at
various times on the civil war fronts. Defending together with the Soviet
people the achievements of the Great October Revolution, these internationalist
fighting men wrote unfading pages into the history of the fighting alliance of
the working people of the various countries.

Accepting with gratitude the fraternal assistance of the peoples of other
countries, the world's first socialist state and its army themselves carried
out with honor their internationalist duty. During the first years of
existence of the Soviet Republic, when it was fighting off furious attacks

by the united forces of imperialism and domestic counterrevolution, our people
and their Red Army were doing everything possible to support the revolutionary
struggle of the worker class of Finland, Germany, Austria, and Hungary.

From the very first days of establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat
in Hungary in 1919, the Red Army High Command prepared, on V. I. Lenin's
instructions, a plan for establishing a common front of Soviet Russia and
Soviet Hungary. The difficult situation on the civil war fronts made it
necessary temporarily to postpone implementation of this plan. The forming

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of international units to assist the proletariat of Hungary did not, however,
cease even in this adverse situation. A large group of Russian soldiers who
were in Hungary as prisoners of war fought valiantly in the ranks of the
Hungarianiked Army. In addition, the Bungarian Soviet Republic was given
effective diplomatic support.

Assistance from the land of Sovics was of decisive significance for the fate
of the brother Mongolian people. When the Provisional Government of Mongolia
turned to Soviet Russia in June 1921 with a request for help in the struggle
against the bands of Baron Ungern and domestic counterrevolution, our country
sent into Mongolia a 10,000-man expeditionary corps. The vital strength of
proletarian solidarity was also brilliantly manifested in joint actions by
Soviet and Mongolian forces to rout the Japanese aggressors who in the
summer of 1939 invaded the territory of the NPR is the Khalkhin-Gol area.

The Soviet State gave the Chinese people considerable political and moral
support and military-economic assistance in their struggle for national in-
dependence and freedom.

Assistance by the Soviet Union to the Spanish Republic in 1936-1939 constituted
a bright page in the history of international proletarian solidarity, when with
the connivance of the governments of Great Britain, France and the United
States, Spain was invaded by the fascist hordes of Germany and Italy. More
than 3000 Soviet volunteers fought in the international brigades of the
Republican Army.

Proletarian internationalism, tempered in the flame of the Great October
Socialist Revolution and civil war, and in subsequent class battles of the in—
ternational proletariat, became a powerful factor in the strengthening and
development of socialism and the international revolutionary movement, and a
genuine support of the working people of the entire world in the struggle
against international reaction.

[The Soviet people displayed unshaking loyalty to their internationaliat duty
during the years of the Great Patriotic Har./ The Soviet Armed Forces, under
the guidance of the Comauniat Party, inflicted a crushing defeat on Bitlerite
Germany and its satellites, successfully defending the freedom and in-
dependence of the socialist homeland, and carried out a great liberation
mission in respect to the countries of Europe and Asia which had been en-
slaved by German fascian and Japanese militarism.

The Soviet Union was the main force which blocked the path of German fascism
in carrying out its monstrous schemes. It hore on its shoulders the brunt of
the war and played a decisive role in the defeat of Hitlerite Germany and sub-
sequently of militarist Japan as well. Palaifiera of history are continuing

in their attempts to remove this unparalleled feat from the namory of

peoples. Facts are stuﬂnrnthings. however. And they testify that the
Soviet-German front was the main front in world Her 11. Suffice it to say

that up to mid-1964 from 190 to 270 enemy divisions were fighting simultaneous-
ly on the Soviet-German front, while from 9 to 20 divisions were operating
against British and American troops in North Africa, and from 7 to 26 divisions

18

FOR‘OFTWCIAL.USE|MVLY
in Italy. Even following the landing of Anglo-American troops in Northern
France, the bulk of fascist Germany's army continued to fight against the
Soviet Armed Forces. Of the 13,600,000 men lost by the fascist Wehrmacht as
killed, wounded or captured during World War 11, fascist losses on the
Soviet-German front totaled 10 million men. The Hitlerites lost three fourths
of their aircraft and the bulk of their tanks and artillery on this same front.

In the course of combat operations our army liberated from German-fascist and
Japanese occupation the territories of a number of countries in Europe and
Asia with a population of approximately 200 million. A total of seven million
Soviet officers and men, more than 1 million of whom were killed, took part in
the liberation of the European countries. Total Soviet Armed Forces losses in
carrying out the liberation mission in the countries of Europe and Asia ex-
ceeded three million killed, wounded and missing in action. The Armed Forces
of the USSR, carrying out their internationalist duty to the fullest. gained
the profound gratitude of the peoples of the liberated countries.

The heroic example of the Soviet people and their army in the struggle against
Hitlerite Germany fostered an upsurge in the antifascist movement in the
enslaved countries of Europe. More than 2 million patriots took part in the
resistance movement just in Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, Poland, France,
Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia. German antifascist fighting groups led by
the German Communist Party were waging a struggle against the Hitlerite

regime in difficult conditions.

Patriotic forces in a number of European countries established their own
liberation armies during the years of World War II, armies which took part,
together with the Soviet Armed Forces, in the concluding battles against the
German-fascist invaders. The Soviet Union rendered great assistance in build-
ing these armies, furnishing combat equipment, weapons and other essential
gear for forming units and combined units. The first units and combined units
of Poland, Czechoslovakia and Romania were established on the territory of the
USSR.

The Czechoslovak People's Army dates from the formation of a Czechoslovak in-
fantry battalion in the city of Buzuluk in December 1961. This battalion
received its baptism of fire in March l9b3 near the village of Sokolovo in the'
vicinity of Khar'kov. USSR decorations and medals were awarded to 87 men in
this battalion for courage and heroism displayed in this action. Company cam-
mander Jr Lt Otakar Jaros was the first soldier in a foreign unit to be
posthumously awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, while battalion
commander Ludvik Svoboda was awarded the Order of Lenin. The Czechoslovak lst
Brigade was formed on the basis of this battalion and sent to the front at the
beginning of October 1963. Fighting as an element of the-First Ukrainian
Front. it took part in the battles for liberation of Kiev, capital of the
Ukraine. That same year formation of a tank battalion, an air-force fighter
Squadron and an airborne brigade commenced.

As Soviet forces were approaching the border of Czechoslovakia, the Soviet
Government, at the request of the foreign bureau of the Czechoslovak Communist
Barty and the Czechoslovak command authorities, ordered immediate formation of

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Czechoslovak lst Army Corps. In the summer of 1966 the corps was ready to
enter combat and was placed operationally under the conmnnding general of the
First Ukrainian Front. It gained a wealth of combat experience in the course of
intensive battles in the Eastern Carpathians in September-October 1964. On

6 October, as a result of an assault on the Dukla Pass, successfully completed
jointly with Soviet troops, the men of the Czechoslovak corps set foot on
native soil. The slogan "With the Soviet Union Foreveri", born on the Dukla.
became a lodestar for all Czechs and Slovaka who were fighting for freedom and
independence. Czechoslovak soldiers fought for more than 7 months as an
element of the Fourth Ukrainian Front to liberate their homeland.

Thanks to comprehensive assistance and support by the Soviet people, forming of
the Polish Army began on the territory of our country. The Polish lat In-
fantry Division, named after Polish national hero Tadeusz Kosciuszko, became

its first combined unit. On 12 October 1953 this division, as an element of the
the 33d Army of the Western Front, entered battle with the German-fascist in-
vaders near the small Belorussian locality of Lenino. The Soviet Government
awarded decorations and medals to 239 officers and men of the Polish division
for courage and valor displayed in this battle.

The army of People's Poland grew and matured tagether with Red Army victories.
Formation of the Polish lst Corps began in August 1963; soon the Polish lst

Army was formed on the basis of this corps, successfully operating as an

element of the Firs: Belorussian Front in the Lublin sector. The Polish 2d

Army was subsequently formed on liberated Polish soil. Both armies became
elements of the Polish Army, which was more than 600,000 men strong by war's
end. Joint combat actions by Soviet and Polish troops in the course of the
Lublin-Brest, Vistula-Oder, Bast Pomeranian, Berlin and Prague offensive opera-
tions constituted important landmarks along the road of development and
strengthening of our fighting alliance.

The fighting comradeship of the Soviet and Romanian peoples developed in the
difficult wartime conditions. Defeats sustained by the German-fascist

forces on the Soviet-German front and effective propaganda vork fostered ac-
tivation of an antifascist and patriotic movement among Romanian Army per-
sonnel captured by Soviet troops. In September 1943 a conference of representa-
tives of Romanian prisoners of war appealed to the Soviet Government for per-
mission to form volunteer units on Soviet soil to take part in the struggle
against fascism. With our country's support, by spring of 1906 Romanian anti-
fascists had formed the Tudor Vladimirescu 1st Volunteer Infantry Division. As
an element of the Second Ukrainian Front, it took part in combat against the
Bitlerites in the Iasi-Kishinev Operation.

Exploiting favorable conditions created by the advance of Soviet troops,
patriotic forces in Romania, led by the Communists, overthrew the military-
fascist regime in Romania in August 196‘ and turned their weapons against
Hitlerite Germany. Operating as a component of the Second Ukrainian Front,
Romanian troops fought for liberation of their native land against the
Hitlerite occupation forces, and subsequently fought successfully, together
with the troops of the Red Army, for liberation of the brother peoples of
Hungary and Czechoslovakia.

20

non orhcm us: ONLY
At the beginning of February 1945 the Budai Volunteer Regiment was formed of
Hungarian military personnel who had come over to the side of the Soviet
forces. Following liberation of the Hungarian capital, the regiment was with-
drawn to the city of Jaszbereny, where the lat Infantry Division of the new
Hungarian Army was formed. In January-May 1965 the Soviet Union gave Hungarian
patriotic forces fraternal assistance in forming two infantry divisions and two
railway brigades.

A total of 19 infantry, 5 artillery and 5 air divisions, 6 infantry and air-
borne, 8 tank and motorized rifle, 12 artillery and mortar, and 5 combat en-
gineer brigades, as well as a large number of other units and subunits of
friendly armies were armed and trained during the war years with the assistance
of the Soviet Union. By war's end the total numerical strength of these units
amounted to 550,000 men. The Soviet command authorities allocated to them,

just from the resources of the central supply agencies, 16,500 guns and mortars,
more than 1,100 tanks and self-propelled guns, more than 2,300 aircraft, plus
large quantities of other weapons and combat equipment.

The friendly armies, which had grown in numbers and had become strengthened in
combat, took active part in the final battles in the European theater of mili-
tary operations. Troops of Yugoslavia and Bulgaria, for example, fought
shoulder to shoulder with Soviet troops in the Belgrade Operation. Two Romanian
armies and one Bulgarian army gave considerable support to the troops of the
Second and Third Ukrainian fronts in liberating Hungary. Combined units of the
People's Liberation Army of Yugoslavia and the Bulgarian lst Army took part in
the Vienna offensive operation conducted by Soviet forces. Two Romanian armies
and one Polish army, a Czechoslovak army corps and a Hungarian railway brigade
fought together with the troops of three Ukrainian fronts in the Prague Opera-
tion. The Mongolian People's Republic proved to be a reliable friend and ally
of our country in the difficult years of the Great Patriotic Her. The fraternal
Mongolian people, true to the principles of proletarian internationalism,
provided the Red Army with a large quantity of horses, food supplies, and warm
clothing. The Revolutionary Mongolia tank column and the Mongolian Herdsman

air squadron were formed with financing by the working people of that country.
In August 1945 the 80,000-man Mongolian People's Army took active part, together
with Soviet troops, in defeating the Japanese militarists in Manchuria.

Thus the brotherhood in arms which was born in the first years of existence

of Soviet rule experienced further development during the years of world Har 11.
The fighting alliance of brother peoples and armies which formed in the cOurse
of the war successfully withstood the test of strength in the final battles
against the hordes of Hitlerite Germany and militarist Japan.

World War II ended with total defeat of the aggressors, with a result unforeseen
by the imperialists: a large number of countries in Europe and Asia fell away
from the capitalist system. Socialism advanced beyond the framework of a
single country and became transformed into a world system, which was the

second most important event after the Great October Revolution. "In a
protracted and the most difficult war in the history of our homeland," reads the
CPSU Central Committee decree entitled “0n the 60th Anniversary of the Great

October Socialist Revolution:"the Soviet people accomplished a feat

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
DUI! UI'I'ILIAL U3!- UNLY

unparalleled in the history of mankind. They succeeded not only in defending
their freedom and independence but also made a decisive contribution to the

cause of saving Eurogean and world civilization from destruction by the
fascist barbarians."

The Great Patriotic Har reaffirmed the vital strength of the Leninist teaching
on defense of the socialist homeland and the correctness of the Leninist
description of wars waged by working people for the sake of saving socialism
and their revolutionary achievements. V. I. Lenin's statement that "that
people in which the majority of workers and peasants have recognized, felt

and seen that they are defending their own, Soviet rule -- rule by the working
people, that they are defending that cause the victory of which will

guarantee to them and their children the opportunity to utilize all the

benefits of culture and all things created by human labor will never be
defeated"7 has proven to be prophetic.

With formation of the world socialist system, /the Leninist theses on‘the in-
ternational character of defense of socialist achievements experienced further
development in the decisions of the Communist and worker parties of the
socialist countries./ This was dictated by the necessity of ensuring favorable
external conditions for successful accomplishment of the tasks of building
socialism and communism in a situation of intensifying aggressive intrigues

by imperialism, consolidation of the forces of international reaction, and its
uncessing attempts to split the unity of the socialist nations in order to
destroy them one by one.

Unswervingly following the prlnciples of proletarian internationalism, the CPSU
and the other ruling Harxist-leninist parties, immediately following the con-
clusion of World War II, took essential measures to establish close economic,
political and military cooperation among their countries. The USSR gave ef-
fective economic assistance to the young nations which had embarked upon a so-
cialist road of development, assistance which helped them overcome the severe
consequences of the war and to proceed with organization of societal production.
Subsequently multilateral cooperation within the framework of the Council for
Economic Mutual Assistance enabled the countries of the socialist community to
accomplish through joint efforts many important economic and scientific-techni-
cal tasks, which also had a positive effect on strengthening their defense
capability.

In the first postwar years military-political cooperation on the basis of
/bilateral treaties/ of friendship and mutual assistance constituted the prin-
cipal form of unification of efforts of the socialist countries to defend
those countries. The first such treaties were treaties signed by the USSR
during World War II: with Czechoslovakia on 12 December 1923, with Yugoslavia
on 11 April 1965, and with Poland on 21 April 1945. After World "at II came
to an end, the Soviet Union entered into similar treaties with the Mongolian
People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Hungarian People's
Republic, the People's Republic of Bulgaria, the People's Republic of China,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. and the German Democratic Republic.

The majority of socialist countries also entered into similar treaties with
one another.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
During this period the process of establishing national armies was being con-
cluded in all the young socialist nations, armies which in their class es-
sence became armies of a new, socialist type. Thanks to the solicitude of the
Communist and worker parties, they were provided with weapons and combat
equipment which were up-to-date for those times, and there occurred improvement

in their combat proficiency and ideological-political indoctrination of per-
sonnel.

Immediately following World War II the imperialists, extremely dissatisfied
with its results, commenced active preparations for another world war, hoping
that they would be able to "replay" the lost battles of the 20th century and
destroy socialism. At the same time they sharply activated the policy of "cold
war," the main content of which was undisguised blackmail, threats, acts of
provocation. and outright aggressive actions directed against the socialist
countries. U.S. imperialism, which at that time possessed a monopoly on the
atomic bomb, moved to the head of the forces which were threatening mankind
with a new world military conflagration.

In 1949 the imperialist powers hammered together the aggressive North Atlantic
bloc (NATO), and by the middle of the 1950's they had established like military-
political blocs in Southeast Asia (SEATO) and in the Near East (CENTO). Push-
ing of military preparations by the aggressive blocs was accompanied by a
frenzied arms race and by the establishment of an extensive network of U.S.
military bases along the borders of the USSR and the entire socialist community.
The NATO bloc, which was directed against the Soviet Union and the other so-
cialist nations, virtually split Europe into two opposing military camps.

Simultaneously with establishment of the NATO bloc, proclaimed by its organizers
as a "defensive organization," with the aim of deceiving Western European
public opinion, a plan was drawn up deep within the Pentagon, on the instruc-
tions of President Truman, for preparing for and waging an atomic war against
the USSR and its allies under the code name "Dropshot." Just as today, U.S.
ruling circles were counting on the flame of nuclear war raging in the
countries of Europe but not touching U.S. soil.

The war was tentatively planned to commence in 1957. A total of 300 atomic
bombs were to be dropped during the first 30 days of the war, which in the
opinion of the plan's authors were to crush the Soviet Union's will to

resist and to force it to surrender. If massive nuclear strikes did not lead
to swift surrender, the bombings were to continue, with simultaneous com-
mencement of coordinated strategic offensive operations from various directions,
with the aim of crushing the Sovietforces in Central Europe.

One's attention is drawn by the clearly marked class character and political
aims of the war schemes directed against the USSR. The plan of Operation
"Dropshot" emphasized, for example, that "the very nature of the socialist
system presents the most serious threat to U.S. national security." Therefore
the main political objective of war against the Soviet Union consisted primari-
ly in destroying the Soviet sociopolitical system, as well as stripping the
Soviet Union of its unified nationhood, in order to ensure that in the future
nothing could prevent establishment of U.S. world hegemony. In order to

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

achieve this goal, the territory of the Soviet Union was to be split up into
separate occupation zones -- Western, Ukrainian-Caucasus, Western Siberian,
Ural-Turkestan, and East Siberian-Far Eastern. Occupation troops stationed in
key industrial and administrative centers would maintain control of the ter-

ritory of'the USSR and its allies and observe compliance with the terms of
surrender.

At approximately the same time the British chiefs of staff committee was draw-
ing up on a priority schedule plans for nuclear bombardment and employment

of bacteriological weapons against the Soviet Union. According to their cal-
culations, they would be delivered on 58 Soviet cities with a population of more
more than 100,000 persons each. Moscow, Leningrad, Arkhangel'sk. Baku, and
other industrial centers were selected as priority targets.

The end of the U.S. nuclear monopoly forced U.S. ruling circles to scrap
Operation Dropshot. But this did not mean that the imperialist powers had
given up their intentions of destroying the socialist world with the aid of
armed force. Stubbornly adhering to an aggressive course of policy. they con-
tinued, contrary to the will of peoples, their policy "from a position of
strength," which contained the threat of another world war. In December 1956
a meeting of the NATO Council adopted a decision to equip the armies of this
bloc with nuclear weapons, while somewhat later the Paris Agreements,

signed by the NATO member countries, were ratified and went into effect on

5 May 1955, opening the door to NATO to the FRG. Having become a member of
NATO, West Germany, which at that time was governed by the revanchist right
wing of the monopoly bourgeoisie, became actively involved in the arms race
and soon became a most important component of the system of aggressive blocs
established by the imperialist powers. A focal point for another world war
was ripening in the center of Europe.

This development of the international situation confirmed the correctness and
farsightedness of V. I. Lenin, who stated that peoples taking the socialist
path of development "definitely need a close military and economic alliance,
for otherwise the capitalists... will crush and strangle us one by one."8
Under the prevailing conditions the brother parties of the socialist countries
were faced with the objective necessity of elaborating a unified program of
actions for the purpose of ensuring reliable defense of revolutionary
achievements and strengthening the world socialist system. It was essential
to place in opposition to the united forces of international imperialism the
unified might of the peace-seeking socialist nations and to establish a
reliable system of their collective defense and security. Toward this end a
conference was convened in May 1955 in Warsaw, capital of the Polish People's
Republic, at which the heads of the governments of Albania,9 Bulgaria, Hungary,
the GDR, Poland, Romania, the USSR and Czechoslovakia signed on 16 Hay 1955

a treaty of friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance, which has gone down
in history as the [Warsaw Pact./

Creation of the Warsaw Pact Organization was of enormous international sig-
nificance. It vividly embodied the Leninist ideas of proletarian interna-

tionalism and the necessity of unity and solidarity of the socialist countries
in defense of their revolutionary achievements and in the struggle against

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
aggressive imperialist forces. Constituting a genuinely defensive alliance,
the Warsaw Pact Organization has no other aims than the defense of socialism,
securement of a firm peace for the benefit of all peoples, and creation of
favorable external conditions for accomplishing the tasks of building socialism
and communism.

The aims of the Warsaw Pact are formulated in its preamble. It states that the
Contracting Parties have decided to enter into this Treaty "in order to ensure
their security and in the interests of maintaining peace in Europe."10 Con-
firming their aspiration for strengthening international peace and security,
the parties to the Treaty pledged "to refrain in their international relations
from the threat of force or the use of force and to resolve their international
disputes by peaceful means."11 They declared their willingness "to participate
in a spirit of sincere cooperation in all international actions aimed at en~
suring international peace and security,“12 and "to seek the adoption, in
agreement with other nations which desire to cooperate in this matter, ef- .
fective measures toward a general arms reduction and banning of atomic, hydrogen
and other mass destruction weapons."13

Guided by the interests of peace and security, the Warsaw Pact member nations
pledged to consult with one another on all important international questions
affecting their common interests, as well as to hold urgent consultations
whenever in the opinion of any member nation there arose the threat of military
attack on one or several Warsaw Pact members. If it proved impossible to
eliminate such a threat, Article b of the treaty would come into effect. Ac-
cording to this article, in case of an armed attack in Europe against one or
several Warsaw Pact member nations, each member nation, individually and by
agreement with other members, is obligated to give the attacked country or
countries immediate assistance by all means which seem necessary to that
country, including the employment of military force.

In order to achieve advance preparation for effective joint defense, the
parties to the treaty agreed to establish a Joint Command with military

forces assigned to it, a command operating on the basis of jointly specified
principles. At the same time they pledged to take other coordinated measures
requisite for strengthening their defense capability; not to participate in
any coalitions or alliances and not to enter into any agreements the aims of
which are contrary to the privisions of the Treaty, and to act in a spirit of
friendship and cooperation with the aim of further development and strengthen-
ing of economic and cultural ties.

An important feature in the Warsaw Pact is the content of Article 9, which
states that this Treaty "is open to accession by other countries, regardless
of their societal or governmental system, which express their willingness, by
means of participation in this treaty, to promote unification of the efforts
of peace-seeking nations with the objective of ensuring peace and the security
of peoples."14

Thus the content of the Warsaw Pact is entirely permeated by the ideas of
peace. There has been no other military-political alliance in history with
such noble aims and tasks. Herein lies its root difference from the al—
liances and blocs linking the nations of the capitalist world. Regardless of

25
l")R'OFF1CJAI.lEﬂE(NWLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the form of imperialist alliances, they always aim at preparation for and
initiation of aggressive wars and impeding of social progress. Suffice it to
mention the activities of the NATO bloc, the participation or support of which
has been involved in every more or less major act of aggression perpetrated
since 1969.

In the period since establishment of the Warsaw Pact Organization, IHarxist-
Leninist teaching on defense of the achievements of socialism has been en-
riched with new theses and conclusions,/ advanced and formally stated in
documents of congresses of Harxist-Leninist parties of the socialist countries
and international conferences of Communist and worker parties in 1957, 1960,
and 1969. An important place in this teaching is occupied by theses and con—
clusions which describe imperialism as the source of contemporary wars. which
reveal the aggressive thrust of its bloc policy, and which substantiate the
objective necessity of collective defense of socialism and define its prin-
cipal forms and means.

A conclusion on the possibility of averting another world war and the neces-
sity of uniting peace-seeking forces to defend socialism and peace throughout
the world, for example, received support at the 1957 Conference of Representa-
tives of Communist and Worker Parties of the Socialist Countries, and the
thesis on the necessity of defending socialist achievements against domestic
and external enemies as a most important mechanism of.the socialist revolution
and the building of socialism was formally stated.

It was pointed out at the 1969 International Conference of Communist and
worker Parties that "as in the past, the spcnrheld of the aggressive strategy
of imperialism is directed primarily against the socialist nations. Imperial-
ism refuses to renounce direct armed struggle against socialism. It is con-
tinuously escalating the arms race, is attempting to activate military blocs
created for purposes of aggression against the Soviet Union and the other
socialist nations, is intensifying the ideological struggle against them, and
is attempting to impede their economic development."15 The conference
stressed that the defense of socialism is the international duty of Communists
and that as long as the aggressive NATO bloc continues to exist, an important
role is played by the Warsaw Pact Organization in preserving and defending
peace and the world socialist system, and in guaranteeing the security of the
socialist countries against military attack by the imperialist powers.16

The entire course of events since 1955 and incessant attempts by international
imperialism to split and destroy piecemeal the world soeialist system have
confirmed that the national independence and the very existence of each so-
cialist nation can be reliably guaranteed only through the joint efforts of
the entire socialist community. No one country, be it large or small, can ig—
nore the necessity of cooperation with the other socialist nations in the
realm of defense and cannot ignore the need for military unity. Military
isolation from the other nations of the socialist community, just as economic
or political isolation, merely plays into the hands of the enemies of so-
cialism, since this makes it easier for them to carry out their sinister
schemes.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Viewing the international character of the defense of socialist achievements as
one of the general laws and patterns of the socialist revolution, the building
of socialism and communism, Harxist-Leninist science at the same time reveals
the specific features of manifestation of this mechanism in different concrete
historical situations.

An important feature of the defense of socialism in the present-day situation is
the fact that it is organized in conditions of a correlation of forces in the
world arena which has shifted in favor of socialism, as well as further aggrava-
tion of the general crisis of capitalism and increased aggressiveness on the
part of imperialism. The established military-strategic balance between the na-
tions of the socialist community and the imperialist bloc prevents interna-
tional imperialism from determining the fate of countries and peoples as it sees
fit, subordinating them to schemes of reestablishing its world domination, and
restricts its capabilities to crush the struggle of the masses for national in-
dependence, liberation from capitalist exploitation, and against the omnip-
otence of the monopolies. Hence the endeavor on the part of imperialist na-
tions to disrupt the military-strategic balance by means of an unchecked arms
race and to achieve superiority. Hence their brazen adventurism and willingness
to gamble away the vital interests of mankind for the sake of their narrow
selfish aims. which today characterize the policy of the most aggressive im-
perialist circles.

Only the unified might of the nations of the socialist community can stand up to
and restrain these misanthropic aspirations of international imperialism. This

is why representatives of the Heroes Pact member nations were forced to declare at
the 15 Hay 1980 meeting of the Political Consultative (knmnittee: "...es long as
the NATO bloc exists, and as long as it continues building up its military
potential in the endeavor to gain military superiority, the members of the

Warsaw Pact will undertake all necessary measures to maintain their defense
capability at the requisite level. They will always display concern for the
reliable security of their peoples."17

Another specific feature of the present international situation, which exerts
considerable influence on organization of the defense of socialist achievements,
is the fact that the Chinese leaders have become a direct accomplice and ally
of imperialism. They have established close ties with the most aggressive
forces of the North Atlantic bloc and have drawn China onto a path of hostile
policy toward the USSR and the other nations of the socialist community. This
was graphically demonstrated by the barbaric attack by the Chinese militarists
on socialist Vietnam in 1979 and is being confirmed today by continuing acts

of provocation on the Vietnam and Laos borders and by all-out assistance to

the bands of Pol Pot supporters and Afghan basmachi. "Unfortunately. there have
been no changes for the better in Beijing's foreign policy," stated the Central
Committee Accountability Report to the 26th CPSU Congress in this connection.

"It continues to be aimed at aggravation of the international situation
and is aligned with the policy of imperialism."18

It follows from this that militarist China presents a serious danger to peace-
loving peoples. These are the realities. And this also demands further unity
of the socialist countries and increases the responsibility of each nation for

27

FOI'OFFKJA1.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

effectiveness of measures being taken to strengthen national security and the
security of the entire socialist community.

A scientifically substantiated, consistent. and coordinated policy on the part
of Communist and worker parties and their unswerving loyalty to the principle
of proletarian, socialist internationalism assume partiCularly great importance
in this complex international situation. Therefore the present stage in orga-
nization of the defense of socialist achievements is characterized by further
growth in the leadership role of Marxist-Leninist parties in military organiza-
tional development.

Guided by the Leninist thesis of dialectical unity of the economic, scientific-
technical, moral-political potentials and military potential proper as the
principal components of the defense might of the state. the Communist and

worker parties of the socialist countries are doing everything necessary to en-
sure that the armed forces of the Raraaw Pact member nations are at a level in
conformity with the demands of today's war. And, as is demonstrated by
exercises held each year, definite success has been achieved in this. All
allied armies and the Joint Forces are presently armed with modern combat equip-
ment and weapons and comprise a powerful fighting organism bound together by the
ideas of MarxissrLeninism and by the noble, lofty goal of selfless service to
the cause of defense of peace and socialism.

FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 30, page 133.

2. Ibid., Vol 37, page 260.

3. Ibid., Vol 40. page 53.

a. Ibide, Pp 98-99.

5. Ibid., Vol 36, page 292.

6. "O 60-y godovshchine Velikoy Oktyabr'skoy Sotsialisticheskoy Revolyutsii:
postanovleniye TsK KPSS st 31 yanvarya 1977 gods" [0n the 60th Anniversary
of the Great October Socialist Bevolution: CPSU Central Committee Decree
of 31 January 1977]. Moscow. 1977, page 6.

7. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 38, page 315.

8. lbid., Vol 40, page A6.

9. Representatives of Albania ceased participation in the activities of the
Warsaw Pact Organization in 1962, and Albania withdrew from this organiza-
tion in 1968.

10. "Organizatsiya Varshavskogo Dogovora: dokumenty i materialy 1955-1980"

[The Harsaw Pact Organization: Docuaents and Materials, 1955-1980], Moscow,
1980, page 6.

28

INDR‘OFF1CJAL.USIECN¢LY
11. Ibid., page 7.

12. Ibid.

13. Ibid.

16. Ibid., page 9.

15. "Hezhdunerodnoye eoveehchaniye Weticheeukh 1 rebochikh pertiy:
dokunenty 1 uteriely" [International Conference of Commiet end Worker
Parties: Documents end Materials], macaw, 1969, page 287.

16. Ibid., pp 303-304.

17. "0rgen1zateiye...." op. cit., pege 269.

18. 'ﬁaterialy XXVI 8"yezde KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSIJ Congress].
page 11.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Three. THE HARSAH PACT -- RELIABLE SHIELD OF PEACE AND SOCIALISH

Creation of a military-political alliance of socialist nations was an act of un-
fading historical significance. The period subsequent to establishment of the
Harsaw Pact demonstrated how correct and essential this measure was. Unifica-
tion of the capabilities of the brother socialist countries enabled them to
establish a reliable system of defense against aggression on the part of the im-
perialist powers, with this objectively fostering stabilization of internation
relations and strengthening of peace in Europe and throughout the world. -

The international solidarity of the Soviet Union and the other nations of the
socialist community time and again had a sobering effect on the imperialist
aggressors and forced them to renounce their criminal schemes. Such was the
case in 1956, for example, when the Soviet Union rendered fraternal assistance
to the Hungarian people in crushing a counterrewolutionary insurrection un-
leashed by domestic reactionaries with the active assistance of the imperialist
powers. In August 1961 the Harssw Pact member nations resolutely supported
protective measures taken by the government of the 603 along the boundary with
Vest Berlin, which was being utilized by international imperialism for sub-
‘ersive purposes. The allied nations, true to the principles of socialist in-
ternationalism, did not remain indifferent when the socialist system in
Czechoslovakia was threatened in August 1968. Through the joint efforts of
the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, ﬁungary. the GDR, and Poland, effective assistance
was given to the Czechoslovak people in defending their socialist achievements
and in thwarting an attempt by the imperialists and their accomplices to wrest
this country from the world socialist system.

The Soviet Union and the other ﬂarsaw Pact sember nations also came Out resolute-
ly in defense of the socialist revolution in Cuba, which was made the target of
aggression and blackmail on the part of 0.5. imperialism. Nor did they leave
socialist Vietnam in the lurch. As a result of comprehensive assistance and
support rendered to the heroic Vietnamese people by the brother socialist
countries, the largest-scale attempt by 0.5. imperialism since World War II to
crush a socialist nation by armed force and to strangle a national liberation
revolution ended in failure. As was already noted, the brother peoples of the
socialist nations also gave Vietnam assistance in repulsing Chinese aggression
in 1979.

30

FOR 0FFKJA1.USE‘0NLY
But of course the main result, crowning more than 25 years of activity by the
Uarsaw Pact Organization, is the secure-ant of peace and prevention of another
world war. "The skies above Europe have been peaceful for sore then 30 years
now." stated 1.. I. Brezhnev in a speech in Prague on 31 Hay 1978. "This is very
inportant. It would sees that history has never before bestowed such a lengthy
peace on the peoples of our continent. And the peoples should be clearly

aware that this is in large measure. and even to adecisive degree a result of
the fact that half of Europe today is living in conditions of socialism. Peace
in Europe is in large seasure a result of_our co-on efforts and the coordinated
foreign policy of the Warsaw Pact eenber nations."1

The struggle for peace, the results of which in the final analysis determine the
fate and future of mankind, is being waged today from an i-easurably stronger
position than at any tine in the past. The unified eight of the nations of the
socialist consunity and their coordinated foreign-policy activities, thanks to
which an extensive aggregate of interlinked constructive aessures was carried
out, have made it possible to break a tragic cycle: a world war, followed by a
brief respite of peace, followed by another world war. The Peace Program pro-
claimed at the 26th CPSU Congress and subsequently further developed at the

25th and 26th congresses. has become an effective factor in nobilizing the
forces of peace and progress and achieving further developnent of the process of
detente. This Program was approved by the allied nations as a col-non foreign-
policy platforn of the entire socialist cousunity. It 'also received the support
and approval of the peoples of developing and capitalist countries. all those

to whom peace and the future of mankind are dear. And the ruling circles of the
leading capitalist countries were coepelled to reckon with this Program in their
policies.

As a result of the vigorous and consistent activities of the Soviet Union and
the entire socialist col-unity, an inprovenent in the international situation
was achieved in the 1970's. The deepening process of detente became increasing-
ly filled with concrete economic and political content. This success of the
policy of detente logically proceeded fron enhancelsent of the international role
of the socialist nation and the influence of their coordinated policy on the
world situation.

A large part of the credit for the fact that the brother socialist nations are
acting in a united front in the international arena goes to the [highest
political agency of the Warsaw Pact Organisation -- the Political Consultative
Comittee (PCC)./ Decisions on root problsns affecting the canon interests of
the Warsaw Pact member nations are collectively elaborated at PCC neetings. and
major questions connected with strengthening the defense capability of the
allied countries and performance by these cauntries of their pledges in the area
of joint defense are excised and settled at these neetings. The adopted
decisions reflect the coordinated, unified position of the allied countries.

By mutual agreenent. meetings of the PCC are held alternately in the capitals
of the brother comtries. They are usually held at the highest level. with

the participation of the general (first) secretaries of the Central Cousitttees
of the brother Conunist and worker parties and the heads of government.

31

FOIOFFICIALUSEONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Participation in the work of the PCC meetings by the leaders of the ruling
parties and‘hesds of government gives the adopted decisions considerable weight
and greatly raises the international prestige of this body.

The principle of sovereign equality is the basic principle governing the activi-
ties of the Political Consultative Committee. Representatives of all allied
nations enjoy equal rights in placing questions on the agenda, in discussing them
and reaching decisions on them. The idea of collective elaboration of a common,
coordinated policy of the socialist nations is formally stated in the text of the
treaty and is unswervingly implemented. Collective discussion of the interna-
tional situation and synthesis of the experience of carrying out joint actions
enables the participants in the PCC meetings deeply to reveal the general patterns
and trends of world development, to determine the main direction and specify cor-
rect points of reference for carrying out a coordinated foreign policy.

The main problems which continuously occupy the center of attention of the
Political Consultative Committee include the following: the struggle to prevent
another world war, for collective security in Europe and a just solution to its
problems; defense of the achievements of socialism and strengthening of the
unity and solidarity of the socialist countries; support of peoples struggling
for their freedom and independence.

One of the most important problems of foreign policy activity of the Warsaw Pact
member nations is the /campaign for peace and the establishment of a reliable
system of European security./ This is understandable, for Europe is one of the
most important regions in the world. During two world wars the bloodiest battles
took place here, vast areas were densested, and the greatest number of persons
were killed. The European continent continues today to remain that area on our
planet which is the most sensitive to changes in the international climate. Con-
centrated here is the greatest quantity of military forces and various weaponry,
as well as the greatest danger of outbreak of another world war. For this reason
the Harsaw Pact member nations are constantly applying maximum efforts to

create a system of international relations whereby wars will never again break
out in Europe, and relations between countries will be constructed on principles
of peaceful mutual cooperation.

The FCC has come forth with a great many concrete proposals pertaining to mili-
tary detente in Europe. A declaration was adopted at the very first PCC meeting,
in Prague in January 1956, which expressed a deep aspiration for peace. It
stressed that peaceful conditions for development of the European countries can
best be guaranteed by creating a collective security system which would replace
the existing groupings. Toward this end a proposal was made to negotiate an
appropriate agreement among a number of European countries, including the USSR,
Great Britain, France, as well as the United States. With the aim of creating
the requisite trust among nations, the PCC proposed that the member nations of
the Warsaw Pact Organization and NATO pledge to renounce the employment of force
and to resolve disputes solely by peaceful means. The sec also proposed a treaty
of nonaggression among neighboring countries and the establishment in Europe of a
special "arms limitation and control" zone.2

At the Moscow meeting of the PCC in May 1958 the Warsaw Pact member nations
presented constructive proposals on entering into a nonaggression pact between

32
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
the NATO member nations and the member nations of the Harsaw Pact.3 A Soviet
proposal calling for a peace treaty with Germany and an end to the occupation ar-
rangement in West Berlin was unanimously supported at a meeting of foreign af-
fairs ministers of the Harsaw Pact countries in April 1959, while the PCC meeting
in March 1961 once again declared the urgent need to eliminate "remnants of
World War II by concluding a peace treaty with both German states and. in con-
nection with this, neutralizing the focal point of danger in West Berlin, by
transforming it into a demilitarized free city."4

The peace-seeking proposals by Harsaw Pact member nations were accompanied by con-
crete steps which confirmed the seriousness of their intentions. The Warsaw Pact
countries repeatedly reduced their armed forces. In 1955-1959 their numerical
strength was reduced by 2,596,500 men, with a corresponding reduction of arms,
military equipment and defense expenditures. In 1960 the Soviet Union unilateral-
ly reduced its armed forces by an additional 1.200.000 men, after which their
strength level was lower than that proposed in 1956 by thetiestern powers, and
below the actual strength level of 0.8. forces. Thus within only five years

after establishment of the Warsaw Pact Organization, the member nations reduced
their forces by 3,796,500 men.5 They also made numerous reductions in military
forces in subsequent years.

At the same time the Harsaw Pact countries were continuing to increasetiiplomatic
activity. seeking a move toward detente and strengthening of peace in Europe. In
January 1965 the PCC drew the attention of the European community to the danger
ofznans to establish multilateral NATO nuclear forces. A proposal to convene an
All-European Conference on Security in Europe, which subsequently played an im-
portant role in the campaign for international détante, was first presented at
that same meeting. The PCC also proposed an agreement on a nuclear arms freeze
and the establishment of atom-free zones in Europe, and reaffirmed its willingness
to conclude a nonaggression pact with the NATO member nations. At the same time
the participants in the meeting warned the western powers that if the plans for
multilateral NATO nuclear forces were carried through. the socialist countries
would be forced to take response measures to guarantee their own security. The
firm position taken by the socialist countries and support of this position by
the peace-loving world community resulted in thwarting of the schemes of the NATO
bosses, which threatened the cause of peace.

The following year the Warsaw Pact member nations signed in Bucharest a special
Declaration on Strengthening Peace and Security in Europe, which specified an ex-
tensive program of actions. In particular, this program called for implementa-
tion of such measures as the simultaneous dismantling of existing military
alliances or at least disbanding of the NATO and Harsaw Pact military organizations;
partial measures to achieve military detente on the European continent, including
the closing down of foreign military bases, withdrawal of troops on foreign soil,
reduction of the numerical strength of the armed forces of both German states and
establishment of nuclear-free zones; prevention of PRC access to nuclear weapons
in any form; recognition of the presently existing borders between European
countries; peaceful settlement of the German question on the basis of the fact

of existence of two German states, the permanent stability of their borders and
renunciation of acquisition of nuclear weapons by these nations; convening of a
general European conference to discuss questions of ensuring security in Europe
and arranging for general European cooperation.

33

FOR(Mﬂﬂ(1Al.USEIONLY
PUK UI'HLIAL ODE ONLY

The proposals drawn up at the Bucharest meeting were further developed at PCC
meetings held in March 1969 in Sofia and a year later in Budapest, as well as
at the Moscow PCC meeting in August 1970. In particular, an appeal to all
European countries was adopted at the Budapest meeting, "appealing for coopera-
tion in convening a general European conference and creating the necessary

preconditions for this conference to be successful and justify the hopes which
peoples place in it.”6

occurred in the 1970's. The consistent campaign of the Warsaw Pact Organiza-
tion for strengthening peace and detente led to a considerable increase in its
prestige and influence on development of international relations. The peoples
of the European countries, in spite of the slanderous lies of bourgeois
propaganda, became increasingly more convinced of the peace-seeking intentions
of the USSR and the other nations of the socialist community and of the con-
structive and substantiated nature of their proposals aimed at strengthening

peace and security in Europe. All this could not help but exert a positive
influence on the international political climate of the 1970's.

An important place among the most significant events of those years is occupied
by normalization, on the basis of corresponding treaties, of relations between
the USSR. the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Polish People's Republic and
the 608 on the one hand and the PRC on the other, as well as the signing of the
quadripartite agreement on West Berlin, which signified a decisive step toward
formal recognition of the results of world war II and postwar development in
Europe. Bilateral treaties concluded between the socialist countries and the
FRC stated formal recognition of the borders existing between them, recognized
the western boundary of Poland along the Oder and Neisse rivers, and contained
the declaration that the contracting parties had no territorial claims and
would not advance such claims in the future. An agreement on Heat Berlin,
signed by the USSR, the United States, Great Britain and France, contained,
among other points, the important provision that relations between-the city's
western sectors and the PRC 'Mould be maintained and develop taking into con-
sideration the fact that these sectors would continue not to be a component

part of the Federal Republic of Germany and would continue in the future not
to be governed by the PRC."

The Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, convened in 1975
at the initiative of the socialist countries, constituted a major success of the
policy of peace. This conference confirmed the inviolability of the postwar
boundaries established between countries and elaborated the principles which
are to guide the mutual relations of the nations participating in the con-

ference, and specified new prospects for long-term peaceful cooperation among
them.

Thanks to the efforts of the nations of the socialist community, during those
years success was also achieved in making headway in some of the areas

of arms limitation. In particular, new advances were made along the path of
limiting strategic arms and thus holding the arms race in check in its most

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dangerous direction. For example, an antimissile defense system limitation
treaty and a provisional agreement on certain measures in the area of strategic
arms limitations (SALT I) were concluded between the USSR and the United States.
Additional documents were signed during L. l. Brezhnev's 1973 visit to the
United States: an agreement on preventing nuclear war; basic principles of
further strategic arms limitations talks; an agreement on scientific and tech-
nical cooperation in the area of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, plus others.

Tangible results were also achieved. especially in Europe, in the area of
normalization of relations between countries with differing social systems and
in development between them of political contacts, trade-economic relations on a
basis of equality. scientific-technical and cultural relations.

Consequently, international relations in the 1970's were positive on the whole,
favorable for the cause of peace and social progress. Consolidation and further
development of this progress would be in the root interests of all peoples.

At the end of the 1970's and beginning of the 1980's, however, aggressive im-
perialist forces placed in opposition to positive processes of world development
a policy which attests to their unwillingness to consider the realities of
today's world. U.S. ruling circles led a crusade against the policy of inter-
national détente. They set about strenuously to destroy everything positive
which had been achieved in Soviet-American relations with considerable dif—
ficulty in the preceding years. Ratification of SALT II was stymied; negotia-
tions on other arms limitation items were unilaterally suspended. The United
States, with the support of the other imperialist powers. proceeded to pursue

a policy of disrupting the military-strategic balance which had been established
between the socialist world and the capitalist world, of achieving military

superiority, and of dictating its will to the socialist nations "from a
position of strength."

The arms race unleashed by the imperialists represents the greatest threat to
the cause of peace and security of peoples. It became sharply intensified fol-
lowing the May (1978) and December (1979) NATO Council meetings, and assumed

an unprecedented scale under the present U.S. Reagan-Haig administration. For
example, U.S. arms expenditures amounted to 26.1 percent of the annual budget
in 1981. They will increase by an additional 25 percent in 1982 and will reach
a total of more than 220 billion dollars —- a peacetime level unparalleled in
U.S. history. In the period 1981-1986 President Reagan proposes spending on
the military the astronomical sum of 1.5 trillion dollars (in 1981 prices).

Intense efforts are in progress in the United States on development of the

MX intercontinental ballistic missile system, targeted to become operational

in 1987. Simultaneously work is in progress on development of the Trident sub-
marine-launched nuclear missile system. a new strategic bomber, a nuclear-
powered “supercarrier,” etc. Development of laser, space and other weapons
based on new physical properties is proceeding at an accelerated pace. There
has been a sharp increase in expenditures on the development of new, "binary"
chemical munitions -- artillery shells, bombs and mines filled with two sub-
stances which, upon combining, form a lethal gas. In spite of protests by the
world community, manufacture of neutron warheads has begun.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The U.S. military is carrying out far-reaching plans of carrying the arms race
into space, as is attested by the launch program involving the space shuttle
"Columbia." One of the principal tasks of this program is perfection of a
laser-weapon guidance system. Space shuttles would be employed for the purpose
of regularly transporting spy satellites and other heavy military equipment in-
to space. Considerable funds have been allocated for development of a long-
range optical surveillance system which is to be deployed in space.

Vigorous U.S. efforts to strengthen NATO are also continuing. Under pressure
applied by U.S. ruling circles, military appropriations of the NATO countries
increased 12-fold from 1949 through 1980. A particularly rapid growth is noted
from the end of the 1970's, when a long-term military program was adopted,
calling for an immense growth of the combat capabilities of the armies of these
countries by 1995. In 1980, for example, they spent almost 225 billion dollars
for militaristic purposes, with the European NATO members spending approximately
80 billion of this amount - almost 10 billion dollars more than in the preced-
ing year. In 1981 this sum increased to 300 billion. Growth of military ex-
penditures will also continue in subsequent years, since the United States
presented an ultimatum at the December (1980) meeting of the NATO Council,
demanding that its European partners strictly adhere to the decision calling for
an annual increase in military expenditures of not less than 3 percent. At

the same time the process of militarization of the economy is advancing at a
rapid pace, especially in the leading NATO cauntries, and advances in science
and technology are becoming increasingly subordinated to tasks of preparing for
war.

The buildup of the military might of imperialism is proceeding along many lines.
We should mention first and foremost the NATO decision to deploy new U.S.
intermediate-range missﬂesin Western Europe: 108 Pershing II launchers and

464 Tomahawk land-based cruise missiles. Public protests in Western Europe to
this decision had not yet died down when the new U.S. Administration demanded
at the Rome meeting of the NATO Council (1981) a new analysis of the correla-
tion of forces [sootnosheniya sil -- also translates as "balance of power"]
between the Warsaw Pact and NATO countries and elaboration of NATO "technical
requirements" in intermediate-range nuclear missile weapons. The Pentagon is
now talking about deploying 1500-2000 missiles on the European continent.

Buildup of NATO military power in the area of conventional arms is also
proceeding at full speed. Plans call for increasing the strength of the U.S.
armed forces by almost a quarter of a million men by 1986. 0.3. and FRG
ground forces are taking delivery on the new Abrams and Leopard—2 tanks, which
are from 50 to 100 percent superior in performance characteristics to the
models they are replacing. An extensive array of antitank weapons is being
(helsped: alongdde TOW, MILAN, and HOT antitank missiles, the NELLPIRB antitank
missile, with an automatic guidance system, has now become operational. Par-
ticular attention is being focused on saturation-equipping combined units with
antitank helicopters. Air forces are taking delivery on new P—lS, F-lb, A-lO
Tornado and Jaguar aircraft. The decision has been made to deploy on board
U.S. Navy warships, beginning in January 1982, cruise missiles with an ef-
fective range in excess of 1000 kilometers. In general-purpose naval forces
there is taking place further improvement and development of attack, ASH,

mine warware and amphibious landing forces, which should substantially increase

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
their combat capabilities. The organizational structure of forces is cor-
respondingly changing. Reorganization of British combined units and units was
completed last year. PRC ground forces are transitioning to a new organiza-
tional structure which, in the opinion of Western experts, will increase their
combat capabilities by approximately 30 percent.

According to the design of NATO military-political leaders, accomplishment of
the long-range military program will constitute the material basis for implemen-
tation of new military doctrines and strategic plans by the NATO member nations.
As we know, in 1967 the United States replaced the doctrine of "massive
retaliation" [massirovannogo vozmezdiya] with the strategy of "flexible
response" [gipkogo reagirovaniya]. The latter is now being subjected to
strong influence by a new U.S. strategy -- the strategy of "realistic
deterrence" [realisticheskogo ustrasheniya]. the heart of which is the idea

of "limited nuclear war" [ogranichennoy yadernoy voyny], advanced in the
notorious "Directive 59" of former U.S. President Carter. The Pentagon is
presently elaborating a ”new military strategy." While fully retaining the
ideas of the Carter directive, it additionally demands that the U.S. armed
forces and economy be prepared to wage simultaneously two major, protracted
"non-nuclear wars" [neyadernyye voyny] -- in Europe and in the Near East.

as well as participation in a minor conflict in any other part of the world.
Thus buildup by the NATO nations of their military power is being accompanied
by a shift in military-political conceptions from "containment” to "preventive
Strike" [preventivnomu udaru], from "sufficiency" [dostatochnosti] to
"superiority" [prevoskhodstvu]. Directive 59 plainly specifies the possibility
of the United States launching a nuclear missile first strike against

"military targets" [voyennym ob"yektam] in the Soviet Union.

We must note that these plans are being increasingly condemned in progressive
circles, particularly in the countries of Hestern Europe. This is indicated
by mass demonstrations, statements by political leaders and representatives of
the clergy, the appearance of increasing numbers of peace committees, the
holding of forums, peace weeks, and statements by scholars working with
problems of security. And this is understandable, for implementation of the
schemes of the NATO strategists threatens Europe, especially its civilian
population, with incomparable misfortunes. To understand this, it suffices to
ponder the following figures. A total of 10 million persons were killed in
World War I, only 5 percent of whom were civilians, while in World War II 50
percent of the more than 50 million deaths were civilian. During the war in
Korea civilians comprised 84 percent of total casualties. while during the
U.S. aggression in Vietnam, as is attested by the figures of Stockholm's In-
ternational Institute for Investigation of the Problems of Peace, more than

90 percent of those killed were civilians. It is not difficult to imagine

what densely-populated Europe can expect from a future world war, if the im-
perialists unleash such a war.

Concentration of U.S. nuclear missile weapons in the Hesrern European NATO
countries,the intention to deploy in these countries new intermediate-range
missiles, neutron weapons, new types of chemical weapons and other barbaric
means of waging war have given rise among the population of these countries to
a valid fearthat the Americans could turn Europe into a nuclear confrontation

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run urn-u Mt. var. UM.‘

zone. Under pressure from the masses. the ruling circles in a number of
European countries are attempting, although cautiously at present, to ensure
that the new Washington administration takes their interests fully into ac-
count in shaping its foreign policy, in particular the urgent necessity of
diplomatic contacts with the USSR.

Such a reaction on the part of the Western Europeans to U.S. "concern" for
their "security" impelled U.S. ruling circles once again to resort to a device
which is typical in the capitalist world -~ an attempt to lay the blame on the
Soviet Union for initiation of another round of escalation of the arms race.
lmperialist propaganda commenced an extensive campaign against a nonexistent
"Soviet military threat." As we know, such campaigns have long since been

an integral element of political life in the United States. They are used to
push military appropriations through Congress, in attempts to reverse the
process of détente, etc. Now they have decided to employ this technique on an
international scale.

To accuse the Soviet Union of a desire for war is not only unjust but
blasphemOus to the highest degree. Everybody knows that the peoples of the
socialist countries experienxd more than any other countries the bloody horrors
of the last war. The Soviet Union lost more than 20 million lives in that

war, 20 percent of Poland's population perished, and the peoples of the other
socialist countries also sustained enormous casualties. We should also like to
remind the bourgeois falsifiers and their accomplices of several additional
figures: the USSR lost approximately 30 percent of its national wealth during.
the years of world War II, while Britain's national wealth declined by only

0.8 percent, that of France by 1.5 percent, while for the United States the

war signified an economic boom, as a result of which that country's percentage
share in the capitalist world's industrial output rose to 62 percent by 1967,
as compared with 41.6 percent in 1937.

Soviet citizens are justly proud of the contribution which our country is making
to the great cause of the struggle for world peace. The struggle to lessen the
threat of war and to hold the arms race in check always has been and remains a
key focus of the foreign policy activity of the Communist Party and Soviet
State. From the moment of the Great October Socialist Revolution, from the
very first foreign policy act of the Soviet Government -- the Peace Decree --
socialism has consistently waged a campaign for peace, at first in the person
of the Soviet Union, and later the community of socialist nations. And its
contribution toward solving this most urgent. most important problem for the
destiny of mankind has been truly great. "It is quite obvious," state

the documents of the 26th CPSU Congress, "that today the Soviet Union and its
allies constitute the main support of peace on earth to a greater extent than
ever before."7

Confidence in the peace aspirations of the Soviet Union is penetrating

nnrc and moreinto the consciousness of the masses throughout the world. En-
countering this fact, which is unpleasant for them, the propagandists of the
myth of a "Soviet threat" resort to all kinds of falsifications. Utilizing the
powerful mass information media to implant a distorted structure of reasoning
into the consciousness of their fellow citizens, they deliberately distort the

38

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
foreign policy ideas of the Soviet Union, embodied in CPSU program documents,
in legislative enactments of the Soviet Union, and in all its practical in-
ternational activities.

The disseminators of the myth of a "Soviet threat" claim a "lag of the West"
[otstavanii zapada] in the area of nuclear missile weapons. In order to
bolster this fabrication they scrupulously calculate, for example, Soviet
medium-range nuclear weapons in Europe, while they totally ignore U.S. forward-
based nuclear forces and the nuclear potentials of U.S. European allies. A
similar juggling of input data is also typical of calculations aimed at

proving the superiority of the USSR in the area of conventional arms.

Equally groundless are attempts by imperialist propaganda to substantiate

the dangerous decision to deploy new 0.5. intermediate-range missiles in
Western Europe with the claim that the Soviet Union has deployed missiles of a
new class in Europe (designated "SS-20" in the Nest), allegedly securing
Soviet superiority in this area of weaponry. The truth, however, is as fol-
lows:

[In the first place [it.]/, for a number of years now the number of
medium-range nuclear-weapon delivery vehicles in Europe has remained approximate-
ly equal. Exhaustive figures on weapons of this type are contained in replies
by L. I. Brezhnev to questions put by the editors of the magazine DER SPIEGEL in
November 1981: the NATO countries possess 986 such means of delivery, and the
Soviet Union -- 975. In analyzing the correlation of nuclear forces between
the opposing sides one cannot take in isolation only one weapon category, land-
based missiles, for example. Nuclear potential must be examined in the aggregate,

since only on this basis can the principle of equal security of the two sides
be observed.

/Secondly [it.]/, in replacing old missiles with new ones, the Soviet
Union, with the aim of preserving nuclear parity, not only did not increase
the total number of medium-range nuclear weapon delivery vehicles by a single
unit, but even reduced the total number -- one or two old missiles were

removed simultaneously with the deployment of each new missile in the Soviet
Union.

IThirdly [it.]l, if we consider total number of nuclear warheads,
right now NATO intermediate-range weapons can carry approximately half again
as many as the corresponding Soviet weapons. Thus replacement of old
missiles with new ones has not resulted in giving the Soviet Union superiority

in this area. The total yield of Soviet medium-range missile warheads also
did not increase but even decreased.

He must note in all frankness that 0.8. Government spokesmen themselves do

not believe the lie of "Soviet military superiority" [voyennom prevoskhodstve]
which was fabricated on their instructions. U.S. Secretary of State A. Haig,
for example, recently acknowledged in a speech that "in the most important

area of strategic nuclear forces there continues to remain an approximate
parity between our two countries." General Rogers, Haig's successor as

supreme commander of NATO Joint Forces in Europe, gave the following reply to

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the direct question of whether he believes'that the Russians will soon have an
advantage [preimushchestvo], in connection with which they may be tempted to
launch an-attack on NATO": "I do not consider that a possibility."

Having failed with the myth of "military superiority," imperialist propaganda is
developing speculation [spekulyatsiyu; also translates as seeking to profit] on
the subject of a "Soviet military threat" in another dangerous direction. In
the Nest, and in the United States in particular, increasingly persistent ef-
forts are being made to convince the public that the very development of mili-
tary-strategic parity constitutes a threat on the part of the Soviet Union,

that observance of the principle of equality and equal security is impossible
without... U.S. military superiority.

Typical in this regard is a letter by a group of senators, widely publicized

by the U.SJ mass media, a letter sent in December 1979 to the then U.S.
president. The letter ended that the USSR had reached parity [pariteta] with
the United States in strategic arms, that it had brought to an end NATO
superiority in tactical nuclear forces, that it was diminishing NATO superioritv
in tactical air forces, and that it had built a navy "which threatens tradition-
al western superiority on the open sea. Enumerating these measures, which
were clearly aimed only at ensuring reliable defense of the USSR, the senators
characterized them. without a twinge of conscience, as “upsetting the military
balance" [narusheniye voyennogo ravnovesiya]. Such an experienced politician
as N. Brandt also noted the widespread occurrence of dangerous views of this
kind: "Our American friends are of the opinion that the United States should
definitely be stronger than the Soviet Union, that this is a law of nature."

For what purpose does U.S. imperialism so persistently seek to achieve mili-
tary superiority? In any case not for the defense of Europe against a "Soviet
invasion." This is obvious even to bourgeois politicians. The West German
magazine DER SPIEGBL stated the following in this regard in the spring of 1981:
"...Experts are in unanimous agreement that additional arming is superfluous
from a military-technical standpoint. No expert with even the slightest ex-
perience would dispute the fact, even in a state of drunkenness, that the
Americans could respond to a Russian missile threat to Europe in any case and
without additional arming."8

A different aim is being pursued here. One can perceive it from those
threatening statements, made in a hegemonist spirit, by top-level U.S.

leaders -- the President, the secretary of state, and the secretary of

defense -- which are presently emanating from Washington practically every day.
They speak of U.S. determination to implant "American ideals" throughout the
world and willingness to employ the might of the armed forces to secure "vital
U.S. interests."

The world literally shuddered upon hearing a statement from the lips of a
highly placed official of the principal imperialist power -- Secretary of State
Haig -— that "there are things which are more important than peace." He has
publicly stated time and again that "most important of all" are the in-
terests of the United States, of course defined in conformity with the desires
of the military-industrial complex.

00
The Secretary of State formulated U.S. imperial global ambitions with a cynicism
rare even for the present 0.5. leaders. He stated that the main goal of U.S.
foreign policy is creation "of a world which would be favorable" to so—called
"American ideals." In other words Hashington would like to appropriate the
right to recarve the world in conformity with its expansionist schemes, ignoring
and flouting the legitimate rights and interests of other countries and

peoples.

This is the real source of danger to peace-loving peoples! Seeking world
domination today is fraught with the danger of another world war. For the
Europeans such a war means the destruction of everything which has been created
by the genius and labor of peoples throughout their history.

He must regretfully state that this threat is not adequately appreciated in
many Western capitals. As was indicated by the Rome meeting of the RAID Council
(1981). unprecedented pressure from overseas brought results which can only
worsen the international situation. In exchange for vague promises by the 0.8.
delegation to commence talks with the USSR, the Western European partners of

the United States essentially gave the green light to a new and extremely
dangerous round of escalation of the arms race in Europe.

we must also note that an increase in the aggressiveness of 0.8. imperialism and
its endeavor to secure military-strategic superiority at all costs. as well as
unceasing attempts to split the community of socialist countries, attempts
which are most vividly expressed in the events in Poland. appreciably livened
revanchist circles in West Germany. There are persons in that country who
publicly express their joy in the fact that new U.S. intermediate-range
missiles will be able to reach Moscow from Heat German territory in 4 minutes.
Also indicative is the fact of a decision to publish modern geographic maps
designating Germany's 1937 borders. Obviously there are people in the FRG

who refuse to relinquish great-power dreams and who believe, as was correctly
noted at the 6th Congress of the German Communist Party by the party chairman,
Comrade H. Miss, that achievement of these revanchist goals can be brought
closer by supporting the present 0.8. policy of confrontation and missile
deployment plans. "Of course," he added, "such views are pure illusion. But
they represent a mortal danger. They are playing with fire."9

One must agree with this statement. Therefore in response to increased ag-
gressiveness on the part of international imperialism and to initiation of a
new round in the arms race by 0.5. ruling circles. the USSR and the other
brother socialist countries are compelled to take new measures to maintain
their defense at an adequate level. "We are not advocates but opponents of an
arms race," stressed L. I. Brezhnev in a speech at the official dedication of a
memorial complex in the hero-city of Kiev. "He could find a quite different
use for those funds which it devours. But if we are forced, we shall find a
swift and effective response to any challenge by militant imperialism, for our
first and most sacred duty is to guarantee the security of our country and its
allies, to ensure a reliable peace for the Soviet people."10

Aware of their strength, however, the USSR and the brother socialist countries
are not about to rattle sabers. We place in opposition to the dangerous and

61

FOR OFHCMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

irresponsible policy of imperialism the peace-seeking policy of socialism,
directed toward radical improvement of the international situation, toward
weakening the threat of war, toward holding the arms race in check and deepen-
ing détente. In counterbalance to the imperialist strategy of aggression and
war, the Communist Party and Soviet State continue to put forward the tried and

tested Leninist strategy of peace and peaceful coexistence between countries
with differing social systems.

Proceeding from a profoundly scientific, Harxist-Leninist analysis of the con-
temporary world situation, the 26th CPSU Congress advanced an entire aggregate
of constructive proposals to free peoples from the threat of nuclear war. of
primary significance among the proposed measures are proposals of military
détente. In particular, the USSR and its allies have proposed expanding the
range of confidence-building measures [diapazon mar doveriya] specified in the
Final Act of the all-European conference. The Soviet Union also expressed its
willingness to extend confidence-building measures to the entire European part
of the USSR -- under the condition of a corresponding expansion of the zone of
confidence-building measures on the part of the western nations -- and to hold

concrete talks with interested countries on confidence-building measures in
the Far East.

A decision made by the Soviet Union, pursuant to which 20,000 Soviet military
personnel, 1000 tanks and other military equipment were withdrawn from the
territory of the GDR, a decision reached in coordination with the other
Warsaw Pact member nations. became an important confidence-building step.

Realistic ways were spelled out for moving forward in solving the extremely
important problem of strategic arms limitation and reduction. The USSR is
willing to continue, on the basis of equality and equal security, appropriate
talks with the United States. preserving all positive advances which have
been achieved in this area. In particular, the USSR proposes reaching an
agreement on limiting the deployment of new submarines -- U.S. "Ohio" class,
and analogous submarines in the USSR, and on prohibiting the modernization of
existing and building of new ballistic missiles carried by these submarines.
The Soviet Union also proposed reaching an agreement on establishing a
moratorium on deployment of new intermediate-range nuclear missile weapons in
Europe.

The idea of convening a special session of the UN Security Council, with the
participation of the top leaders of the Council member nations and, if desired,
the leaders of other countries as well, an idea advanced in the Peace Program,
aims at seeking ways to improve the international climate and prevent war.
These same goals are pursued by a proposal to create an international com-

mittee consisting of prominent scientists from different countries, which would
demonstrate the vital necessity of preventing a nuclear catastrophe.

The Peace Program elaborated at the 26th CPSU Congress has subsequently been
supplemented by new proposals, in particular a proposal to establish nuclear-
free zones in various parts of the European continent, including in Northern
Europe and and in the Balkans, as well as a peace and cooperation zone in
areas of the Hediterranean.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
important proposals wern made by L. 1. Brezhnev during his visit to the PRC
in November 1981. The new Soviet peace initiative, ratified by all Warsaw
Pact member nations, essentially constitutes a program of curtailment
lsvcrtyvaniya] of nuclear arms in Europe. Its main elements boil down to the
following.

First of all, the Soviet Union supplemented its previously advanced proposal
for a moratorium, that is, while talks are in progress both sides would
refrain from deploying new and modernizing existing medium-range [sredney
dalhosti: also translates as intermediate-range] nuclear weapons. Now the
USSR stated its willingness -- if the other side agreed to a moratorium --
as an act of good will, unilaterally to reduce a certain part of its medium-
range nuclear weapons in the European part of the country.

Second, the Soviet Union stressed its intention to speak out in Geneva for a
radical reduction in medium-range nuclear weapons -- not by tens but by
hundreds of units. The weapons to be considered of course should include both
U.S. forward-based lperedovogo basirovaniya] weapons and corresponding British
and French nuclear weapons.

Thirdly, the USSR would also be willing to reach an agreement on total renuncia-
tion lotkaze] by both sides of all types of medium-range nuclear weapons aimed
at targets in Europe. In addition, the Soviet Union stated that it favored
Europe ultimately becoming entirely free of nuclear weapons -- both medium-
range and tactical.

The Soviet proposals, which convincingly demonstrate the will of our party and
our people to defend peace, have evoked broad response and support throughout
the world. They gave a new, powerful impulse to the struggle to strengthen
international security, a struggle which is being persistently and consistently
waged by the nations of the socialist community, Communist and worker parties in
capitalist and developing countries, and all progressive mankind.

Unfortunately. the imperialist nations respond in a different way to peace
initiatives by the socialist countries. They keep seeking new ways and

devices to avoid accepting peace-seeking proposals and to continue their

policy of aggravation of relations between West and East. Such a policy can be
clearly seen, in particular, in the obstructionist position of the United
States and its NATO allies in the Geneva disarmament committee. These countries
construct artificial barriers impeding the committee's work, undertaking fruit-
less procedural debates, even engaging in speculations about rumors they
themselves have instigated. The adversaries of disarmament resort not only to
”turning maneuvers." They are also mounting a frontal assault on the possibili-
ty of holding talks on this committee on a number of important items.

For example. more than 3 years ago the Soviet Union, supported by the other
socialist countries, presented a proposal calling for ceasing production of all
types of nuclear weapons and gradual reduction of stockpiles, to and including
their total elimination. A number of UN resolutions call upon the Geneva Com-
mittee to commence without delay talks on ending the nuclear arms race.

43

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless such talks are not being conducted, due to opposition by the
United States and its allies, who claim that such talks are "premature."

Or take the question of total and universal banning of nuclear weapam testing.
It would seem that favorable conditions exist for resolving this problem,
since all five nuclear powers are presently participants on the committee.
The group of neutral and nonaligned nations, supported by the socialist
countries, proposed establishing within the framework of the committee a
special working body, with appropriate negotiations to commence without delay.
But committee activities were met with an impasse in this direction as well.
The United States and Great Britain stubbornly oppose formation of a working
group, while China's representatives, hypocritically declaring that they do
not oppose its formation, immediately stipulate that they will not consider
themselves bound by any agreements reached.

Strengthening guarantees of the security of nonnuclear nations is one more
vital question of contemporary world politics, the constructive position of
the Soviet Union on which is well known. Lying on the negotiating table of
the Geneva Committee is a draft international convention submitted by the
Soviet Union together with other socialist countries. Another draft was sub-
mitted by nonaligned nations. There have also been many General Assembly
resolutions on this score. Nevertheless practically nothing is being done.
The reason is the same as always -- opposition by the United States and its
allies, which claim that drawing up an international convention on strengthen-
ing guarantees of the security of nonnuclear nations is an "unrealistic"
undertaking.

At a meeting of the Disarmament Committee held in 1981, a group of socialist
countries proposed immediate commencement of talks on drafting an interna-
tional convention on banning neutron weapons. The majority of committee mem-
bers condemned attempts by certain Western delegations to play down the

danger of the decision by the U.S. Government to produce these weapons. Never-
theless the U.S. delegation succeeded in voting down the proposal to ban these
weapons. It is indicative that, while thwarting the adoption. one after the
other, of constructive proposals by the delegations of the socialist nations,
the United States and its allies have not presented a single serious initiative
in Geneva in recent years, and have not submitted a single draft agreement in
the area of disarmament.

The situation is approximately the same at the Vienna talks. The delegations
of the socialist nations advanced a number of concrete proposals on freezing
and reducing the military forces of the NATO and Harsaw Pact nations in Europe.
The Soviet Union twice reduced the strength of its forces temporarily stationed
on the territory of the GDR in order to move resolution of this problem from a
standstill. The United States and the other NATO countries, however, not only
refused to follow the example of the USSR but even to soften their position.

On the contrary, they are making every effort to drag negotiations out, at

the same time building up their military potential in Europe.

Deliberate aggravation of tension can be clearly seen in the policy of the
United States and its imperialist allies not only in Europe but in other regions

#4

FOR OFIHC1A1.lﬂSE(NVLY
of the world as well. It is a direct continuation of that policy of blackmail.
threats and outright armed aggression which has been conducted by U.S. im-
perialism throughout all the postwar years.

According to the figures of the U.S. Brookings Institution, the United States
deployed and used its armed forces to achieve political objectives on 215
occasions just between 1 January 1966 and 31 December 1975. In 19 instances
the United States resorted to the threat of employment of nuclear weapons. Nor
did U.S. allies lag behind that country. Since the establishment of NATO there
has not been a single military conflict anywhere in the world in which member
nations of this imperialist bloc have not been directly or indirectly involved.
More than 100 armed conflicts, the victims of which have totaled millions of
persons, have taken place in various parts of the world with the direct or
concealed participation of the United States and other NATO countries.

U.S. imperialism perpetrated the most flagrantly cruel military actions in
Southeast Asia. Vietnam, Laos. and Kampuchea were methodically devastated by
massive air attacks. and every living thing was burned out with napalm and
poisoned by chemical agents. the total number of victims and amount of
physical destruction inflicted in these countries substantially exceeded the
damage caused by the Anglo—American military forces on fascist Germany during
the entire course of World War II.

Proceeding from the principle of the indivisibility of peace [nedelimosti
mira] and seeking to prevent the escalation of conflicts occurring through the
fault of the imperialist powers into a third world war, the warsaw Pact nations
have repeatedly issued warnings to the aggressors and drawn up concrete
proposals /aimed at eliminating focal points of international tension in a num-
ber of areas of Asia and Africa./ Suffice it to say that the PCC time and
again issued special declarations on the threat to peace in connection with the
U.S. aggression in Indochina and on the question of establishment of a firm and
just peace in the Near East. In 1970 a special declaration was adopted at the
Warsaw meeting of the PCC, entitled "Ending Imperialist Acts of Provocation
Against the Independent Nations of Africa." In addition, questions pertaining
to strengthening the security of the peoples of Asia, Africa and other regions
of the world are constantly reflected to one degree or another in statements
and declarations adopted by the etc at its periodic meetings.

Vigorous support by the socialist countries and their diversified assistance
enabled the courageous Vietnamese people to gain victory in their many-years
war of liberation and to sweep their country clean of foreign interventionists
and their puppets. The nations of the socialist community also helped the
peoples of a number of other countries in Asia and Africa defend their

freedom and independence and the right to develop along their chosen road.

Thus the development of international relations in the 1970's was favorable
for the cause of peace not only in Europe but in other regions as well. The
efforts of the Soviet Union and all the countries of the socialist community
played a salutary role. By their increased prestige and consistent peace-
seeking policy they were able to achieve certain detente and to create the
requisite conditions for effecting a transition from military confrontation to

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

peaceful coexistence and mutually beneficial cooperation. As subsequent events
showed, however, this was not to the liking of international imperialism. par-
ticularly U.S. ruling circles. Analyzing the aggregate of hegemonist aspira-
tions of U.S. imperialism displayed at the end of the past decade, one can con-
clude that a new stage has begun in its aggressive policy both in respect to
the socialist cauntries and the developing countries of Asia, Africa, and
Latin America.

Today the world is witness to the fact that high U.S. officials, competing with
one another in aggressiveness, are declaring U.S. intentions openly to inter-
vene in the affairs of other countries and to crush liberation movements. U.S.
President Reagan, for example, announced U.S. willingness to arm the counter-
revolutionary mercenary bands being sent onto Afghan soil. Following this,
Washington officially announced its intention to supply arms to Angolan
counterrevolutionary organizations. We also know of the existence of special
camps on 0.5. territory where former members of Somoza's National Guard are
training for terrorist raids and armed invasion into Nicaragua. The United
States is giving direct military support to the antipopular junta in El Salvador.
At the same time the Republic of South Africa, a country of barbaric apartheid
practices, which is illegally holding Namibia under its colonial rule, has been
declared by the United States to be a "friendly nation."

"Strengthening of the independence of liberated countries is not to the liking

of the imperialists," states the Central Committee Accountability Report to

the 26th CPSU Congress. "By thousands of ways and means. they are attempting

to bind these countries to themselves, in order to have freer rein in disposition
of their natural resources and to utilize their territories for their own
strategic schemes."11

In order to strengthen its position in the Near and Middle East, in Africa,
Southern and Southeast Asia. and in the Far East. Washington declares entire
subcontinents to be "zones of U.S. vital interests" [zonami zhiznennykh
interesov] and seeks to expand the network of U.$. nilitary bases and facilities.
U.S. inperialisa is stubbornly endeavoring to conduct international affairs

with the aid of force and a "big-stick policy." which has been rejected by
peoples. It assigns the role of such a club, brandished over developing
countries and liberation movements, to its "rapid deployment forces," the

total numerical strength of which is to be increased to 230,000 men.

It is significant that the United States is hypocritically attempting to
portray its gendarme activities in various regions of the world as a "campaign
against terrorism," while slanderOusly characterizing as "complicity with
terrorism" just and legitimate assistance to peoples which are defending their
freedom, independence and sovereignty. The already-mentioned dishonorable
device of accusing one's adversary of one's own sins is once again being an-
ployed here, for it is precisely the United States which has "become famous"
for murdering statesmen and civic leaders. And terrorism by amateur extremists
in the United States is marching shoulder to shoulder with organized banditry
paid for and directed by the authorities. Terrorism in respect to dissidents
and protesters within the United States is directed against entire countries
and peoples the aspirations of which "are not to the liking“ of Washington. A
U.S. Navy armada of more than 30 warships hangs over Southwestern Asia as a

66

INDR OFFICJAI.IJSE§(NULV
mailed fist of intimidation. The 2500 U.S. bases and other military facilities,
at which are stationed more than 500,000 military personnel, as well as the most

destructive weapons, including nuclear, bases scattered throughout the world,
have become bridgeheads of global terrorism.

Efforts by 0.5. imperialist circles to encourage focal points of tension and
armed conflicts present a serious threat to world peace and the security of
peoples. The United States is a direct accomplice in and essentially an in-
stigator of Israel's aggressive actions against the Arab countries of the Near
East. Such actions would be impossible without the military, financial and
diplomatic assistance which U.s. imperialism gives its ally.

This was once again demonstrated to the world following the bandit raid by
Israeli aircraft into Iraq in the summer of 1981. Replying to the question of
what U.S. policy would be in the Near East following this act of naked ag-
gression, the President's national security advisor Allen stated that "the
Israeli raid will obviously affect the Arab countries. And we hope? he added,
"that Egypt's isolation from the other Arab countries will come to an end and
that others will realize the advisability of sitting down at the negotiating
table."12 It is evident from these words that the attack on the research
center on the outskirts of Baghdad, just as the subsequent barbaric air attacks
and artillery bombardments against towns in Lebanon, are coordinated U.S.-
Israeli actions aimed at intimidating the Arab countries which oppose the
capitulstionist Camp David agreements. Essentially this very statement by the
U.S. presidential adviser constitutes a patent attempt to exert pressure on
the Arabsfor the sake of achieving those same aims which were pursued by

Tel Aviv in perpetrating its criminal act.

The United States and its NATO allies are trying just as hard to delay an end
to the war between Iran and Iraq, in order to exhaust these countries, to place
them under U.S. domination, to establish control over the oil-producing areas,
and at the same time to expand their base for aggression against the USSR. The
United States maintains a naval armada in this same region for the same pur-
pose -- to exert pressure on countries adjacent to the Persian Gulf and, if
necessary, to occupy them. Tension in this region has reached such a high
level that there has arisen a real threat of another major military flareup.
"One rash step, and the flames of war could embrace the entire Near East,"
stated L. I. Brezhnev in a speech in Tbilisi. "And who knows how far the
sparks of this conflagration will fly."13

In order to consolidate its domination over the most important strategic
regions, sources of raw materials and energy resources, the United States is
increasingly more persistently endeavoring to draw its NATO allies, as well as
Japan and China, into its contemplated actions. Under pressure by the U.S.
Government, NATO leaders are seeking to expand the sphere of action of this
bloc. It is significant that the 0.5. "right" to military adventures beyond
NATO boundaries, if a threat arose there to the notorious "vital interests of
the West," was officially recognized at the spring 1981 meeting in Brussels.
In addition, the final official statement by the NATO Military Planning Com-
mutee even hints of the possibility of participation by NATO allies in joint
actions beyond the boundaries of the bloc's "zone of responsibility." The

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I\ua\ an I at 0:.- I --o. \O-‘e.e

Near and Middle East, the Persian Culi, and lndian Ocean are designated in
Hashington as regions of "vital interests." They are alsoattempting to include
within this category Southern Africa, Latin America, and Asia -- practically
the entire world.

U.S. ruling circles are continuing their attempts to put together new aggres—
sive military-political blocs and alliances in addition to existing ones.

The U.S. military, for example, is seeking to turn Pakistan into a U.S. military
strongpoint, from which other Asian countries cauld be threatened. Toward
this end the United States concluded with Islamabad in the summer of 1981 an
agreementto give the latter more than three billion dollars in military-
economic aid, providing Pakistan access to the latest weaponry. This

dangerous step is obviously aimed at destabilizing the situation in Southern
Asia.

In the Far East the Hashington-Beijing-Tokyo triangle has recently been assum-
ing more and more clearly 6: configuration of an aggressive alliance. Play-
ing into the hands of U.S. policy, Japanese ruling circles are pushing mili-
tarist preparations, in violation of that country's constitution. The Beijing
leaders are ranking increasingly closer with the most aggressive imperialist
circles. They seek to encourage confrontation between the NATO nations and
Japan on the one hand and the Soviet Union on the other. lmperialist politi—
cians in turn are counting on drawing China deeper into anti-Soviet actions
and into the campaign against détente and peace. China's services are already
being utilized by U.S. imperialism, in particular in the waging of an un-
declared war against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and in creating a
new military threat to socialist Vietnam.

Supported by the Beijing hegemonists and making use of other "Pacific allies,"
U.S. diplomacy is seeking to set the five ASEAN member nations (Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore. Thailand, and the Philippines) against Vietnam, Laos, and
Kampuchea. Playing on the militarist ambitions of certain political

circles within ASEAN, imperialism is endeavoring to activate the five-member
military alliance, established in 1971, between Great Britain, Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia, and Singapore (ANZUK). And if they are able to formalize
an alliance between ANZUK and ANZUS (with a membership of the United States,
Australia, and New Zealand), Malaysia and Singapore will automatically become
the Pentagon's militarist bloc partners.

Reports of plans to establish a military bloc in the South Atlantic with the
participation of the Republic of South Africa, of utilization of South African
baSeS by the U.S., and of deliveries of U.S. weapons to South Africa are
ominous. It is appropriate to remind the reader in this connection about the
nuclear ambitions of the South African racists, which carry a threat to world
peace and security. Legitimate concern is also evoked among the world com-
munity by attempts by Washington to reach an agreement with their protégés in
Pretoria on the Namibia question. in order to circumvent the UN decision to
grant independence to this racist-occupied territory. who in actuality seeks
world domination? The cited facts enable one to reach the only correct con-
clusion, that precisely those who are shouting the lOudest about a "Soviet
threat" are seized with imperial ambitions. It is precisely U.S. militant

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
circles which us e any excuse to meddle in the affairs of other peoples. for
their own military-political expansion. And when there are no such excuses,
they create them artificially.

The USSR and the other nations of the socialist community. while taking neces-
sary measures to strengthen their defense capability, at the same time

pursue a firm, consistent policy aimed at strengthening peace and the security
of people in all regions of the world. Soviet proposals pertaining to political
settlement of the Near Eastern conflict are well known. The foundation of such
a settlement, in the opinion of the Soviet Union, should consist of three
organically interlinked elements: cessation of Israeli occupation of all Arab
lands seized in 1967; realization of the inalienable rights of the Arab

people of Palestine, including establishment of their own state and, finally,
guarantee of the security and sovereignty of all nations in the region, in-
cluding Israel.

The Soviet Union. as noted above, has expressed its willingness to hold con-
crete talks on confidence-building measures in the Far East with all interested
countries. Nor is it against discussion of questions connected with
Afghanistan -- both separately and in a linkage with questions pertaining to
security of the Persian Gulf. Unfortunately the Western powers, Japan and
China have failed to respond to these proposals.

Also ignored was a proposal made to the Western powers, China. Japan, and all
other nations with an interest in the Persian Gulf area to agree not to es-
tablish foreign bases and not to deploy nuclear or any other mass destruction
weapons in this region; not to employ and not to threaten the employment of
force against Persian Gulf countries; not to meddle in their internal affairs;
to respect the status of nonalignment, not to draw them into military
groupings with the participation of nuclear powers, and to respect the
sovereign rights of the nations of this region to their natural resources;
finally, not to create any hindrances or threats to normal trade and use of
the sea lines of communication linking the nations of these regions with other
countries of the world.

This lack of response to the peace-seeking proposals of the Soviet Union and
the other nations of the socialist community impelled the USSR Supreme Soviet
to address an appeal to the legislative bodies of all nations "to speak out
resolutely in favor of negotiations aimed at preventing another round in the
nuclear missile arms race - honest negotiations on a basis of eguslity, with-
out any preliminary conditions or attempts to impose a dikggg," “

“The USSR Supreme Soviet," states the Appeal to the World's Parliaments and
Peoples. adopted at the 5th Session of the USSR Supreme Soviet, 10th Convoca-
tion, "solemnly declares that the Soviet Union threatens nobody and does not
seek confrontation with any nation in the West or East. The Soviet Union has
not sought and does not seek military superiority. It has not been and will
not be the initiator of new rounds in the arms race. There is no weapon which

it would not agree to limit or ban on a mutual basis, on agreement with other
nations.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

/“Securement of peace has been, is now and continues to be the highest
foreign policy objective of the Soviet State./ The Peace Program for the
1980's, adopted at the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, aims toward this objective. It encompasses measures to reduce both
nuclear missile and conventional weapons, contains proposals on settling
existing and preventing new conflicts and crisis situations, and is per-
meated with the endeavor to achieve deepened detente and development of
peaceful cooperation among the countries of all continents. It expresses the
readiness and willingness of the Soviet Union to hold talks on all vital
questions of peace and security and attentively to address any and all con-
structive ideas by other nations."15

"...Events in the international arena," stated L. I. Brezhnev in his speech
in Kiev in May 1981, "are increasingly more insistently reminding us that
peace is not a blessing which is given automatically.... The peace is being
threatened, and threatened seriously. It is necessary to fight for peace." 6
And the socialist nations are waging such a struggle persistently and stub-
bornly, seeking to achieve strengthening of European and international securi-
ty, an end to the arms race, and are faithfully defending the rights and
interests of the peoples of the world. An important role in achieving suc-
cess of the policy they pursue is played, among other factors, by the defense
might of the Warsaw Pact Organization.

FOOTNOTES

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Lsninskim kursom" [Following a Leninist Course], Vol 7,
pp 350—351.

2. See "Organizatsiya Varshavskogo Dogovora" [The Warsaw Pact Organization],
pp 17-19.

3. Ibid., page 37.
4. Ibid., page 66.
5. Ibid., pp 56-55.
6. Ibid., page 114.

7. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 6.

8. Cited in PRAVDA, 8 June 1981.
9. Cited in PRAVDA, 30 Hay 1981.
10. PRAVDA, 10 May 1981.

ll. "Materialy...," op. cit., page 14.

50

FOR‘0FFKJA1.USEIONLY
12. Cited in PRAVDA, 22 June 1981.
13. PRAVDA, 23 Hay 1981. I
14. PRAVDA, 210 June 1981.

15. PRAVDA, 210 June 1981.

16. PRAVDA, 10 Hay 1981.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Four. FIGHTING ALLIANCE 0P BROTHER ARHIES

As we know, the Warsaw Pact countries have their own military organization - a
fighting alliance of the brother armies. A certain contingent of their troops
and fleets, pursuant to Article 5 of the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and
Mutual Assistance, has been assigned to the [Joint Armed Forces [0b"yedinennyye
vooruzhennyye silyl./ which at the present time include ground troops, air
defense forces, air forces, and naval forces.

The numerical strength and composition of the Joint Armed Forces, their organiza-
tion, equipment and other items connected with this have been determined by the
governments of each country taking into account the recommendations of the
Political Consultative Committee and the Commander in Chief of the Joint Armed
Forces, as well as the economic and military capabilities of each country. The
troops and naval forces assigned to the Joint Armed Forces are stationed on the
territory of their own countries and remain under the national ministries of
defense. Their daily life and activities are regulated by the laws, statutes
and military regulations existing in the Warsaw Pact member nations. The
ministries of defense of the allied countries bear full responsibility for the
state, equipment, combat readiness, military and political indoctrination of

the personnel of these troops and naval forces. Thus the principles in con-
formity with which the Joint Armed Forces are constructed and operate stress the
sovereign rights of each country. At the same time the rights and authorities
which according to the general agreement are granted to the Commander in Chief
of the Joint Armed Forces, the Staff and other agencies of the Joint Command,
enable them successfully to perform their functions related to settling all
matters within their competence.

/The ground troops/ of the Joint Armed Forces are armed with operational-tac-
tical missile launchers, modern tanks and armored personnel carriers, con-
ventional and rocket artillery, antitank weapons, means of protection against
air attack, plus other weapons and equipment. Their diversified hardware
enables them to perform complex combat missions both in the defense and of-
fense. The fact that combined-arms large units, alongside modern artillery
systems, are armed with tactical missiles possessing a high degree of accuracy
and the capability to destroy any targets positioned within their range gives
the ground forces enormous firepower.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The combined-arms large units in the Joint Armed Forces are equipped with first-
class armored vehicles which are most highly suited to operations in condi-
tions of enemy employment of nuclear weapons. Protected by reliable armor, the
tanks and infantry fighting vehicles possess a high degree of resistance to
blast wave effect and substantially reduce the degree to which vehicle crews

are affected by penetrating radiation. In addition, they possess excellent
cross-country capability.

The combined-arms large units are also equipped with first-class antitank artil-
lery and antitank guided missiles. Hitting enemy tanks and infantry fighting
vehicles at a considerable distance, they are capable of substantially weaken-
ing the striking power of attacking enemy troops, of depriving the enemy of the
capability to overcome the defense, and thus of increasing its stability when a
combined unit is repelling an attack by large enemy forces.

Ground-forces combined units, units and Subunits possess diversified means of
protection against air attack -- self-propelled multiple-mount guns, and anti-
aircraft missile systems. Ground troops air defense weapons are employed in
close coordination with fighter aircraft, which makes it possible successfully
to engage hostile fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft in any situation.

Engineer troops are a component part of ground forces. They are furnished with
modern combat equipment, which makes it possible sharply to reduce the time
required to perform engineer tasks in constructing cross-country roads,
shelters against hostile mass destruction weapons and artillery fire, as well
as in negotiating and constructing obstacles and moving troops across various
water obstacles.

As we know, modern warfare is inconceivable without stable and continuous con-
trol, while control is inconceivable without co-Iunications. Today signal
troops are furnished with modern radio sets and other equipment enabling them
rapidly to collect and synthesize a large flow of information in conditions

of enemy radio jamming, to transmit orders, instructions and commands
precisely and rapidly, thus ensuring uninterrupted troop control.

IAir defense forces/ are equipped and organized in such a manner that they are
capable of successfully engaging enemy aircraft. They include antiaircraft
missile forces, fighter aviation, radar [radiotekhnicheskiye: also translated
as radioelectronic] and special troops of various designation. Their combat
power is based on antiaircraft missile systems and all-weather supersonic
fighters, which have the capability of downing modern enemy aircraft on the
far and near approaches to defended targets. The diversified radioelectronic
devices with which the radar troops are equipped enable.them to detect offen-
sive air weapons day or night, summer or winter, at a great distance, to
identify them, to determine their precise location, and thus to provide ac-
curate target designation to antiaircraft missile troops and fighters.

[The air forces] are equipped with multirole supersonic fighter-interceptors,
supersonic fighter-bombers, supersonic tactical [frontovyye] and long-range

bombers, as well as diversified helicopters. Arrival on the line of swing-
wing aircraft made it possible to improve the takeoff and landing performance

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HJK UI'I'K 1:“. “Mi ONLY

of supersonic aircraft aswell as to increase flight duration at subsonic

speeds. The development of VTOL aircraft expanded the operational maneuverabil-
ity of fighter aviation. The high speeds and the armament of frontal
[frontovoy] and long-range aviation aircraft provide the capability swiftly to
hit the most diversified operational and strategic targets. An important role
in air forces operations is also played by helicopter gunships [boyevym
vertoletam; also translates as combat helicopters] which make it possible sub-
stantially to strengthen battlefield air support of ground troops and to

deliver airborne assault forces to tactical and immediate operational depth'

in the enemy's defense.

/Naval forces/ are equipped with missile-armed submarines and surface warships
of various types. modern amphibious landing ships, aircraft, coast and anti-
aircraft artillery, as well as naval infantry equipped with diversified weapons
and the requisite combat technical means, which makes it capable of offering
effective support to ground troops in coastal sectors.

Just as all the other uniformed services, the navies of the Warsaw Pact member
nations are constantly being improved. while subordinate to their national com-
mand authorities. they work on coordination with one another for the purpose of
performing common operational-strategic missions. Past exercises have con-
firmed that the forces of these navies are capable of reliably defending the

sea boundaries of the nations of the socialist connunity and of successfully
engaging hostile warships on the open sea.

[Military agencies of the Warsaw Pact Organization] were established by deci—
sions of the Political Consultative Committee, to guide the development of the
Joint Armed Forces. to train personnel and to achieve combat cohesion of the
component forces. As an aggregate they comprise a unified system which ensures
efficient accomplishment of the tasks of strengthening the defense capability
of the Warsaw Pact member nations and their reliable defense against aggression.
These agencies are as follows: the Ministers of Defense Committee. the Joint
Command, the Military Council. the Staff. the Technical Committee. plus certain
others.

A particularly important role is played by the ﬂomittee of Ministers of
Defense of the Harsaw Pact member nations,/ established in 1969. The per-
formance of this body was highly praised at the 26th CPSU Congress. "Organiza-
tional development of the Joint Armed Forces," noted the Accountability Report
to the congress. "was conducted smoothly. Here too, as always, a good job was
done by the Ministers of Defense Committee."1

The Committee is made up of the ministers of defense of the allied nations, the
Commander in Chief and Chief of Staff of the Joint Armed Forces. The Ministers
of Defense Comittee is a permanently functioning military agency with specific
duties and functions. The most important questions pertaining to strengthening
the defense capability of the allied nations, organizational development
[stroitel'stvo] and improvement of the Joint Armed Forces, and increasing their
combat readiness are handled at its meetings.

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Defense ministers preside at the Committee meetings by turns, in alphabetical
order of the names of the Warsaw Pact member nations. The term of office of

The chairman specifies with the Committee members the agenda. date and place of
the following meetine (thev are roughly determined at the preceding meeting)
and convenes the next meeting through the Committee's working body - Joint
Armed Forces Staff. ‘I He also determines, in coordination with the Com-
mittee members, the time and place for holding an unscheduled meeting if the
need for such a meeting arises. This operating procedure for the Ministers

of Defense Committee proceeds from the principles of equality and sovereignty
on which mutual relations among the Warsaw Pact member nations are based.

[The Joint Comand/ performs important tasks within the framework of the Harsaw
Pact Organization. It includes the Commander in Chief of the Joint Armed Forces.
the Chief of Staff of the Joint Armed Forces, as well as the Commander in
Chief's deputies for air defense, air forces, naval forces, weapons and
equipment, and the Commander in Chief's deputies from each country which has
assigned troops to the Joint Armed Forces. The Chief of Staff of the Joint
Armed Forces serves as first deputy commander in chief.

The Commander in Chief and the chief of Staff of the Joint Armed Forces are designated
by decision of the governments of the Warsaw Pact member nations, from the

military commanders of any Warsaw Pact member nation, and in their activities
are guided by the decisions of these governments and by the instructions of the
Political Consultative Committee. The deputy commanders in chief are appointed
by the respective governments of the warsaw Pact member nations. The Commander
in Chief of the Joint Armed Forces periodically reports to the Political Con-
sultative Committee, to the governments and the Comittee of Ministers of
Defense of the Harsaw Pact Nations on the results of the daily activities of
the Joint Command.

The deputy commanders in chief from the allied nations, who as a rule are
deputy ministers of defense or chiefs of the general staffs of the allied
armies, conduct extensive activities pertaining to training the national troop
contingents assigned to the Joint Armed Forces and maintaining them in a
continuous high state of combat readiness. They perform their work in close
coordination with the military supervisory bodies of the Warsaw Pact Organiza-
tion. in particular the Military Council and Joint Armed Forces Staff.

Representatives of the Commander in Chief of Joint Armed Forces are assigned to
the allied armies with the consent of the respective governments. Their
tasks consist in giving the national command authorities assistance in training

close contacts between the joint and national command authorities. Highly
trained officers and general officers, with a wealth of experience in directing
troops, they make a substantial contribution to the cause of strengthening the
fighting alliance among the allied armies and increasing the combat readiness-
of the Joint Armed Forces.

[The Military Council of the Joint Armed Forces/ opennnson a collective prin-
ciple. Membership of the Military Council is as follows: the Cosmander in Chief

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run UrrlLlAL Uat. UNLY

(he also serves as chairman of the Military Council), the Chief of Staff and
deputy commanders in chief of the Joint Armed Forces.

Questions pertaining to the combat and mobilization readiness of the Joint Armed
Forces and the organizational structure of troops and naval forces are analyzed
at meetings of the Military Council; measures to improve weapons and combat
equipment systems as well as to improve troop control and naval forces control,
measures connected with combat training of the allied armies, as well as other
matters pertaining to strengthening the Joint Armed Forces are regularly dis-
cussed. Military Council recommendations are drawn up taking into account the
opinions and interests of all Harsaw Pact member nations.

As a rule Military Council meetings are held at the end of each year, at which
the results of operational and combat training during the preceding year are
comprehensively analyzed, the tasks for the troops and fleets for the following
training year are specified, and a plan of joint measures is coordinated.

These meetings are usually combined with conferences of top-echelon leader per-
sonnel of the allied armies. This fosters better and more purposeful resolu-
tion of items discussed at the Military Council.

The Joint Armed Forces Staff. which is a control agency of the Commander in Chief
and a working body of the Ministers of Defense committee, works with a broad
range of matters pertaining to the daily life and activities of troops and
fleets. Working closely with the general staffs of the national armies. it
plans current and long-range joint measures, including those pertaining to
operational and combat training, synthesizes experience in training troops and
fleets, and drafts recommendations for utilization of this experience. One

of the most important tasks of the Staff is preparation for and holding of
joint exercises, training conferences, meetings, and training drills of various
scale. It also plays a major role in preparing for and holding meetings of the
Ministers of Defense Comittee and the Military Council. in practical execu-
tion of their decisions in the combat activities of troops and staffs. and in
broadening the fighting friendship of the allied armies.

An important place among agencies of the Joint Armed Forces is also occupied
by the [Technical Committee/,which carries out measures pertaining to coordina-
tion of scientific research and experimental design activities involving the
development and furnishing of new weapons and equipment to the allied armies.

The Staff and theother directive agencies of the Joint Armed Forces are located
in Moscow, while the troops and naval forces assigned to the Joint Armed Forces
are stationed on the territory and in the territorial waters of their own
countries. In order to create conditions for successful performance of their
assigned tasks by these bodies, they have been given the authority, privileges
and immunities required for this, as defined by a special convention concluded
among the Usrsaw Pact member nations in 1973.

The Joint Armed Forces work in close coordination with the national people's
armies, which in recent years have raised their combat proficiency to a new and

higher level. They are better equipped with military hardware, their organiza-
tional structure is continuously improving. and the firepower and mobility of

56

FOR 0F1WC1AI.USE¢DNLN
their combined units and units are increasing. Possessing everything neces-
sary in order reliably to defend the socialist achievements and peaceful labor
of their peoples, at the same time they are being trained and indoctrinated to
be in a continuous state of readiness to repel and defeat the forces of im-
perialism if the latter perpetrate aggression against any of the Warsaw Pact
member nations.

Establishment of the Warsaw Pact Organization signaled the beginning of a
qualitatively new degree of military cooperation among the socialist nations,
which is characterized by more active participation by each socialist country
in strengthening the defense might of the fraternal alliance. Developing in
conditions of socialist economic integration. military cooperation among the
Warsaw Pact member nations ensures the most efficient use of manpower and
material resources for strengthening the defense capability of each country
and the socialist conmnnity as a whole. '

Military cooperation among the Warsaw Pact nations is grounded on the same
principles as relations between these countries in all other areas. They in-
clude first and foremost proletarian, socialist internationalism; complete
equality and sovereignty of the various parties; unity in determining the root
questions of defense of the Warsaw Pact member nations and collective
responsibility for ensuring their security and defense of the achievements of
socialism; guidance by the Communist and worker parties of defense of the
allied countries, organizational development of their armies, and strengthening
of the Joint Armed Forces.

A unity of views on fundamental questions and fruitful cooperation are
characteristic features of the mutual relations among the Communist and worker
parties of the Warsaw Pact nations. "In all major problems of socioeconomic
development and international policy,“ noted L. I. Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU
Congress, "we have established a fundamental unity of views. This is a result
of continuous interaction on the part of the brother Conunist parties and is
our coalnn achievement."2 These words also apply with full substantiation to
the problems of military cooperation.

Let us examine [the principal areas. forms and methods of military cooperation/
which are the most typical for the Warsaw Pact member nations.

One of the most important areas is [coordination of efforts in matters of or-
ganizational development of the nationalandmd - improvement in the structure
of military agencies, formation of units and combined units of the various
branches of service and combat arms, providing them with the requisite arms,
etc.

Military experts sent by the Soviet Union at the request of the governments of
the brother socialist countries helped form and reorganize many combined units
and units of the armies of the allied countries. This assistance was partic-
ularly intensively rendered in the period when extensive motorizstion of the
national armies was taking place, and when they were transitioning to mastering
the principles of warfare in conditions of enemy employment of nuclear weapons.
Reequipping of the armies of the allied countries was at that time proceeding

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

chiefly by deliveries of combat equipment and weapons from the Soviet Union.
They were provided with modern tanks, artillery, aircraft, and other combat
equipment of the same type as that being employed in the Soviet Armed Forces.

During those same years the Soviet Union gave considerable assistance to the
national people's armies in training senior and top-echelon command cadres.
Many officers of the nations of the socialist community graduated from Soviet
service academies and presently occupy important positions in their national
armies. The overwhelming majority of top-echelon leader personnel of the
allied armies are graduates of the USSR Armed Forces General Staff Academy
imeni K. Ye. Voroshilov.

 

In the 1950's and 1960's military cooperation consisted chiefly in the Soviet
Union assisting the other Warsaw Pact member nations, while subsequently it

has increasingly assumed a bilateral and multilateral character. The principle
of co-production, in conformity with which the development and manufacture

of specific types of weapons for all the allied armies is assigned to one or
several countries, is being more and more extensively employed in arms
production. The socialist countries are endeavoring to achieve increasingly
greater standardization of weapons, which greatly facilitansboth their
manufacture and organization of supply, repair and maintenance of combat equip-
ment, and its planned. scheduled upgrading and replacement.

In many instances the development of new equipment leads to change in the or-
ganizational structure of troops: new subunits and units appear, and there
occurs in combined units and units a change in the ratio of types of weapons,
communications gear. and number of military specialists. In particular, the
development of tactical and operational missiles made it necessary to form
appropriate units. Initially they were formed in the Soviet Army, and sub-
sequently, after testing and verification at field exercises, in the other
allied armies as well. The experience of the Soviet Armed Forces and as-
sistance by advisers sent to the allied armies at the request of the respective
governments were extensively utilized. Naturally in carrying out this measure
the economic capabilities of each country were taken into consideration, as
well as the ratio of combat arms established in the national armies, and the
character of the potential theater of military operations.

Leading areas include military cooperation among the Warsaw Pact member nations
in matters of /increasing the fighting efficiency and combat readiness of the
allied armies./ The forms of this cooperation are elaborated at meetings of
the Committee of Ministers of Defense and the Military Council of the Joint
Armed Forces. They incluce the following: determination of the main tasks of
combat and political training; statement of problems pertaining to elaboration
of methods of mastering and combat employment of new combat equipment; co-
ordination of time and quantity of manpower employed in holding joint opera-
tional-tactical exercises and war games; determination of combat training
results for the year or completed stage and determination of tasks for the new
combat training period.

Combat training in the national armies is carried out on the basis of orders
issued by the ministers of defense of each member nation of the Warsaw Pact

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Organization. The experience of the allied armies is extensively utilized. Ex-
change of experience takes place at various levels and in various forms. One
widespread form is mutual visits to military units by military delegations,
attendance at various training events and exercises -- especially at demon-
strations held on new topic items or with employment of new combat equipment.
Good results are obtained by competitions among the top subunits of the various
allied armies in gunnery, deployment of guns and antitank missiles into

firing position, and in the applied military sports. As a rule squads, weapon
crews and platoons produce excellent results in such competitions, which makes
it possible to reveal new reserve potential in training personnel and in-
creasing their combat skills. Such competitions are particularly extensively
conducted among subunits of Soviet forces temporarily stationed on the territory
of allied countries and the national armies of these countries. Temporary

duty assignments for officers and combat crews from allied armies to Soviet

Army training centers and temporary duty assignments to special training
subunits of allied armies for Soviet officerswho have mastered new equipment
have become a widespread form of exchange of experience and knowhhow in the

area of mastering new combat equipment.

[Joint operational-tactical exercises,/ which organically incorporate all types
of combat training mastery of which is essential for successful conduct of the
battle and operation, constitute the highest form of collective preparation of
the allied armies to repel imperialist aggression. Since the role of opera-
tional-tactical training is steadily growing in connection with the increasing
complexity of the conditions of combat, exercises and war games of all types
are acquiring ever increasing significance.

Large-scale operational exercises, with the most important elements being
played out by two-sided or one-sided troop actions, have been increasingly
more widely employed in operational-tactical training in recent years. A
series of exercises code-named "Shchit" [Shield] was held in 1976-1979. These
were followed by the "Bratstvo po oruzhiyu-BO" [Brotherhood in Arms-80] and
"Soyuz-81" [Alliance-81] exercises, which involved commanding generals, com-
manders and staffs, as well as various units and combined units of the allied
armies. Such combined exercises make it possible to achieve several training
objectives simultaneously: to boost the level of operational, tactical and
field (sea) training of military commanders and staffs at two or three echelons
simultaneously; to improve on and find new modes of teamwork between staffs
and troops (naval forces) of the various allied armies; to achieve a unity of
views in employment of troops, naval forces and combat equipment in performing
standard operational-tactical missions.

Tactical exercises conducted at a given stage of an operational-strategic exer-
cise take on particular importance in this light. Aggressive actions by per-
ticipating units and combined units make it possible to test the practicability
of commander decisions and to refine various combat performance standards. The
need for such refinements is dictated by the changes which are continuously
taking place in weaponry. the degree of personnel proficiency, and modes of
conduct of combat operations both in friendly forces and in the forces of the
potential adversary. In particular, the march capabilities of units and com-
bined units, the time expended on their deployment into combat formations,

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on negotiating various obstacles, ability swiftly to exploit delivery of ef-
fective fire on the enemy, etc,are tested and verified at exercises.

At the same time, participation by a limited number of units and combined
units in operational-strategic exercises makes it possible substantially to
reduce the cost of holding such activities. In the past, when troops moved
on foot and by horse transport, the cost of large-scale maneuvers was com-
paratively small - the cost was almost the same as the amount spent during
daily combat training. This made it possible to include a large number of
troops in maneuvers. Today a vast quantity of fuel and vehicle resources
would be required to transport such a large number of troops. In addition,
following an exercise considerable money would have to be spent on repairing
roads. Thus the form of exercise adopted in the Joint Armed Forces makes it
possible, in addition to high-quality performance of training tasks, to save
considerable funds and material resources.

The increasing complexity of warfare and transition to the principle of es-
tablishment of coalition operational-strategic force groupings for performance
of specified tasks have placed on the agenda the question of the need for
bringing even closer together the basic points of military theory by which the
allied armies are guided and the methods of training command cadres. Proceed-
ing from this, such an area of military cooperation as [development and ex-
change of military knowledge] is assuming more and more significance. The
most important matters pertaining to development of theory of the art of war-
fare are examined at conferences of top-echelon personnel of the armies,

which are held at the level of commanders of combat arms and chiefs of general
Staffs. Major problem items which are of great theoretical and practical
significance, such as determination of the principal directions of further im-
provement of troop control, organization of rear services and technical sup-
port, etc,are also addressed at Joint Armed Forces military—scientific con-
ferences.

Publication of studies in the military press is a widespread form of exchange
of military knowledge. The military press extensively publishes the writings
of authors from the allied countries. In our country, for example, articles
by military theorists and practical experts of the allied armies are regularly
published by VOYENNO—ISTORICHEKIY ZHUBRAL, KOIHUNIST VOORUZHENNYKR SIL, and
other periodicals. The same can be said of the military journals of the other
armies of the Warsaw Pact countries. In addition, they regularly publish
translations from Soviet military journals and other periodical publications.
Exchange of military journals, specialized monographs and other publications
is also well organized in all allied armies. All this enables command cadres,
instructors at military educational institutions and representatives of mili-

tary science to keep current at all times on the latest advances in military
thought.

Military-scientific conferences organized within the framework of the allied
armies play an important role in the development and exchange of military

knowledge. In the Soviet Anmed Forces such conferences are held annually at
service academies, in military districts, and in groups of forces. Officers
of friendly countries take part in them. The synthesized recommendations of

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
these conferences are published in the work. [trudylof the academics or in in-
formation bulletins of military districts and serve as material for thorough
analysis of a given scientific problem. Presentation of lectures by faculty of
national armies at military educational institutions of allied countries has
also been practiced with increasing frequency in recent years. At the Military
Academy imeni M. V. Frunze, for example, lectures have been presented by in-
structors from the Polish Army General Staff Academy. the F. Engels Military
Academy of the National People's Army of the son. and the c. Rakovski Military
Academy of the Bulgarian People's Army.

Constant cooperation among the allied armies occurs in the area of [training
military cadres./ It began during the Great Patriotic war, when groups of
officers received training at Soviet military educational institutions for
Polish. Czechoslovak. and Romanian national military units. This area of mili-
tary cooperation assumed a large scale in the postwar years. Countries which
took the road of socialist development sent to the military educational in-
stitutions of the Soviet Union large numbers of military personnel to obtain

a military higher education. Cooperation in this area helped supply the armies
of the Warsaw Pact nations with well-trained officer cadres who had come

from the ranks of the worker class. the working peasantry, and the people's
intelligentsia.

As the number of cadres with a military higher education increased, the social-
ist countries established their own service academies. Both the experience of
the service academies of the Soviet Army and the direct assistance of Soviet
military experts were utilized in establishing national service academies and
establishment of curricula at these academies. Such assistance was also_
rendered in preparing faculty. A number of officers of the allied armies
became leading military educators after successful completion of graduate work
at Soviet service academies.

Cooperation among the brother armies of the Warsaw Pact nations is not limited
to matters of furnishing troops and naval forces with modern combat equipment
and improving their combat skills. It is also being successfully accomplished
/in the area of ideological and political indoctrination work./

As was noted in the Central Committee Accountability Report to the 26th CPSU
Congress, the socialist countries today must accomplish constructive tasks in
more complicated conditions. The ideological struggle has become appreciably
aggravated. The West is putting into motion an entire system of devices cal-
culated to undermine and soften up the socialist world. Endeavoring to
detach people from socialism. the imperialists regularly conduct hostile cam-
paigns against the nations of the socialist community. They slander and dis-
tort everything which is taking place in these countries and are acting with
increasing sophistication and insidiousness.

Enemy propaganda attaches particular importance to ideological influence on
military personnel of the Harsaw Pact member nations. Bourgeois ideologues
endeavor to distort Marxist-Leninist teaching on war and the army and. first
and foremost. to disparage the leadership role of the Communist and worker

parties in military organizational development and to distort the causes and

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the essence of wars. Desperate attempts are being made to present in a false

light the objectives and

nature of the Warsaw Pact Organization and to cast on-

to it the blame for escalation of the arms race, aggravation of the interna-

tional situation and the

increased danger of occurrence of another world war.

A significant role in the subversive ideological activities of the imperialist

nations and their allies

is played by efforts directed toward weakening the

patriotic and internationalist qualities of the fighting men of the socialist

armies. They attempt by

all means to deaden their patriotic and interna-

tionalist feelings. to debase the very concepts of patriotism and interna-
tionalism, calling them a "carryover from the past," and at the same time to
revive and develop in people's consciousness and behavior such elements of

bourgeois and philiatine
ship and money-grubber a

It follows from all this

ideology as individualism, selfishness, private-owner-
spirations, nationalistic and religious prejudices.

that the tasks of further strengthening the defense

capability of the Warsaw Pact member nations are inseparable from an all-out

improvement in the level
was particularly noted a
present-day conditions i

of ideological and political indoctrination work. It
t past congresses of the brother parties that in
t is very important to give an aggressive character

to all ideological and political indoctrination work.

Therefore of great impor

tsnce in the life and activities of the armies of the

Warsaw Pact nations is cooperation among political agencies, party and youth

organizations in matters

of political indoctrination of personnel, carried out

on the basis of the decisions of these countries‘ Communist and worker parties.

In his report at the 26t
along government agencle

h CPSU Congress, L. I. Brezhnev noted that cooperation
8, public organizations and production collectives of

the brother socialist countries has assumed a lively and fruitful character.

"Intellectual intercours
stressed, "have become a

This statement also appl

e and close ties in the area of ideology and culture," he
solid standard."3

ies with full validity to the armies of the Warsaw

Pact member nations. Close contacts among the political agencies, party and
youth organizations of the allied armies constitute an important means of
strengthening brotherhood and friendship among them. They make it possible

to exchange know-how in
cessful accomplishment o

ideological work, which in large measure promotes suc-
f the tasks of indoctrinating personnel in a spirit of

high revolutionary vigilance, socialist patriotism, proletarian and socialist
internationalism. Occupying the center of ideological measures being carried
out at the present time are explanation and study with all personnel of the

Joint Armed Forces of the historic documents of the 26th CPSU Congress and the

materials of the congres
important program founda
brother countries.

Improving the military 0

sea of other Communist and worker parties - the most
tions of the life of the parties and peoples of the

rganization of the Warsaw Pact, the Communist and

worker parties of the brother socialist countries proceed from Lenin's state-
ment that man has been and continues to be the most important, decisive force
in war. 'In any war," stated V. I. Lenin, "victory in the final analysis is

dictated by the spirit 0

f those masses which shed their blood on the field of

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
battle. ...Awareness by the masses of the aims and causes of a war is of
enormous significance and guarantees victory."‘

Political agencies base the forming of a high degree of political conscious-
ness in military personnel on indoctrination of socialist patriorism,
proletarian, socialist internationalism, hatred toward the enemies of peace,
democracy and socialism, and constant readiness both for defending the home-
land and for joint defense of the entire world socialist system.

Present realities in the nations of the socialist community create favorable
objective conditions for indoctrinating soldier-patriots and internationalists.
Patriotic and internationalist indoctrination of military personnel of the
brother countries is accomplished by means of the entire structure of the so-
cialist way of life. In addition, a well-conceived, purposeful lsysten of
indoctrination activities] of commanders, political workers, party, youth and
public organizations has been elaborated in the brother armies.

Special classes are held in the personnel political training system, dealing
with problems of unity and cohesiveness of the nations of the socialist communi-
ty, strengthening and further development of the Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance and the Warsaw Pact Organization, as well as problems of patriotic
and internationalist indoctrination, strengthening of friendship and coopera-
tion among servicemen of the brother armies. Many other forms of propaganda
and mass agitation work are also extensively utilized for purposes of interna-
tionalist indoctrination of personnel. Questions pertaining to the fighting
alliance of the armies of the brother countries are regularly addressed in
lectures, reports and talks. Theoretical conferences are extensively held in
subunits and units of the Soviet Army and Navy on the following topics: "V. I.
Lenin on the Defense of Socialism as the Highest International Duty"; "The
26th CPSU Congress on Further Strengthening Friendship and Cooperation With
the Socialist Countries"; "Socialist Internationalism in Action"; plus others.

Lecture series, specific-topic and film-lecture evenings dealing with the so-
cialist countries and their armies are quite popular with servicemen. As a
rule, they are scheduled to coincide with anniversaries of establishment of

the brother countries or their armed forces and include a number of lectures on
the given country and its army, and the showing of films or film excerpts on
this subject matter. In the Soviet Armed Forces veterans of battles for
liberation of the brother peoples from the Hitlerite invaders and officers who
have served in groups of Soviet forces stationed abroad, in addition to com-
manders and political workers, address personnel.

Commanders and political workers devote much attention to indoctrination of
warrior-patriots and internationalists in the revolutionary, fighting and labor
traditions of the peoples and armies of the brother countries. An important
contribution to dissemination of traditions is made by joint excursions by

young people and military personnel of the allied armies to sites of revolu-
tionary, combat and labor glory. The participants in these excursions con-

duct vigorous propaganda of the heroic history and internationalist mission of

the Soviet Army and the joint struggle of the brother peoples for the victory

of socialism. These excursions are extremely popular in the military and are
playing an increasingly greater role in internationalist-patriotic indoctrination.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Festivals of feature films made at film studios in the socialist countries have
also proven effective. During a festival commanders and political workers
usually give talks on the country in which the film being shown was made, about
that country's successes in building socialism, on its culture and national
customs. This helps the men become more deeply permeated with friendly feelings
toward the brother peoples of the socialist countries. As a rule display cases
and stands dealing with the armies of the socialist nations are set up in club-
houses, Lenin rooms and cabins. Military unit libraries make selections of
books and articles dealing with the achievements of the working people of the

socialist countries, the daily life and combat training of the servicemen of
the allied armies.

/Joint exercises of the allied troops and fleets/ are of particular importance
for indoctrination of servicemen and awareness of their internationalist duty.
The very environment of such an exercise and the fact that personnel of

brother armies are performing common missions help draw them closer together and
foster friendship and mutual trust among them. Usually such exercises are at-
tended by party and government leaders of the allied nations on whose territory
the exercise is being held. This also helps strengthen the international com-
munity of brother peoples and their armed forces.

Commanders, political workers, party and youth organizations perform purposeful
indoctrinational work with personnel in the period of preparation for and
during exercises. Joint activities by commanders and political agencies of the
allied armies in the area of ideological and political indoctrination work are
planned and coordinated on the eve of an exercise. Meetings for exchange of
information and know-how, seminars, and instruction sessions are held. Im-
mediate supervision of political measures during the period of an exercise is
handled by a joint command group, the nucleus of which consists of top-echelon
personnel of the main political directorate of the army of that allied country
on whose territory the exercise is being held. Large strategic formations and
combined units of the other allied armies assign top-echelon political workers
to it as their representatives.

A field newspaper joint staff is usually established for the period of prepara-
tion for and conduct of exercises. This newspaper is published in the
languages of all the brother armies taking part in the exercise and is one of
the important centers of joint information and propganda work. In addition,

a joint field radio broadcast staff is established, which organises broadcasts,
also in the different languages. Materials for the joint field newspaper and
for the field radio broadcasts are prepared by representatives of each army.
They also put out various leaflets and instruction pamphlets. An important role
in efforts to strengthen the fighting alliance is played by press centers set
up at exercises, which provide prompt information on exercise progress. A
joint filming team films the most important events and interesting mock combat
episodes. The films produced by this team are subsequently shown in all

allied armies.

When troops reach the assembly areas and when units and combined units of the
brother armies are deployed adjacent to one another, get-togethers between
representatives of the allied forces are held, as well as political rallies

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
dedicated to the commencement of the combined exercise. In the caurse of an
exercise considerable benefit to the cause of strengthening combat friendship
is produced by exchange of comand groups, reassignment of individual units

to the command authorities of allied armies, as well as get-togethers for the
purpose of exchanging experience and know-how in combat training among enlisted
personnel and noncommissioned officers of related military occupational
specialties, and the holding of joint demonstration classes and competitions.
Combat friendship evenings, get-togethers between military personnel and the
local civilian population, and excursions to industrial and agricultural enter-
prises, to the sites of past battles against the Hitlerite invaders and to
historic sites connected with revolutionary battles of the worker class during
pauses in operations have also proven effective. "hen circumstances allow,
political agencies of the brother armies hold joint discussions and seminars on
military-political and theoretical topics and arrange for addresses by
propagandists and exchange of amateur concerts. Films produced in the Warsaw
Pact nations are shown and performing artist shows are held for participants

in the exercise and the local civilian population.

The holding of political rallies and military reviews of participating troops
upon the conclusion of exercises have become a fine tradition. As a rule these
events are attended by party and government leaders as well as top-echelon
military command authories. Addresses by the leaders of Communist and worker
parties are met with enthusiasm on the part of personnel. Joint exercises in-
variably demonstrate the political and military unty'of the Joint Armed Forces
of the Harsaw Pact member nations, constituing a genuine school of indoctrina-
tion of servicemen in a spirit of socialist internationalism and continuous
readiness for immediate, selfless performance of their duty to defend the
achievements of socialism.

/Sports contacts/ among servicemen of the allied armies are becoming increasing-
ly important for indoctrination of personnel in a spirit of socialist inter-
nationalism, indissoluble friendship and fighting comradeship. Sports festivals
and championships in athletic and applied military sports, held under the Super-
vision of the Sports Coandttee of the Allied Armies (SCAA) [sportivnogo

komiteta druzhestvennykh armiy], are a widespread form of these contacts.

The work of the SCAA is carried cut according to the principles of voluntary
and equal participation by representatives of the sports organizations of the
committee member brother armies and free expression of creative initiative by
these representatives. Current problems pertaining to the development of
physical culture and sports in the allied armies are regularly discussed at
SCAA meetings and scientific methods conferences, and recommendations are
adopted which promote improvement in troop combat training and strengthening of
international contacts among servicemen.

Soldier-athletes of the allied armies are making a significant contribution t)
the development of sports in their countries. This is eloquently attested by
their athletic achievements at the 22d Olympic Games, held in Moscow in 1980.
A total of 479 soldier-athletes from the Warsaw Pact member nations took part
in the 1980 Olympics. They earned 231 Olympic medals, including 76 gold and
65 silver medals. in tough athletic competition.5

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Athletic competitions among the allied armies always promote strengthening of
international friendship among the servicemen of the allied armies and their
brotherhood in arms. The calendar of these athletic competitions is extremely
full. In 1981, for example, the schedule called for holding two sports
festivals, 26 championships and tournaments just within the framework of the
SCAA. Such competitions as the Honved cup boxing competition in Budapest, the
Oder bicycle races in Frankfurt an der Oder. the brave marksmanship tournament
in Sofia, plus others have become tradition.

Mass sports competifions among units and combined units of the national allied
armies and groups of Soviet forces temporarily stationed on the territory of a
number of Warsaw Pact nations do a fine job of promoting the cause of inter-
nationalist indoctrination. A particularly friendly atmosphere is created at
such competitions. As a rule, their organizers seek to acquaint the competition
participants with the economic successes and culture of that country. Athletes
meet labor and war veterans and become acquainted with the life, customs and
combat training of the fighting men of the allied armies.

A special "For Friendship and Solidarity" prize was established in 1981 for
the purpose of strengthening international contacts among soldier-athletes.
This prize is awarded to a serviceman who has achieved an excellent athletic
performance and who has also displayed toward his fellow competitors the
greatest feeling of respect, comradeship, and solidarity.

ICultural contacts/ are acquiring increasing significance in instilling
patriotic and internationalist traits. Friendship evenings. get-togethers
between servicemen of the brother armies, and specific-topic evening activities
devoted to the community of socialist nations and their national holidays have
become quite widespread. Joint amateur talent concerts. exchange of agitation-
performing artist groups, and the holding of film festivals and imaginative
literature exhibits have become traditions.

Particularly close ties in the area of indoctrinational work have been es-
tablished [between the groups of Soviet forces temporarily stationed on the
territory of allied countries and the armies of these countriesﬂ The activi-
ties of garrison international friendship councils and volunteer patriotic and
internationalist indoctrination instructors, operating successfully under the
supervision of commanders, political agencies and party organizations, have
gained general recognition.

Party and government leaders, veterans of the revolutionary movement, and
persons in culture and art of the brother countries regularly speak in the units
and combined units of Soviet forces, acquainting the men with the achievements
of their countries in building socialism and with their national revolutionary
traditions. Personnr. of Soviet units in turn visit national military units,
factories, state farms and agricultural cooperatives. Representatives of the
Soviet forces address personnel of the national armies and citizens of the
allied nations, telling them of the labor successes of the Soviet people, the
fighting history of the Soviet Army and performance of its international duty,
as well as the fighting alliance of brother armies.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the German Democratic Republic a fighting alliance week and sports holiday en-
titled "Brotherhood in Arms," during which a great many diversified joint
measures are conducted, have become a tradition. The other national armies and
groups of Soviet forces also devote considerable attention to comprehensive
mutual ccntacts. This work assumes a particularly large scale on national
holidays and anniversaries of the armies, of the great victory over fascism,

and of establishment of the Harsaw Pact Organization. Get-togethers and
friendship evenings for the servicemen of the brother armies are held on these
days, as well as joint official meetings at garrﬂnns and at military units,

military song festivals, amateur performer concerts, sports competitions, and
get-togethers with the civilian population.

Thus in the Joint Armed Forces indoctrination of personnel in a spirit of so-
cialist patriotism and proletarian internationalism occupies a leading position

in the work of commanders, political agencies and party organizations. It

greatly promotes strengthening the combat power of the allied armies, the unity
and solidarity of the socialist comnunity.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 25th CPSU Congress],
page 6.

2. Ibid., page 5.

3. Ibid.

4. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 41, page 121.

5. According to SCAA figures.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US". ONLY

CONCLUSION

The 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was an event of
world-historic significance. The great teaching of Harxism-Leninism received
further development in its documents, and plans were specified for achieving
growth of the economy of the USSR, the sociopolitical and intellectual develop-
ment of the Soviet society. and a program was drawn up for strengthening world
peace and preventing nuclear war. /"Defending peace -- today there is no

more important task at the international level for our party, our people, and
for all the peoples of the world,"/1 stated L. I. Brezhnev. defining the main
thrust of foreign policy activity of Soviet Communists and summarizing the

peace—seeking proposals of the USSR which comprised the Peace Program for the
1980's.

To defend peace in our era means to defend the most important, determining
right of each individual and of all mankind -- the right to life. This
enormous, vitally important and very complex task can be accomplished only
through the unified efforts of all peace-loving forces in the world, and
particularly through the collective efforts of the nations of the socialist
community.

Creation of a military-political defensive alliance of ti:5 socialist nations

of Europe, its continuous strengthening and improvement have made it possible
to forge a strong shield, which reliably protects the revolutionary achieve-
ments of the brother peoples and faithfully serves the cause of peace and
progress. Comprehensively embodied in the Warsaw Pact are Leninist prin-
ciples of proletarian, socialist internationalism, in which are harmoniously
combined the interests of the individual peoples and nations united within this
organization, the socialist community as a whole, and the entire world Com-
munist and worker movement. During the years of its existence the Warsaw Pact
Organization has acconplished a great deal to counteract the aggressive schemes
of imperialism and to defend peace-loving nations and peoples from foreign in-
terference in their affairs. It is a consistent fighter for peace, universal
and total disarmament, for preventing a nuclear catastrophe.

The socialist countries' love of peace, however, notes USSR Minister of Defense
Mar SU D. F. Ustinov, member of the CPSU Central Committee Politburo, should

not be interpreted as weakness. "The socialist countries." he stresses,
"possess everything they need in order reliably to defend their peoples. The

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
resources and might of the nations of the socialist community are sufficient to
repel aggression, and nobody will ever succeed in bringing them to their knees."2

The Warsaw Pact Joint Armed Forces play a major role in holding the imperialist
aggressors in check and in thwarting their schemes, which are pernicious to mankind.
Their fighting unity, cohesion, and close interaction constitute one of the most
important factors in countering the danger of war. Strengthening of this unity
on a foundation of proletarian, socialist internationalism,which, continuously
becoming enriched with net experience and content, confirms its vitality again
and age 1 n, constitutes a tireless concern of the Columnist and worker parties
of the brother countries.

At the present stage the Joint Armed Forces are capable of standing up to any
aggression. The international situation, however, gives no reason for relaxa-
tion. Remember the lessons of history, be alert, never forget the aggressive
nature of imperialism, fortify steps toward peace by increased combat readiness
and continuous improvement of one's moral-political, fighting and psychological
qualities -- these Lenin instructions have been and remain firm for all per-
sonnel of the Joint Armed Forces of the Warsaw Pact member nations. A continuing
task of personnel of the Soviet Army and Navy is to act as an example in this

for all the servicemen of the allied armies.

The years of existence of the Warsaw Pact Organization as well as its diversi-
fied and fruitful activities convincingly confirm the vital necessity of this
military-political alliance. As long as the NATO bloc continues to exist, and
as long as imperialist nilitarist forces continue escalating the arms race, the
Warsaw Pact Organization and its Joint Armed Forces will work tirelessly to

become stronger and better. The brother socialist countries are deeply aware
of this historic necessity and are unswervingly obeying it.

FOOTNOTES
l. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress], page 31.
2. PRAVDA, 25 July 1981.
COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1982

3024
CSO: 8144/0980

- END -

69

FOR‘OFFKJAL.USE(NNLY