APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDP02-00000R000100030006-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030005-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8302
2 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030005-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
_last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was

processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as

given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUC!’ NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100030005-2

Nl'ali \ ullr

TMNSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS. (FOUO 7/79)

7. Animus)

9. Perla-us; Olga-runes New and Address
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Glebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

‘2. women“ Organisms- Near and Menu

As above

I}. Supple-(May Nam

 

0. Mnusru

The report contains information on the Soviet military and civii
establishments. leadership, doctrine. policy. planning, politicc
organization. and equipsent.

  
    
 
 
   
  
 
  

. Key tom end Docent-t Analysis.

USSR

Military Organizations
Military Facilities
Military Personnel

"L idem! m: low-5.4a Tune

In. ( nsnu held/0090’ 15C

0. Muletilny Star-est

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

 
     
   
   

s ones tent" Iltv. Ida!

1’le FOR“ HAY DE IEPIODUCED

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA—RDP82-00060R000100030006-2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/
2 March

TRANSLATIONS 'ON USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(P000 7/79)
CONTENTS

Consents on China's Anti-Soviet Course
(Yu. Petrov; ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYBNNOYE OBOZRBNIYB,

Oct 78)sesessetcsasssosssesssssssssesaosssssssesssossss

Consents on nght Operations of M10 Motorised Infantry
Companies
(A. Kol'tsov; ZARUBEZRNOYE VOYBNNOYB OBOZRENIYE.

Oct 78).!0000000....00000.0000.600.000.00IQOOOOOOOOCOOO

Co-ents on U. 5. Flight Training Simulators and Methods
(6. 0s1pov. N. Kolesntkov; “3113821110an
VOYBWOYB OBOZRENIYB, Oct 78).

Consents on NATO Pilot Rescue Methods and Bqulpsent
(0. Oblipov. et a1.; ZARUBBZIIMYB VOW!
owumlvz. Oct 78)..OOOOOUOIOOOOOUO00000000000000.0000

Consents on Hestern Antlsubnsrine Defense of an Aircraft
Carrier Group
(A. Chistyskov; ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYBNNOYB
OBOZRENIYB. NOV 78)...I.0000.00.90.00.0.00.0.0....00...

Comots on the 0.8. Sixth Fleet
(I. Kare-0v; ZARUBBZIINOYB VOYENmYB
OBOZRENIYBp Nov 78)....0000000000000OOOOOOOOOOOIIOIOOOO

Cements on [1.8. Navy Auto-sted Control and Co-unicsttons
System '
(I. boshchnov; must-mums VOYEN'NOYE
OBOZRMYA, Nov 7a)OIOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOCOCOOOOOOCOOOOOO

Consents on the U..S Guantanamo Base
(Yu. Sedov; ZARUBEZHNOYB VOYBNNOYE
OBOZRENIYE. Nov 78).
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

toms 0N CHINA'S ANTI-SOVIET COURSE

Moscow ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENROYE OBOZRBﬂIYB in Russian No 10. Oct 78
signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 23-28

[Article by Col Yu. Petrov: "China - in Alliance with the Reaction-
aries"]

[Text] It was observed at the 25th Congress of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union that the policy of the current leaders of Chins is
openly directed against the majority of the socialist states. "Further-
more." General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev said in the Accountability Report of the Central Committee to
the party congress. "it stands right alongside the position of the most
extreme reactionaries in the world. from the militarists and enemies of
detente in the Western countries to the racists of South Africa and the
fascist rulers of Chile. This policy is not only completely devoid of
socialist principles and ideals: in actuality it has become an im-
portant reserve for imperialism in its struggle against socialism."

Beijing’s feverish attempts to stop detente. prevent disarmament. and
saw mistrust and hostility among different states and its endeavors
to provoke a vorld var end itself come out ahead present a great
danger to all peace-loving peoples.

The Beijing leaders use the Maoist notion of "three worlds" as the
theoretical substantiation of their foreign policy activities. This
conception was first proclaimed in 1976. but since then it has been
somewhat revised. above all to strengthen its anti-Soviet orientation.
According to this idea all the countries. regardless of their social
orders. are divided into "three worlds." In the first the Beijing
“theoreticians” put the "superpowers": the USSR and the United States.
The second is the industrially developed countries (both capitalist
and socialist). and the third. of which Beijing claims leadership. is
all the developing countries. including those with the most reactionary.
anticommunist regimes.

The purpose of the idea of "three worlds" in its current form is to
justify the policy followed by the Maoist leadership of total hostility

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roa omcmiviygm‘

to the Soviet Union. This idea is intended to unify the reactionary
forces to create an international anti-Soviet front. The Chinese
leaders formally proclaim the necessity of creating a front for the
struggle against the two "super powers," but in reality this "struggle
against hegemony" has an openly anti-Soviet character.

while aligning itself with the imperialist states. Beijing not only
calls on them to unite against the "enemy." which is the USSR and the
other socialist countries, but even tries to use them to build up its
own military-economic potential.

The Beijing leaders, while following their anti-Soviet policy, have
adopted a primary line of rapprochement with the United States. They
say that Beijing and washington have many "common" and "parallel"
interests. Hus Cuofeng and other Chinese leaders essentially agree
with those openly imperialistic aspects of U. S. policy which

prevent the alleviation of international tension. promote the arms ‘
race. and maintain the U. S. military hegemony in Western Europe and
certain regions of Asia.

'Who Beijing leadership insists on maintaining an American military
presence in Asia." American professor S. Specter, who visited China,
reported. "The Chinese leadership is demanding that U. S. Armed
Forces stay in South Korea and Japan. China favors keeping and en-
larging U. S. naval forces in the western part of the Pacific and in
the Indian Ocean. China does not want the United States to withdraw
from Southeast Asia." They justify this position with references to
the supposed Soviet threat. On many international issues discussed at
the United Nations, Beijing forms a bloc with Washington. It is also
common knowledge that the former U. 8. Secretary of State Schlesinger
and former naval chief Zumwalt, who are died-in-the-wool opponents of
detente and represent the interests of the military-industrial complex.
were received with great pomp in Beijing.

A mutual search continues for channels of military-technical cooper:
ation between the PRC and militarist circles in the United States. In
this connection. the press in many countries has called attention to
the recent trip to china of an American government delegation led by
F. Press. the U. S. president's advisor for science and technology.

The Japanese newspaper SANKYOI SHIHBUN reported that this delegation
conducted talks about supplying China with equipment for military and
spy satellites and various electronic equipment which could be used
for military purposes. Beijing, the newspaper observed, is trying to
receive ailitary-technical documents from the United States, including
documents on missile building.

According to reports in the foreign press, the U. 8. Government is re-
moving one limitation after another on the export to China of those
types of modern technological equipment that can be used for military
purposes. The administration in Hashington has become particularly
active in reviewing the question of relaxing checks on exports to the
PRC after the trip to Beijing by presidential advisor for national
security 2. Brzezinski and his talk with the Beijing leaders.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Representatives of American imperialist circles are counting on China's
deep-seated anti-Sovietlsm. "China has become an ally of the United
States. The Beijing leadership is promoting a stronger NATO and sup-
porting American diplomacy in a number of problems. beginning with the
Middle East and ending with South Asia," wrote R. Solomon. one of
Brzezinski’s assistants. in the journal FOREIGN AFFAIRS. Beijing is
making great effortsby various means to slow down or completely prevent
the Soviet Union and the United States from reaching agreement on the
issues of detente, limitation of strategic offensive weapons. and other

matters of great international importance for strengthening peace through-
out the world.

Hhile maintaining a policy hostile to the Soviet Union and the socialist
countries. the Chinese leaders have undertaken a rapprochement with the
Uestern European members of NATO on questions of military-political
cooperation and conducting joint actions against the peace-loving policy
of the USSR and the other socialist countries. Under the pretext of
strengthening "general security" from a supposedly growing threat by

the Warsaw Pact Organization. Beijing encourages war preparations and
the arms race in the NATO countries. '2 established its first contacts
with the headquarters of this imperialist bloc as early as 1975.

The European NATO country with whom the PRC is developing relations
most actively is West Germany. and it shows special sympathy for the
reactionary forces. Supporting the revanchiste aspirations of the

West German "rightists." Beijing expressed its sympathy with them

"in connection with the splitting of the German nation" and demonstrated
approval for their demands for its "reunification." It is perfectly
clear, writes BYCIE HARSZAHY that when China speaks of unification it
"has in mind not only absorption of the independent German state. the
German Democratic Republic, by the Federal Republic of Germany, but
also restoration of the 1937 borders of the 'Third Reich.'" This is
also confirmed by the statement made by the Chinese leaders to the
delegation from the Vest German television company ZDV, which came

to the PRC in September 1977 at the invitation of Beijing Radio. The
statement says that China "considers Berlin a constituent part of the
Federal Republic without any restrictions." The Beijing leaders sup-
port all attempts by reactionary imperialist forces to thwart the
four-power agreement on West Berlin and thus make this city a dangerous
crisis point once again.

Placing its hopes in western Europe on extremely reactionary politi-
cians. Beijing accepts representatives of the English Conservatives
with open arms. Thus, Hrs. Thatcher. the leader of the British Con-
servatives, was received in Beijing like a head of state. The main
reason for this was that in her statements in China she harshly at-
tacked the foreign policy of the Soviet Union and all the countries
of the socialist community. Therefore. Deputy Premier Li Xiannian.
in conversation with Mrs. Thatcher. found "a good deal in common" in
their assessments of various important international issues. Both
the Chinese leaders and the leader of the English Tories show a desire
to oppose the policy of detente, which. in their opinion. "is beneath
mention." The anti-Sovietism of Chief Air Marshal Cameron. chief of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

defense headquarters for Great Britain, and Lord Chalfont were also
greeted with great satisfaction in Beijing.

It is emphasized abroad that. while calling for allout strengthening

of the NATO bloc, the Chinese leaders attach great importance to re-
activating French ties with the NATO military organization. Supporting
the propaganda campaign developed in France concerning the "threat"
from the socialist countries. the Chinese press welcomed the new mili-
tary idea called "expanded zones of responsibility." which envisioned
immediate introduction of French armed forces into action if a conflict
occurs between the NATO countries and the members of the Harsaw Pact.

A Chinese military delegation headed by deputy chief of the general
staff Yang Chengwu visited France.

According to the testimony of the French press, the Chinese delegation
showed particular interest in various types of missiles. airplanes,
and other modern military equipment. A PRC representative stated that
China is counting on French help to modernize its armed forces. In
its turn. France demonstrated an interest in further expansion of hi-
lateral military cooperation, which began in 1972.

The expansion of political contacts with Western Europe and intensi-
fication of the campaign to discredit the policy of detente were accom-
panied of activation of Beijing's links with the European Economic Com-
munity. In April of this year the "Common Market" granted China the
status of most favored nation. In the words of a representative of this

organization, the agreement with China does not envision any restrictions
on sale of strategic materials.

The Chinese leaders, following a policy of militarization of the country
and modernisation of the armed forces, are looking for ways to buy mili-
tary equipment and weapons in the West. According to a report by the

DPA Agency, Beijing emissaries in West Germany intend to buy a license
from the Hesserschmitt-Boelkow-BlohmCompanyfor the production of heavy
helicopters. In 1975 a major deal was concluded with the English Rolls
Royce Company for the purchase of Spay jet aircraft engines and to grant
China a license to manufacture engines of this type. China has purchased
Alouette and Super Frelon helicopters from France.

The Beijing leaders, just like the bosses of the NATO bloc, are urging
the capitalist countries of Hestern Europe to increase their military
expenditures. They support escalation of the arms race. In their desire
to win favor with imperialism the Beijing leaders have gone even further
than the Hashington "hawks" and NATO militarists in their praise of the

neutron bomb, whose production is resolutely opposed by the peace-loving
peoples of the entire world.

Beijing's servility before the world imperialist react1onaries has recent-
ly become highly cynical and flagrant. Today the Chinese leaders not
only support NATO by every means but directly identify China with this
sgressive bloc. Answering questions from American journalists, deputy

A
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

premier of the PRC State Council Deng Xiaoping stated that he basically
agreed with the opinion of the U.S. Ambassador to Japan that China is
an "Eastern NATO" and hinted at the necessity of the three countries,
the United States. Japan, and China. taking joint action in the Far East
against the "Soviet threat."

The Swedish newspaper NORSNENSPAIM pointed out, in this connection.
that the NATO leadership has every reason to be more than satisfied with
the actions of the current Beijing leaders. In top NATO circles Naoist
China is even called the "16th NATO member'.'"and given the role of a
kind of ”Far Eastern flank" of this reactionary organization.

Beij ing's ties with NATO, the Finnish newspaper KANE“! UUTISET remarked.
are becoming more active every year. Therefore we are fully justified
in saying that. if it is not a matter of a military alliance yet. in
any case the policies of China and the NATO countries are moving in a
col-on direction.

The NATO countries are not the only objects of the fixed attention of
the Beijing strategists. In their attempt to forge an anti-Soviet front
the leaders of China also direct their gaze to the Best. By using
flagrant pressure and blackmail and playing on the nationalism of reac-
tionary Japanese circles, Beijing was able to get Japan to sign the so-
called ”treaty of peace and friendship." It has an anti-Soviet orien-
tation. which has been mentioned more than once by the Beijing leaders
themselves. China's line in relation to Japan aims at supporting the
forces in that country who stand for militarization and revenge. Deputy
“.1" of the PRC State Council Deng Xiaoping openly praised Japan last

tober for building up its military strength. Trips to Japan by Chinese
figures who always visit the northern regions of the country and lake
anti-Soviet statements while there are used to stir up revanchiste
claim against the Soviet Union. In this way Beijing is clearly claim-
ing a right to use the Chinese-Japanese treaty for its own far-reaching
plans and hegenoniatic purposes and to involve Japan in actions that en-
danger the cauae of peace.

The Singapore STRAITS TIMES and the English DAILY TELEGRAPH point out

in their consents that "it is impossible to aeny the possibility that the
Japanese-Chinese treaty could grow into an alliance of the United States.
the PRC, and Japan." U. 8. Assistant Secretary of State Holbrook spoke
even more openly. He said, in the Hawaiian Islands in June 1978. that
Japan and the PRC were the bulwark of 0.8. Asian policy. According to
the reports by the Japanese paper SANKYOI SNIHBUN. llolbrook also em-
phauized that the United States, China. and Japan have canon interests
on the level of maintaining stability in Asia and thus hinted at the
possibility of an American-Chinese-Japanese pact to prevent Soviet pene-
tration into Asia.

The formation of .mch a bloc would, according to the thinking of opponents
of the alleviation of international tension. rake it possible to put
together Japan with its highly developed economy and military potential
and China. which has enormous human resources and reserves of strategic
raw materials. 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
By following its anti-Soviet line in the international arena, Beijing
is in fact betraying the interests of the national liberation movement
in Asia. Africa, and Latin America and joining with the most reactionary
forces of imperialism and the internal reactionaries in the countries
of these regions. China now considers the forces that receive support
from the Soviet Union and the socialist countries to be its bitter ene-
mies.

China's joint actions with imperialisa to suppress the national libera-
tion movement are no longer isolated cases, but rather an established
line of foreign policy activities.

Beijing has betrayed the anti-imperialist movement in Chile and, like
the United States, supports the fascist Pinochet regime.

The Chinese leadership opposed the national liberation movement in
Angola. Together with the United States it supported the pectarian.
proimperialist grouping which fought then and still fights alu'gside the
South African racists against the revolutionary government of Angola.

The events in Zaire are one more example of Beijing's alliance with
reaction and imperialism. After the NATO countries intervened, a dele-
gation from the PRC headed by deputy chief of the general staff Chi
llaotian visited Kinshasa. During the visit China promised to deliver

a new batch weapons and military equipment to the Hobutu regime.

One item promised was patrol boats. As the AP reported. China also
offered to send military advisors to Zaire.

The leadership of China covered itself with shame during the events in
the Horn of Africa. It took part in an attempt to strike down the young
socialist Ethiopia and, together with the United States, approved of the
aggressive actions taken by the Coverment of Somali. The Chinese did
not limit themselves to verbal support either, but with the NATO coun-
tries shipped military goods to the Barre government. According to the
English DAILY TELEGRAPH, the weapons sent to Soaali by China included
ground-to-sir missiles.

Beijing tried to cover up its aid to the Somali leaders by slandering

the Soviet Union, which was supposedly preparing to "seize" the African
countries one after the other. "However. Beijing'e pseudorevolutionary
phrases," the Hungarian newspaper "ACYAR HIRLAP wrote in this connection,
"cannot conceal the regrettable I act that the Chinese leaders are acting
in alliance with international reactionaries against progressive forces."

The policies of the Beijing leadership with respect to the national
liberation struggle against Israeli and their support of the proimperialist
line and capitulationist policy of Sadat also illustrate Beijing's
betrayal.

The events on the Indochinese Peninsula are striking evidence of the
hegemonistic. expansionist aspirations of the Chinese leadership. With

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the assistance of Kampuchea. Beijing delivered a stab in the back to
socialist Vietnam, which had only recently concluded the hard but vic-
torious war against American agresaion and begun peaceful building.
Beijing provided substantial material and military aid to Kampuchea

and pressured it to go to war against the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
At the same time China is trying to put economic and political pressure
on Vietnam to stop socialist building in that country. The flagrant
betrayal of the heroic Vietnamese people by Beijing not only arouses
the indignation of all progressive people in the world but also opens
the eyes of many to the true content of the policy of the Chinese
leadership. whose centerpiece is a desire for world hegemony and a
frank orientation. as emphasized in the foreign press, toward seizure
of vast areas of neighboring states.

In its relations with China, the Soviet Government holds firmly to the
principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and territorial integ-
rity, nonintervention in the domestic affairs of others, and rejection
of the use of force. however. all the Soviet Union's initiatives to
re-eatablish good neighbor relations have either been rejected by
Beijing or left unanswered. For its part, the Chinese leadership is
directimgall its efforts to srtifically stirring up anti-Sovietism and
takes every opportunity to demonstrate its hostility to the USSR. In
response to the message of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet
addressed to the Permanent Committee of the All-Chinese Assembly of
People's Representatives on 26 February 1978 proposing to normalize
Soviet-Chinese relations. the Beijing leaership began a new campaign
of slander against our country.

At the same time Mac’s heirs are continuing a line aimed at thwarting
the peace-loving efforts of the Soviet union and the other socialist
countries. a policy that favors continuation of the arms race and push-
ing the world Leeord another war. This Beijing policy profoundly con-
tradicts the interests of all peoples and demands that the Soviet
people show high vigilance toward the tricks and ruses of the Chinese
militarists.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoyo obozreniye", 1978

11.176
C80: 1801

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mars 01' NIGHT OPERATIONS OF NATO ll‘TORIZ- INFANTRY CORNERS

Moscow ZARUBBZIINOYB VOYMOYB OBOZRENIYB in Russian No 10, Oct 78 signed
to press 5 Oct 78 pp 36-41

[Article by Col A. Kol'tsov: "The Company in Night Battle")

[Text] Despite the desires of the world's people for establishent of
lasting peace on earth, nilitarists in the United States are drawing up
new plans to increase their nilitsry might and training troops to wage
aggressive actions at any point on the globe under any conditions.

In recent times a great deal of attention in the foreign Iilitsry press
and in new regulations and manuals of the armies of the principal capi-
talist countries has been devoted to the problem of waging combat actions
at night. The primary reason for this is that. with the appearance of
new weapons, night no longer causes a decrease in the level of combat
action. Thus, 11. 8. Army manuals state directly that nodern night vision
instruments allow ground forces to wage combat actions under any condi-
tions, deliver accurate fire strikes. organize cooperation and control,
and provide support to large and small units at night in practically the
sane fashion as during the day.

however, the use of night vision instruments cannot, in the opinion of
foreign specialists, eliminate all the difficulties that arise in con-
nection with the physiological and psychological characteristics of the
human organism. at night the human being has a heightened susceptibility
to fatigue and aural and light signals, the outlines and dimensions of
objects, and distances are perceived in distorted form. As a result,

a feeling of uncertainty and even fear arises, the reaction to danger is
diminished, the nervous system relaxes, and, fighting effectiveness is
lowered. Therefore, western military specialists believe that victory
in night battle will go to the side that is best equipped and trained
for actions in conditions of complete darkness and poor visibility. In
their opinion, this training will achieve its purpose if it is carried
on systematically at night using the latest night vision inatruents and
illu-ination equipment.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

They believe that night battle is usually a continuation of daytime
battle. Therefore. the units and subunits will be forced to operate

in darkness not only on unfamiliar terrain but also in an unclear situ-
ation. where the commanders do not have time to organize the battle.
Subunit maneuvers must be as simple as possible. and their actions will
be more independent.

Success in this type of fighting. the foreign press emphasizes. depends
greatly on the unity of the subunits. their ability to orient them-
selves and keep to assigned directions. For example. a motorized in-
fantry company will usually attack on f‘ot. overcoming the enemy de-
fense in unfamiliar terrain. and it may encounter various manmade and
natural obstacles. Performance of the combat mission will depend
greatly on skillful battle leadership by sco'o. the determination and
teamwork of the platoons and squads. their orientation skills. and
skillful use of night vision instruments and means of illumination.

In some cases when the enemy antitank defense is comparatively weak
or has been reliably neutralized. a motorized infantry company at-
tacks the enemy in combat vehicles. "hen this attack procedure is
used. it is recoammnded that before the night battle the company com-
mander carefully study the terrain and choose a sector for the break-
through which does not have any insurmountable obstacles. All the
combat vehicles should be equipped with night vision instruments and
the drivers must be trained for actions at night.

The troops should prepare themselves and go onto the attack secretly.
If it is impossible to achieve surprise. the attack is carried out
with illumination of the terrain; it is recouended that first of
all the enemy be blinded and his night vision instruments knocked out.
Illumination equipment should be used continuously and evenly. The
illumination is distributed both in time and by place in the battle
formation of the forward platoons of the company. In this case. just
as in daytime. therearesrtillery preparations. passages are made
through minefields and other engineering obstructions. and the attack
is carried out vith support from tanks. infantry combat vehicles. and
sometimes also fire support helicopters.

The success of night battle depends greatly on choosing the correct
axis of attack. To do this. spetialists believe. it is essential not
only to completely uncover the enemy's defense. but also to study the
possibilities of a concealed approach to the line of attack using
woods. brush. and folds in the terrain. considering that the enemy
also has modern night vision instruments.

The company commander carefully analyzes all information from recon-
naissance and personal observation and then outlines the sector of

the breakthrough. the primary axis of attack. and concealed approaches
to the line of attack. with supporting artillery he coordinates the
lines for opening and transferring fire and the targets that are to
be neutralized immediately. He organizes cooperation with neighbors
and gives missions to his own platoons. The company commander may

9
F08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

plan to lay down smoke which will obstruct enemy observation and
aimed fire. It is recommended that the smoke be laid down on call
so that it will not obstruct the actions of the attacking subunits.

When the company begins moving toward the line of attack. the ar-
tillery should be firing at normal intensity. that is. as it has done
on previous nights. It is a good idea. specialists feel. to organ-
ize flanking fire by neighbors against targets in the axis of the
company's attack. Hhen the platoons reach the line of attack. the
artillery concentrates its fire on the objects to be seized. As the
attackers advance fire is transferred deeper to cut off the path of
retreat and mortars and antitank guided missiles continue to fire at
fire points that have not been suppressed and are obstructing the
platoons' attack.

The foreign press emphasizes that artillery support for an attack at
night involves great difficulties because the targets are invisible
and correction of fire by shell explosions is extremely compier. It
is extremely complex. It is recommended, therefore. that all targets
and lines be ranged as much as possible during daylight hours and
fire at night he waged according to pre-agreed signals given by the
forward lire of the attacking company. Combat engineers must prepare
a passage when a company attacking at night crosses a mine field.

The company commander, who is in the front line with the control
group. secretly advances to the predetermined attack line with two
platoons. Then these platoons. with combat engineer support. cross
the ainefield along the passage and make a breakthrough in a narrow
sector. After this one of the platoons races to the depth of the
enemy defense, wiping out command posts and communications equipment
first of all. while the other. providing fire cover. brings the

third platoon through the passage and continues to advance.

During the battle the company commander gives the signal to use il-
lumination rockets. At this time division artillery begins execution
of its missions to illuminate targets in the depth of the enemy de-
fense. devoting special attention to the routes of movement of enemy
second echelons and reserves. Battalion artillery usually does not
take part in illumination of the terrain. so that it will not be di-
verted from its immediate missions of support for the attacking
companies.

As definite lines and objects are taken it is recommended that the
subunits immediately secure their defense. To do this they quickly
send an outpost ahead. organize cooperation, and begin setting up a
system of fire and digging trenches. The artillery is given the mis-
sion of laying down concentrated fire in front of the company defense
sector. Cooperation with neighbors is organized and mines may also
be laid in the directions of greatest tank danger. Specialists be-
lieve that the success of night attack depends greatly on holding on
to captured objects.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Precise control and cooperation become especially important in
night fighting. The company commander much show great initiative and
independence. He makes all decisions quickly and immediately puts
them into effect. Radio. light signals. whistles. bugles. and the
like are used for communication with platoon leaders and supporting
subunits. Special attention is devoted to precise designation of the
axis of attack and lines for opening fire and transferring fire:
mutual recognition is also important.

ﬂight battle. as the foreign press observes. demands special troop
training. In many armies of the NATO bloc. therefore, up to one-
third of training time is nighttime. Night actions are a key ele-
ment of combined arms exercises. Because the units are saturated
with the latest night vision instruments and illumination devices.
higher demands are made of personnel. In general they are the fol-
lowing: acquire solid skills in night orientation and keeping an
assigned direction. learn to use night vision instruments and illumi-
nation devices. and be able to move silently and conceal oneself re-
liably.

Foreign military specialists recommend that troops be prepared for
night actions in stages. First. they believe. personnel must be
taught to perform the simplest duties at night. then gradually train-
ing moves on to the skills of using the weapons and night vision
instruments. as well as simple tactical procedures. engineering jobs.
and, finally. executing marches. At first matches are across fa-
miliar terrain. but later they will be on unfamiliar terrain. The
concluding stage is considered to be waging practice combat actions
at night at the range. firing the regular weapon and using night
vision instruments.

To give subunits more effective training in actions at night. foreign
specialists propose that specially prepared sectors (wooded. swampy.
and others) be set up in the field to allow troops to be trained in
silent. rapid assembly in definite regions. concealed approach to the
enemy. opening fire on the enemy from short range. and also secretly
filtering through the enemy battle formation.

Con-under training. the foreign press observes. should include the
questions of planning night battle. control. cooperation. combat
support. and use of night vision instruments and illumination and
signalling devices. It is recommended that training periods with
commanders be held on unfamiliar terrain at night. with a rapidly
changing situation. The primary purpose of such training periods is
to instill solid skills in controlling subunits in night battle.

The study of night vision instruments is assigned an important place
in the system of combat training. The armies of the main capitalist
countries. above all the U. 8. Army. are receiving more and more new
models. During the U. S. aggression in Vietnam the troops used pri-
marily radar and infrared instruments; in the mid-1960's subunits

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY

began to receive light-intensifying instruments. and by the mid-1970's
they were getting heat vision devices built on the principle of in-
tensifying heat emissions.

Modern non-intensifying electronic-optical instruments (for example
binoculars and sights) do not require any special training to use.
They are less cumbersome and sinpler to operate. Their range of ac-
tion on a starlit (moonlit) night is about 2.000 m. Similar instru-
ments have also been devised for the drivers of combat vehicles and
can be used to drive at night. But they ell require at least minimal
illumination. and it is hard to use then in heavy rain. snow. fog.

or smoke.

heat-vision devices are. in the opinion of foreign specialists. the
most promising. They work on the principle of receiving an image

by means of fixing the heat contrast between objects. their particular
elements. and the surrounding background. These instruments do not
give out emissions and need no illumination or light intensification.
Their range of action in darkness or with limited visibility is
roughly equivalent to the effective range of the rifle. with these
instruments it is possible not only to fix targets and deternine the
distance to them but also to see the outlines of equipment and per-
sonnel distinctly in the form of glowing silhouettes against the
dark background of the environment. The difficulty with then is
that they are heavy and cumbersome. as well as expensive and diffi-
cult to produce and use.

Equipping units with modern night vision instruments. teaching per-
sonnel to operate in darkness. and the development of night fighting
tactics by subunits are evidence that the ground forces of the
countries of the aggressive NATO bloc are preparing extensively to
wage combat actions at night.

COPYRIGHT: "Zaruberhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

11.176
C80: 1801

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS 0“ U. S. FLIGRT TRAINING SIMULATORS AND METHODS

Hoscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYBNNOYE OBOZRENIYE in Russian No 10, Oct 78
signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 52-58

[Article by Col (Rat) G. Osipov. candidate of nilitary sciences and
docont. and Capt N. Kolesnikov: "The Use of Trainers to Prepare
American Air Force Flight Personnel"]

[Excerpt] One of the ilportant measures to strengthen Auerican mili-
tary aviation. in addition to supplying it with the latest aviation
equipment. is to iaprove the flight training of the crews. As the
foreign press reports. trainers have been used more and more widely
in recent years in flight training in the U. 5. Air Force, naval
aviation, and arIy aviation. Trainers are used to iaprove quality.
reduce the tine and costs of crew preparation, and cut the accident
rate in line units.

Foreign military specialists believe that an isprovesent in crew
training can be achieved through siaulation and practicing all stages
of flight on trainers. This, in turn, makes it possible to teach
personnel the skills of controlling the aircraft and its weapons and
to Iaintain these skills in periods when not actually flying. “hen
pilots are trained with modern trainers, it is possible to use such
regiaes as automatic assignment of initial exercise conditions
(altitude. distance. velocity. target aspect angle. and the like).
stepped-up transition to the starting line for the next stage of
flight. teaporarily halting the drill. review. reproduction of the
conditions of the exercise just finished, and deaonstration of ex-
csplary performance. Trainers make it possible for trainees to
practice the sane element over and over as well as broadening their
knowledge.

The reduction in costs of flight personnel training using trainers
results free the fact that one hour of training on a trainer costs
less than in an airplane or nelicopter and the monthly flying tine
of crews can be reduced. It was reported in the foreign press that
the U. 8. Defense Departsent has decided to reduce the flying tine

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of pilots 25 percent by 1981 through extensive use of trainers. In
naval aviation. for example. it is already authorized to perforl 10
percent of the total mandatory flying tine and 25 percent of the sin-
isun annual flying tine by instruments on trainers. The following

facts were given in the foreign press as an example of reducing the
costs of pilot training.

"hen pilots were trained to fly helicopters by instruments using

the 2326 trainer. an average of 6.5 hours of real flying time in the
helicopter was used per trainee instead of 60 hours. and the saving
was $A.000 per trainee. It was also reported that even complex and
expensive trainers had a substantial economic inpact. For exasple.
it costs 8250 an hour at the tactical aviation coalnnd to operate a
trainer for practicing aerial battle in the F-b plane. In one hour.
however. it is possible to have up to 15 practice battles. where in
actual flight in a fighter plane not more than three could be done.
According to calculations by Anericen specialists. the cost of con-
ducting one aerial battle on the trainer is roughly one-thirtieth of
the cost of doing it in a real plane. without counting the aI-unition
savings.

A review of the existing trainers. the content and techniques of
drills. and the primary lines of further developsent of trainers for

training 0. S. Air Force flight personnel are reviewed below. [passage
omitted]

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

11.176
C80: 1801

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON NATO PILOT RESCUE HETNODS AND EOUiPHENT

Moscow ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYB OBOZRENTYB in Russian No 10, Oct 78
signed to press 5 Oct 78 pp 59-67

[Article by Capt lst Rank 0. Oblipov, Lt Col (Res) V. Hikhaylin. and
Haj Med 8erv K. Vladieirov: "Means of Pilot Rescue"]

[Excerpt] In recent years the United States and the other capitalist
countries have done a good deal to eoderniee existing means of rescu-
ing crew members of military airplanes and helicopters and to devise
new. eore effective means. The reason. say foreign specialists. is
that despite the fact that aviation units end subunits are receiving
increasingly sophisticated flying craft. losses of aviation equipment
and flight personnel are increasing year after year. For example.

in the U. S. Armed Forces alone there were 367 flight accidents in
1975 resulting in the destruction of 239 airplanes and helicopters.
In addition. the experience of so-called local vars deeonatrated that
existing means for rescuing the crew members of aircraft that are shot
down are inadequate to modern needs.

Considering all these factors, as well as the great cost of aviation
equipment and the difficulty and length of time required to train
flight personnel to fly Iodern airplanes and helicopters. military
specialists in the United States and the other members of the aggres-
sive NATO bloc are giving great attention to devising means of pilot
rescue. These devices are subdivided into two primary groups. those
for abandoning the aircraft and those for saving pilots who have
abandoned their aircraft. The former group includes parachutes end
ejection seats. The second group is further divided into three sub-
groups: survival and life support means (inflatable life jackets,
protective suits. boats, supplies of food end water. medications, end
other special packages); signal devices (emergency radio sets and
radio beacons. optical, light. and smoke signalling devices); and
means to deliver pilots from aircraft that have been shot down to the
position of friendly troops. In the opinion of foreign specialists.
the increasing costs of building and introducing these devices vill
be repaid because they will save the lives of experienced pilots who
have suffered accidents or been shot down and these pilots will return

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the ranks quickly. By contrast. training new pilots would take
significant Iaterial expenditures and, lost importantly, time.

According to the views of the U. 8. Air Force Command. the efficiency
of pilot rescue devices can be characterized by the percentage of
pilots who safely abandon aircraft and return to the positions of
their units.

with the purpose of studying the capabilities of existing systems for
emergency abandonment of airplanes and helicopters and to find steps

to promote the survival of pilots after ejection. representatives of
Air Force headquarters and special! 's free the aviation and space
medicine laboratories of the Air Po es and U. 3. Navy Medical Service
analyzed data obtained during the conduct of combat actions by American
aviation in Southeast Asia.

As a result. they came to the conclusion that while regular devices do
provide some degree of safe abandonment of delaged aircraft by pilots.
the systems for life support, finding them, and returning them to
friendly territory are ineffective and do not neet current requirements.
As the foreign press observed. a large majority of the American pilots
who were forced to abandon their aircraft over territory occupied by
forces of the national liberation movesent were taken prisoner. The
percentage of pilots taken prisoner was especially high when they

landed near large populated points or concentrations of enemy troops.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obotreniye". 1978

11.176
C80: 1801

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COHHENTS 0" WESTERN ANTISUBHARINE DEFENSE OF AN AIRCRAFT CARRIER GROUP

Moscow ZARUBEZNNOYE VOYBNNOYB OBOZR£NIYB in Russian No ll. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 65-70

[Article by Capt 2nd Rank A. Chistyakov: "Antisub Defense of an Air-
craft Carrier Group"]

[Text] Following their aggressive plans against the Soviet Union and
the other socialist countries. militaristic circles in the Nest assign
an important role to multipurpose and assault aircraft carriers. which
are the primary element of general-purpose forces in the navies of the
leading capitalist states (the United States. Great Britain. and
france). In the opinion of foreign specialists. both at the present
and in the future aircraft carriers will be the primary striking force
of the navy in wars where nuclear weapons are not used and a strategic
reserve in the case of allout nuclear warfare. Aircraft carriers are
expected to help gain and hold supremacy at sea and in the air in the
region of combat actions. deliver strikes against ground and sea tar-
gets using conventional and nuclear weapons. provide air cover for
assault landing forces during the sea crossing. provide direct sup-
port to marine assault parties and ground forces in the cocstal zone.
and blockade straits to prevent enemy ships from reaching the high
seas. In peacetime the imperialists use aircraft carriers for shows
of force in key regions of the world in order to put pressure on other
countries and carry out interventions against them.

The regular 0. S. Navy has 13 multipurpose aircraft carriers. the
British Navy has one assault carrier. and the French Navy has two
multipurpose carriers. According to future plans. multipurpose air-
craft csrriers are to be built only in the U. 5. Navy. which expects
to maintain at least 12 ships. At the same time. plans call for
modernization of ships of this class that have already been commis-
sioned.

To accomplish the missions given to aircraft carriers carrier assault
(multipurpose) forces and assault (multipurpose) groups are formed.
The primary organizational unit is the carrier group. The carrier
group of ships with conventional power plants includes one aircraft

17
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carrier. 5-8 escort ships (cr0180r0.destroyers. and frigates). and an
atomic torpedo submarine.

The atomic aircraft carrier group may include. in addition to a
nuclear-powered carrier. up to four atomic cruisers and an.atomic
torpedo submarine. American naval specialists believe that such a
group has several advantages over the conventional group because of
its greater mobility and self-sufficiency and its ability to carry
more airplanes. aviation ammunition. and fuel.

Foreign naval specialists believe that multipurpose and assault air-
craft carriers are more vulnerable to modern naval weapons than ships
of other classes because of their very great size: the atomic aircraft
carrier Chester H. ﬂimitz. for example, is 332 asters long and 60.8
meters wide. A deeply echeloned defense against enemy forces is cre-
ated. therefore. to insure their fighting stability in all stages of
action. Special attention is devoted to antisubmarine defense. which

is performed by surface ships. aviation. and atonic torpedo subma-
rines.

Surface ships are one of the primary means of searching for and des-
troying enemy submarines and usually operate together with carrier-
based antisub helicopters as a close screen for the carrier. These
ships can wage effective battle not only against submarines but also
surface ships. airplanes. and winged missiles. Destroyers and frigates
with both missile and artillery weapons and also cruisers are the pri-
mary classes of surface ships used for antisub defense. These ships
perform missions related to other types of defense (sir. missile. and
ship defense) at the same time.

Surface ships have various means of detection and destruction for
antisubmarine defense of aircraft carrier groups. According to in-
formation in the foreign press, the primary means of detection on U. 3.
surface ships in the screen forces of a carrier group are sonar sta-
tions of the following types: Aﬂ/SQS-26, AN/SQS-ZJ. AN/SQS-Sé (a
modernized variation of the AN/Sos-23 sonar. it is installed in anti-
missile defense frigates of the Oliver a. Perry type). and AN/SQS-S3
(on destroyers of the Spruance type). The 00667 destroyers and

CG" atomic cruisers being planned for construction are to be equipped
with new AN/SQR-l9 direct listening stations.

Three types of missile complexes are used for antisubmarine defense on
surface escort ships: Asrok (United States). Halaphon (France). and
There (Great Britain).

Among the primary antisubmarine torpedoes used by surface ships and

equipped with self-guiding systems are the American HK37 (model 0),

HK63 (model 1). Hkbb (models 0 and l). and HK66 (models 0 and l) as
well as the French L3 and L5 (model 1).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Antisub helicopters occupy a special place in the weapons system of
surface ships. Participation by helicopters in the search for an
underwater enemy expands the ship's capabilities for detection and ex.
tended tracking and increases the probability that the submarine will
be destroyed by antisubmarine weapons.

According to reports in the foreign press, American ships have adopted
SH-ZD and SH-ZP helicopters of the Lamps system and the SH-lA and SH-SD
modifications of the SH-3 Sea King helicopter.

The surface ships of the British Navy have the Lynx antisub helicopter
which. according to the predictions of experts. will be the most com-
mon antisub helicopter in the nevies of the NATO countries. In addi-
tion. they have Sea King, Wasp, and Wessex helicopters.‘

Antisub aviation is the primary means of providing antisub defense for

an aircraft carrier group. Antisub aviation includes shore-based

patrol aircraft (P-3C Orion. HR-l Nimrod. and Brege 1150 Atlantic).
carrier-based planes (S-3A Viking and Stage 1050 Alice).2 and helicopters.

In recent years atomic torpedo submarines have been widely used for the
antisubmarine defense of carrier groups. They have high speed. secrecy
of action. and the capability of maintaining reliable communications
with surface ships. which makes it possible to organize close cooper-
ation during performance of missions at sea. Traveling under water

at a certain distance from the carrier and maintaining underwater
audio communication with it or one of the escort ships. foreign spe-
cialists feel that they can wage an effective struggle against subma-
rines. The atomic submarines have various types of sonar equipment

for detection.

The American atomic torpedo submarines are equipped with the Sabrok
antisub guided missile system and self-guiding torpedoes to destroy
enemy submarines.

Foreign military specialists note that the antisub defense of an air-
craft carrier group is done in close coordination with the $0808
permanent passive long-range sonar observation system, which signifi-
cantly increases the effectiveness of the antisub defense of an air-
craft carrier group.

In certain cases antisub helicopters launched from assault helicopter
carriers can be used to reinforce the antisub defense of NATO aircraft
carrier forces.

1 For more detail on ship antisub helicopters see ZARUBBZHNOYB
VOYENNOYB OBOZRBNIYB No 8. 1977. pp 79-85 - (Editor).

2 For information on shore and carrier based antisubmarine airplanes
see ZARUBEZHNOYB VOYBRNOYB ODOZRENIYE No 2. 1976, pp 83-90 - (Editor).

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The antisubmsriue defense of a carrier group is a zonal-object defense
which combines defense of an object (the aircraft carrier or other
major ships of the group) and a zone. Expected enemy resistance. the
presence of friendly forces. the missions being performed by the group,
and characteristics of the carrier group's crossing route and region of
combat maneuvering are the chief influences in organizing the struc-
ture of escort forces.

In the region of combat maneuvering the structure of escort forces
should guarantee maximum effectiveness in the use of weapons, primarily
carrier-based aviation. with adequate defense against submarines.

means of serial attack. and surface ships.

The arrangement of ships relative to the center of the order. where an
aircraft carrier is usually located. end the distance between ships
vary depending on the situation. -

Primary efforts in the struggle against enemy submarines are concen-
trated on the threatened sector because it is there that the attacking
submarine will have to break through the echeloned defense; the defense
is provided by antisub airplanes. submarines. surface ships, and heli-
copters. American specialists believe that the main problem for a sub-
marine that intends to attack the aircraft carrier with torpedoes

will be its speed. But increasing the speed of the submarine itself in
order to occupy a position for the attack increases the likelihood that
it will be detected by escort forces.

In all stages of activity of the carrier group. close and distant
zones of antisub defense are usually organized.

The close screen. which is provided by close escort ships and carrier-
based helicopters. it usually circular. Hhere there are not enough
escort ships their place can be taken by antisub helicopters. and if
necessary an atomic submarine may be included in this force. The pri-
mary mission of the close screen forces is to prevent an enemy sub-
marine from carrying out a torpedo attack. In the opinion of many
foreign specialists. submarines should be detected, attacked. and des-
troyed mainly on the crossing route of the carrier group by mixed avi-
ation-ship search and destroy groups that include antisub airplanes
(shore and carrier based),deck-based helicopters, atomic submarines.
end surface ships.

when an aircraft carrier group is deployed for a crossing at fairly
high speed (more than 20 knots). the escort is reinforced in the for-
ward sectors of the cruise formation (see illustration below) because
this is the direction that is considered most dangerous with respect
to submarine attacks.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key :

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antioubnnrine Formation of en Aircraft Carrier Group
During a Sea Crossing

Isa-zoo mm (a)
100 Mu

_. 10:2M'PL.
{lo-4 0mm

  
      
 
    

uengmagmunu
dunno
(5) ozpnneuuc .7 acne . (d) a: ﬁm‘ﬁﬁmw
momma mun
orpunenua _

. liSyﬂiolal- I. ‘ '
(e) fa aouauoccq (1) A “wmnﬂqgfamn

$xpeﬁcep we (1) Ho nﬂlgllelﬂglmguﬁ

m mania“ (k, Hp W53! " 33%
m l> ’2‘:4’:::::L" (1) Hno ‘sav‘5%:&'2:!”°'

(a) 150-200 Hilee (All other distances also given in all»);

(h) Close-In Ship Escort

(c) Zone of Cloae Antiaubnarine Screen;
((1) Zone of Diotant Antieubnarine Screen;
(e) Aircraft Carrier;

(f) Missile Cruiaer;

(s) Hieaile Destroyer;

(h) Destroyer;

(i) Atomic Torpedo Submarine;

(j) Antioubnarine Helicopter;

(It) Deck-Benet! Antieub Airplane;

(1) Shore—Based Patrol Airplane.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The close screen ships are arranged at a distance equal to 1.75 times
the operating range of the sonar equipment to create a solid ring of
sonar observation. The submarine detection range of close screen ships
together with helicopters is up to 00 miles from the center of the
cruise formation.

During the search for enemy submarines deck-based helicopters cooper-
ate closely with deck-based antisubmsrine planes. when the carrier
group approaches a region where the presence of enemy submarines is
likely the deck-based antisub planes and helicopters take off from the
aircraft carrier. The planes search on the distant approaches to the
carrier and the helicopters work in the zone of the close-in escort
ships.

An airplane searches for submarines at an altitude of 240-370 meters
for about four hours. If it finds a sub it attacks it, simultaneously
reporting this to the command element of the group. However, American
specialists believe that an attack based on the data from the initial
detection may not always be successful. Therefore. helicopters or
other airplanes are sent to the region of the last detection of the
enemy submarine. Success is greatly improved if radiosonic buoys and
a magnetic detector are used for more precise determination of the
subaarine's position. Radiosonic buoys may be set down along a closed
contour that covers a given region or in a line across the assumed
course of the submarine. When using a magnetic detector planes fly at
the minimum safe altitude (about 30 meters).

In the search for submarines helicopters usually follow ancirclement

tactics in which they occupy positions in a small circle that covers
the presumed location of the sub and then, maneuvering in spirals,
converge. They examine the region using dipping sonars, periodically
hovering at altitudes of 5-6 m above the surface of the water at the
places where the senate have been dipped.

In the opinion of foreign specialists antisub helicopters have the
following advantages over surface ships: greater speed in examining
a region. the possibility of surprise appearance above a submarine
and establishing contact before the sub can evade detection, and the
ability to track a fast-moving target for a long time. Among the

shortcomings is the difficulty. and sometimes impossibility, of using
helicopters in bad weather.

"hen surface ships search for submarines it is considered that the
sonar transmissions of the surface ship can be detected under the
water at a much greater distance than the ship can detect its target
(submarine). and thus the submarine, upon learning that it is being
hunted. can take steps in time to evade a meeting with the escort
forces. Therefore. foreign naval specialists think it is wise for
only the close screen forces to use sonar sets and complexes in the
active mode. It is recommended that the surface ships of the distant
screen use primarily passive means of searching and helicopters to
avoid being a beacon for enemy submarines.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in regions of combat maneuver the close antisubmarine screen is organ-
ized strictly by zones. with resources distributed throughout the en-
tire region. in this case too. antisub defense is reinforced in those
regions where the appearance of enemy submarines is most likely. "hen
the region of combat maneuvering changes the defense of the object (air-
craft carrier) is intensified but the principle of defense of a region
is maintained.

In a distant zone. both during the sea crossing and in the region of
combat maneuvering. the search for enemy submarines is carried on by
shore and deck based antisubmarine airplanes and by the atomic subma-
rine. At the far border of the distant zone of antisubmarine defense
the search is usually conducted by one or two shore-based patrol air-
crait which fly to the threatened sector 200 miles (370 kilometers)
from the carrier. Deck-based antisubmarine planes patrol either on
the perimeter of the formation or in a threatened sector at a distance
up to 100 miles (185 kilometers). "hen the aircraft carrier. in the
antisubmarine variation. has 20 antisub planes on board. as many as
six may be in the air simultaneously.

Atomic torpedo submarines used for antisubmarine defense in the dis-
tant zone may operate independently or be controlled by a surface relay
ship which maintains constant communication between the submarine and
the command element of the group.

In the sea crossing submarines travel parallel to the course of the
carrier force and search for enemy submarines using their sonar com-
plexes in threatened sectors.

In the region of combat maneuvering atomic torpedo submarines can
cover sectors where it is possible that enemy submarines will break
through to the defended region. Their position for this purpose is
set 60-90 miles (72-162 kilometers) from the center of the region of
combat maneuvering.

In the opinion of foreign naval specialists, using atomic submarines
for the antisubmarine defense of aircraft carrier groups significantly
increases the effectiveness of the group's antisub defense in all
stages of its activity.

Control of the antisub defense of a carrier group, including coordi-
nation with other antisub forces (for example, with a permanent system
of long-range sonar observation) is carried out from the antisub defense
control station. which is located on the aircraft carrier or one of
the escort ships. It exercises centralized control over the antisub
defense resources of the group. collects information about the under-
water situation in the region, evaluates this information and prepares
proposals for adopting plans to wipe out submarines. warns escort
ships. and allocates forces to destroy enemy subs. The antisubmarine
weapon control officer controls direct antisub actions by an escort
ship from a battle information post.

23
FOR OFFIClkL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Controlling the actions of an atomic torpedo submarine under water is
the most difficult aspect. In this case. the submarine can establish
communication with surface ships only by means of underwater audio
communication. The process of control is complicated by the need to
transmit appropriate information from the antisub defense command station
of the carrier group. In these cases escort ships must be used as re-
lsys. According to reports in the foreign press. atomic submarines have
short and long wave radio receivers. tuo shortuave transmitters. and
sonar equipment to naintain communications between ships under water

and surface ships for the purpose of controlling the submarines.
Covered. extendable. towed. and buoy antennas make it possible to carry
on two-way communication above and under water.

Thus. the navel commands of the United States. Crest lritain. and France
are devoting considerable attention to questions of the antisubmarine
defenscofaircraft carriers both in the sea crossing and in combat re-
gions. They believe that effective antisubmarine defense will be one
of the primary conditions for maintaining the combat stability of air-
craft carrier forces, a key element of general-purpose surface forces.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

11.176
C50: 1801

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON THE U. S. SIXTN FLEET

Moscow ZARUBEZNNOYE VOYENNOYB OBOZRENIYE in Russian No 11. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 71-76

[Article by Capt lst Rank I. Kare-av: "The U. 8. Sixth Fleet")

[Text] The silitaristic plans of the American imperialists assign a
special place to the Mediterranean Sea. prinarily because of its is-
portant strategic position.

The Mediterranean Sea is the connecting link anong three continents.
Europe. Africa, and Asia. Internationally iuportant sea and air routes
pasa'along it, connecting najor European countries with the countries
of the Middle East and North Africa and, through the Suez Canal. with
the countries of Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean region. It is
near the rich oil deposits of the Middle East. which represent 70 per-
cent of the explored reserves of the capitalist world. According to
reports in the foreign press. each year sore than 200 million tons of
petroleum is transported across the Mediterranean Sea. “hen the Suez
Canal was closed sany petroleum pipelines were brought directly to
Mediterranean ports.

0. S. isperialist circles consider the Mediterranean Sea region and
the territory adjacent to it as a good base of operations for possible
direct acts of aggression against the USSR and other socialist countries.

During Uorld war II Aserican ships in the Mediterranean landed troops
in North Africa, on the island of Sicily, and on the south coast of
France. In 1965 the U. s. naval connand left a snail force of ships
in the Mediterranean to support Aaerican troops in Italy. The head-
quarters of this force was located on a destroyer nether ship based in
Naples. In August 1967 this mother ship was replaced by a cruiser.

0n 1 July l9b8 U. S. naval forces in the Mediterranean were officially
reorganized as the Sixth Operational Fleet.

The U. 8. Sixth Fleet took final form in 1950. It includes surface
ships. submarines. and subunits and units of naval aviation and aarinea.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the plans of the U. S. naval command the Sixth Fleet is
given the following primary missions: gain and hold supremacy at sea.
wage combat actions from the sea. support ground forces. support the
activities of atomic missile submarines on combat patrol in the
Mediterranean. and delonatrate the U. S. military presence in this
region. It is an important means of intervention by American imperial-
ism in the domestic affairs of the Mediterranean countries.

The commander of the Sixth Fleet is at the same time commander of naval
assault forces in the Southern European theater. Within the American
military he is subordinate to the commander of U. S. naval forces in
Europe (with headquarters in London) and in the NATO organization he

is subordinate to the commander of NATO Unified Armed Forces in the
Southern European theater (headquarters in Naples). The deputy com-
mander of the Sixth Fleet for questions of planning and coordination
of fleet activity within the NATO Unified Armed Forces is also per-

manently stationed there. he heads e special shore headquarters with
35-60 officers.

U. S. strategists consider the Sixth Fleet the most universal. flexible.
and combat-ready operational formation of American naval forces in
Europe. with significant striking power. It has formations and units
of the fleet. naval aviation. and marines. In 1977 the Sixth Fleet had
up to 50 ships and auxiliary vessels. including two multipurpose air-
craft carriers (carrying 160-180 airplanes and helicopters). Sod
nissile cruisers. 15-20 destroyers and frigatea (including missile
ships). 5-6 atomic submarines. 5-6 landing ships (including landing
helicopter ships with 32 transport-landing helicopters on board). and
mobile rear support vessels. An expeditionary marine battalion is
permanently assigned to the lending ships. The fleet has about 25.000
personnel.

The fleet dose not have a fixed ship composition; instead it is com-
posed of combat-ready ships and naval aviation and marine units of the
Atlantic Fleet (Second Operational Fleet) which spend up to six months
in the Mediterranean. The exception is the flagship. a missile
cruiser on which the cruise headquarters of the fleet co-ander is lo-
cated. This cruiser seends 2-3 years without a break in the Mediter-
ranean Sea.

When the international situation in the Mediterranean region worsens
the Sixth Fleet is usually reinforced with ships sent from the United
States. Thus. during the American intervention in Lebanon in 1958
the fleet's ship composition was increased to 76 fighting ships and
auxiliary vessels and the number of personnel rose to 35.000. Just
before the Arab-Isreeli war in October 1973 the total number of ships
in the fleet was raised to 65.

Organizationally. the Sixth Fleet includes several task forces which
are designated to perform both independent and combined missions.“

 

* An organizational chart of the U. S. Sixth Fleet was given in
ZARUIEZKNOYE VOYENNOYE OSOZRENIYE No 8. 1977. p 70 - (Editor).

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

The task forces have 2-digit numbers in which the first digit indicates
affiliation with the Sixth Fleet and is always "6."

The 60th Task Force (aircraft carrier) is the main striking force of the
floor. It usually has at least two aircraft carrier groups. The for-
eign press reports that each group includes a multipurpose aircraft

carrier. one or two missile cruisers. 5-6 destroyers and frigates. and
an atomic submarine.

At the start of 1978 the Sixth Pleat had the multipurpose atomic air-
craft carrier Chester v. Nimitz and the multipurpose carrier America.
Each carrier has an air wing with up to 10 squadrons of airplanes and
helicopters (about 100 aircraft). Thus. according to reports in the
American journal AVIATION "EEK. the following aircraft are based on
the carrier America: two fighter squadrons (each with 12 F-lb Tomcat
planes). a ground-attack squadron (1!. A-6 Intruders including four
refueling planes). two ground-attack squadrons (14 A-7 Corsaira O‘Ch).
a squadron of long-range radar detection planes (four 8-20 hawkeyes).
a squadron of four EA-6B Prowler radioelectronic suppression planes,
a detachment of three RA-Sc Vigilant heavy ground-attack-reconnsis-
sance planes. a squadron of 10 S-3A Viking antisubmarine planes. and
a squadron of eight Fﬂ-JA Sea King antisub helicopters.

The missions of the 60th Task Force are: deliver strikes against sea
and land targets with both conventional and nuclear weapons. provide
air support to ground forces operating in coastal sectors and to
marine landing parties during their landing and fighting on shore.
and combat enemy surface ships and submarines at sea.

Deck-based aircraft are capable of delivering conventional or nuclear
weapons to targets at up to 1.800 kilo-stars from the aircraft car-
rier. A special feature of the carrier task force. in the opinion

of American military specialists. is its high mobility which makes it

possible for the task force to move up to 600 miles (about 1.100
kilometers) in 26 hours.

Under ordinary conditions. the foreign press reports. the fleet air-
craft carrier groups operate separately about 600 miles from one
another. Each day planes from the carrier perform about 120 takeoffs
and landings. The angled flight deck and other special devices allow
planes to land at 30-second intervals. During a six-month stay by an
aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean the air wing logs up to 3.000
hours of flying time.

Judging by material in the foreign press. 70 percent of the airplanes
of a carrier must be in constant readiness for takeoff. however. mil-

itary specialists acknowledge that this level of combat readiness is
not always maintained.

The 61st First Task Force (amphibious assault) is designated for mov-
ing a marine assault party across the sea and landing them on a shore.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
fOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task force includes a group of landing ships called the Amphibious
Ready Group. sade up of an assault helicopter ship. an assault heli-
coptar ship-dock. an assault transport-dock. a tank landing ship. and
a landing freight transport. The ships of the group can move and land
l.800-2.000 narines (an expeditionary battalion) on shore using naval
assault-landing means or inland from the coast by means of transport-
landing helicopters. These methods may also be combined.

The landing ships of the ready group are alternated every six months.

The 62nd Task Force (marines) is an expeditionary battalion (a marine
battalion with attached tanks. artillery. and helicopters). It is
usually drawn from the U. S. 2nd Marine Division. The battalion is

replaced at the same time as the ships of the ready group. on vhich it
1. stationed.

The 63rd Task Force (service forces) performs rear support services for
the ships and aviation of the Sixth fleet. It has one high-speed com-
prehensive supply transport. special weapons and ammunition transports.
tankers. a petroleua carrier. a food transport. a destroyer tender. an
ocean-going tug. a rescue ship. a repair and maintenance ship. and
other auxiliary vessels.

The headquarters of the task force monitors the use of fuel and
petroleum products by the fighting ships of the fleet and refuels them.
Aserican tankers on the Mediterranean. according to reports in the

foreign press. are capable of carrying about 100,000 tons of fuels and
lubricants.

Virtually all supply articles for the ships of the Sixth Pleat are de-
livered from the United States. Each month more than 1.550 tons of
food and about 300 tons of consumable goods are delivered from Norfolk
to the Mediterranean for fleet personnel. fresh produce is bought at
foreign ports.

The U. S. navy commend devotes significant attention at exercises to
practicing aethods of replenishing ships supplied at see. As the
American press reports. the 63rd Task Force carries out more than
2.:00 operations to replenish ship supplies at sea and on the move in
a year. with transport helicopters participating in 10 percent of them.

The 65th Task Force (teaporary) is formed periodically to perform spe-
cial missions. In 1966 it was for-ed to locate and raise the 3-52
bomber and its nuclear bombs which had fallen into the sea near
Paloearea. Spain; in October-November 1971 it uas formed to conduct
tests of new sweeps and apparatus for sweeping acoustic and Iagnctic
mines by helicopter. It included a subunit of minesveeping forces
that had a headquarters group and four Ch-53A Sea Stallion minesueeper
helicopters. The subunit was based at the Suds airbase on the island
of Crete.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 66th Task Force (tenporary) is designated to reinforce the anti-
aubmarine defense of the Sixth Fleet's aircraft carrier task force if
the situation in the Mediterranean Sea region becomes complex.

The 67th Task Force (antisubmarine) searches for and destroys enemy
submarines and carries on reconnaissance. It has P-3c Orion shore-
based patrol airplanes that operate from the naval air bases at
Sigonella on the island of Sicily and Suds on Crete. as well as a
squadron of reconnaissance planes stationed at the U. 8. Navy airbase
in Rota. Spain.

The 69th Task Force (submarine forces) has several atomic submarines
that are based at La Maddalena. Sardinia.

The naval bases and ports of Italy.creece. Turkey. Spain. and the is-
lands of Malta and Crete are used for bases of fleet ships and for
visits. The U. S. navy cmmeand works tirelessly to turn some of these
ports into permanent bases for its fleet. According to reports in the
foreign press. the United States has already received consent to equip
and use the Italian port of La Maddalena and tau Spanish ports. Ceuta
and Cartagens. as naval bases. The lease on the leading naval base at
Rota has been extended. Negotiations are underway with the Government
of Israel to lease territory for basing American ships in the port of
Naifa. ;

During the Arab-Israeli conflict of 1967 the Americans set up an ad-
vance operations base in Suds Bay on the island of Crete to support
naval actions in the eastern part of the Mediterranean. Ongoing re-
pair for ships of the Sixth Fleet is performed there on a destroyer
tender. Repair work is also done on an atomic missile submarine
tender stationed at the Note advance naval base and an atomic submarine
tender at La Maddalena.

The fleet has special detachments in Naples and Rota to coordinate
logistic support and insure uninterrupted operation of the supply
system. These detachments use aircraft of the 26th Naval Aviation
Transport Squadron to transport freight. These planes usually take
off free the Note and Sigonella sirfields and fly "special" routes
determined by actual supply needs. Each month carrier-based trans-
port aircraft deliver at least 250 tons of different kinds of freight
to the aircraft carriers of the Sixth Fleet.

The combat training of the Sixth Fleet is conducted in accordance _
vith plans to use it in limited (local) conflicts as well as in gen-
eral nuclear war. Training aims at raising combat readiness of the
assault forces of the fleet first of all. the aircraft carrier groups
as well as sntisub forces and marines. As the foreign press has re-
ported. ships of the Sixth fleet spend more than 50 percent of their
time at sea participating in various exercises. The Sixth Fleet de-
votes more than half of the time allocated for combat training to
joint exercises with the navies of the other NATO countries on the
Mediterranean (Italy. Greece. Turkey. and also Great Britain and
France). During these exercises the carrier groups practice the

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

missions of delivering strikes against sea and ground targets with
carrier-based aircraft. providing air support to ground forces in the
coastal sectors of the Southern European theater. fighting enemy sur-
face ships snd submarines. landing assault parties. and carrying on
the air and antisub defense of the task forces.

Similar missions are performed by forces of the Sixth Fleet at exer-
cises of the National Week type, held on the basis of U. S. Navy
national plans twice a year. The Sixth Fleet usually works on fighting
enemy surface vessels in bilateral exercises of aircraft carrier groups
during which each group. using cover and deception and observing full
radio and radar silence. maneuvers in an assigned region in an attempt
to find and destroy the enemy. The American press reports that such
exercises usually and in success. with the sinking of one of the air-
craft carriers and several escort ships.

I
According to statements by Pentagon leaders. the Sixth Fleet. being an
"implement of deterrence." is always in a high degree of combat readi-
ness and even in peacetime is staffed at wartime levels. As the base
for formation of NATO naval assault forces in the Southern European
theater. it can. as shown by the events of recent years. operate lnde-
pendently in support of the imperialist policy of the United States in
the Mediterranean Sea region. sometimes not coordinating its actions
with NATO partners at all.

For example. during the night between 26 and 25 October 1973 (at the
time of the Arab-Israeli war). the Sixth Pleat was switched to a state
of combat readiness No 3 without notification of American allies and
the main forces of the fleet (two aircraft carrier groups and a group
of landing ships with marines on board) were assembled in a region to
the south of the island of Crete. in the ismediate vicinity of combat
actions. Moreover. a third aircraft carrier group (the carrier John
F. Kennedy with three escort ships sent from the North Sea) was brought
into the Mediterranean and the carrier Hancock from the Seventh Vleet.
with escort ships. arrived in the Arabian Sea to insure an American
presence to the south of the conflict region.

This information from the foreign press concerning the activities of
the U. S. Navy Sixth Fleet. which is by no means the full story. illus-
trates that it is one of the primary tools of the expansionist policy
of imperialist circles in the Mediterranean Sea basin.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubeshnoye voyennoye obozreniye". 1978

11.176
C80: 1801

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON U. S. NAVY AUTOMATED CONTROL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM

Moscow ZARUBBZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRBNIYA in Russian No 11. Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 76-86

[Article by Col-Engr I. Loshchilov. candidate of technical sciences:
"Automation of the U. 8. Navy Control and Communications System")

[Text] In the next decade. the foreign press reports. the U. 8.
military leadership intends to revise the navy command and control
system so that it is better suited to the requirements of its mili-
tary strategy and the increased capacities of weapons and combat
equipment. At the present time the commnnd and control system needs
centralization of such functions as collection and analysis of obser-
vation data. monitoring the position of ships. operational planning
of their use in combat, and formulation of missions by the higher
command element for all combat-ready forces down to the individual
ship.

American navy specialists believe that all this can be done through a
fundamental revision of existing control and communications systems
and automation of them. In 1975 the U. S. navy command reached a de-
cision to vork out a long-range plan for development of a general-
purpose Naval Command and Control System (NCCS). Following this plan
a series of new structural and technical concepts to be imple-
mented to improve the operating effectiveness. survival capacity.
flexibility. and secrecy of command and control.

Operating effectiveness is to be improved by high-speed automatic
processing. display, and transmission of data. It is considered es-
sential to concentrate the processing of most data on shore in order
to give ship command and control elements prepared data received from
observation and reconnaissance elements and information on other
types of combat and logistical support.

The survival capability of the command and control system is to be
maximized by using standardized command centers capable of organising
and restoring command and control quickly during preparation for and

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

waging of combat actions. They should be mutually replaceable and
capable of redistributing missions in case one or several centers are
knocked out. Various types of communications will be used for data
exchange among the command centers. In the opinion of American mili-
tary specialists. this will insure the necessary reliability of infor-
mation transmission under conditions of radioelectronic warfare.

Flexibility is to be increased by joining particular command and con-
trol systems. standardizing them. and then integrating them. Special
attention is being devoted to the problem of the compatability of
different command and control systems (surface ships. submarines. and
naval aviation) with one another and with the other branches of the
armed forces. integrating ship systems for control of forces and wea-
pons. and joining ship communications and navigation equipment into a
single complex.

Secrecy of command and control is to be achieved by extensive use of
equipment to encipher telephone and digital communication.

According to foreign press reports. the uccs system will be based on
shore command centers for fleets and tactical flagship command and
control centers at sea.

The fleet command centers will provide processing and summarisation of
operational information received from various sources. display of it

in a form that is convenient for decision-making. and rapid. precise
delivery of plans to subordinate formations and higher command levels.
One of the primary functions of the centers will be to integrate infor-
mation received from the shore antisub defense centers. the information
centers of the Ocean Surveillance Information System (OSIS). and the
centers of the Naval Intelligence Processing System (MIPS). The proc-
essing and susmnrisation of information will be done in the interests
of both shore and ship command and control elements. Another important
function of the center is communication with organs of the strategic
leadership of the U. S. Armed Forces. This will be done by including
these centers in the global system of operational command and control
of the U. S. Armed Forces and supplying them with standard equipment
for automated data processing and transmission.

Plans call for setting up fleet command centers at the headquarters of
the commanders of the Atlantic and Pacific fleets and the U. S. naval
commander in Europe. An experimental command center for the commander
of the Atlantic Fleet is now being put together at the Norfolk
(Virginia) Naval Base. It will use a standard “6000 computer and a
special data display system for automated data processing. During the
trials in 1978-1979 the general procedures for functioning of the com-
mand center. the reliability of operation of the equipment. and the
primary data processing algorithms will be tested. In this same period
completion of development of the Composite Operational Reporting System
(CORS). a system for preparation of operational reports on the condi-
tion of the navy. is contemplated. This system will be used for

32
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OfflCIAL USE ONLY

preparation and feeding standard messages to the coeputer with subse-
, quent automatic transmission within the global system of operational
command and control of the U. .. Armed Forces. After the tests have
been made. the command center equipment is to be installed at the
headquarters of the commander of the Pacific Fleet and the U. 8. naval
cosmander in Europe. Similar equipment is to be supplied to the oper-
ational center of Navy Headquarters also. In the first half of the
1980's these centers are going to be joined into a single network.
which will provide direct. high-speed data exchange. use of general in-
formation files by each command element. and automatic selection of
data on query by the leadership and coaposite reports (concerning the
situation in military theaters) for operational orientation of subor-
dinate forces.

Tactical flagship command and control centers are to be deployed on
flagships (aircraft carriers. missile cruisers. and the headquarters
ships of amphibious forces). They will serve as the basis for organ-
izing the commend and control of all-arms formations: therefore. they
should provide coordination with the command and control systems of
various classes of ships. naval aviation. and submarines.

According to information in the American press. the centers are being
developed in two stages. In the first stage a temporary variation is
being developed and going through comprehensive testing under real con-
ditions. This equipment variation was installed on the aircraft carrier
John F. Kennedy in 1977 for testing. and precise determinations were
made of time requirements for accomplishing operational-tactical mis-
sions. the intensity. completeness. and reliability of information
received from observation systems. procedure for coordination with

the fleet cosmmnd center. and the ability to maintain continuous con-
trol when some equipment is down. In 1979 the equipment is to be
installed on several more ships for testing and preparations will begin
for series production. In the second stage standard equipment will

be developed. manufactured. and installed on ships. In all about 60
sets of such equipment are contemplated. The approximate completion
date for the second stage is 1986.

The flagship command and control centers should contain tactical
support centers (Tsc's) and intelligence centers (lc's). which are
deployed on aircraft carriers. and automated systems for tactical air
radio and radar intelligence called the Tactical Airborne Signal Ex-
ploitation System (TASBS) and the Naval Tactical Data System (NTDS).
The tactical support centers are designed to coordinate the actions
of the antisubmarine aircraft of carrier task forces. They should
provide exchange of information during the planning and performance
of missions to combat submarines and processing and display of data
for the crews of carrier-based planes and ship commanders. These
centers are a constituent part of the control system for tactical
antisubmarine aviation (ASTACS - ASH Tactical Support System) and
operate in it as the link between the flagship command and control
centers and the NTDS. Experimental models of equipment for the

33
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centers are now going through testing and series production is contem-
plated in 1980.

It is expected that the TASKS system will be installed on s-JA antisub
airplanes. This should significantly expand the capacities of tacti-
cal flagship command centers for collection of information on the sur-
face situation in naval theaters. Just 16 planes are to be equipped
with this system. It is expected that the system will be put into oper-
stion in the first half of the 1980's. '

The intelligence centers are part of the Naval Intelligence Processing
System. They have been operated since 1962 and are now being modern-
ized. The primary goals of modernization are to switch to up-to-dste
automated data processing and display equipment. to introduce more
sophisticated programs that provide remote access and updating of in-
formation files. and to work out reliable methods of enciphering data.
After this. the centers should supply intelligence data through the
NTDS system to virtually all ships in the tactical control element.

In the opinion of U. S. naval specialists. the NTDS system. which has
already been installed in about 80 ships. remains the basic naval com—
mand and control system at the tactical level. It can perform a

broad range of missions related to command and control of the combat
actions of operational groups. detachments. and individual ships. or-
ganize the antisubmarine struggle. and control aviation and other
types of weapons. The further development of the system is the sub-
ject of three projects and will follow the path of standardizing auto-
mation and communications equipment and interlinking equipment already
in operation with future models.

One of the projects contemplates development of the AN/UYQ-Zl series
of standardized display units (displays. large screens. automated
panels. devices to automatically read data from documents. and equip-
ment for storing. switching. and transmitting messages). All.these
units will have modular design. Judging by reports in the foreign
press. an experimental batch of 17 sets has been manufactured and
series production is planned in the early 1980's. The AN/Uyq-Zl
series of display units is to be used all the way until 1990 in vir-
tually all tactical command and control systems in the navy.

The second project .13, at improving the set of terminal equipment
for the LINK ll automated data transmission radio line. The set in-
cludes a small AN/UYK-ZO computer. an ANIDSQ-69 display for display-
ing alpha numeric information. and a transceiver. After completion
of development work in 1979 the LINK ll set will replace the obsolete
equipment used in the NTDS.

The third project envisions integration of all ship combat informa-
tion control systems and the development of standards for the equip-
ment used in the Naval Tactical Data System.

36
FOR OFFICIﬁl USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the future the "103 system is expected to be used on ships of all
classes. One project. in particular. envisions building a special
variation of the system for installation on Charles Adams-type missile
destroyers and certain frigates. It includes the standard Aﬂ/UYK-7
computer. peripheral equipment. and a standardised series AN/UYK-Zl
display unit. The first models of the new system are contemplated for
installation in 1981.

The NTDS is connected to the Air Tactical Data System (ATDS) combat
information and control system designed for the command and control

of the combat actions of naval aviation. The AIDS is now being
modernized (new automation equipment. radar. and navigation means are
being installed on the E-ZA and 3-20 planes). In addition. the system
is being interlinked with the Airborne warning and Control System

(AHACS) developed by the Air Force for long-range radar detection and
control.

When large marine assault parties are being landed the tactical flag-
ship command and control centers are assigned to coordinate the actions
of the operational formation and marine units. Technically speaking.
this mission will be accomplished by interlinking them with the auto-
mated system for command and control of marine combat actions. the
Marine Tactical Command/Control System (MTACCS) whose introduction is
planned in the first half of the 1980‘s. Several subsystems are being
developed for it: an operational subsystem (Tactical Combat Operations
System - TCOS): intelligence subsystem (Marine Air Ground Intelligence
System - MAGIS); a fire and aviation support subsystem (Marine Inte-
grated Fire and Air Support System - MIPASS); the Marine Air Command/
Control System (MACCS). and others. They will all be interlinked with
similar elements existing at the tactical support centers, intelli-
gence centers. and in the TASBS and NTDS systems.

According to the foreign press. cooperation with other branches of the
armed forces when the navy is supporting ground forces in coastal sec—
tors will be organized through the tactical flagship command and con-
trol centers. Cooperation will be based on the principle of compati-
bility at the tactical level among the command and control systems of
the navy. air force. and ground forces. The chiefs of staff assigned
several programs for this purpose. Two of them. the Tactical Air
Control System/Tactical Air Defense System (TAGS/TADS) and Ground and
Amphibious Military Operations (CAMO) have been assigned to the naval
chief of staff.

The TACS/TADS program envisions combining the cmmmand and control
systems for aviation and air defense. In the navy it includes the
NTDS. ATDS. and MAccs systems; in the ground forces it encompasses
the AN/TSQ-73 automatic antiaircraft artillery control system: in the
air force it covers the Tactical Air Control System (TACS) and its
constituent elements (cosmmnd/control and warning centers). The basic
tactical-technical requirements for interlinking these systems have
now been fully developed and in 1978 work on the program moved into
the stage of experimental design.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The GAHO program aims at guaranteeing compatibility among the control
systems of the branches of the armed forces participating in ground
operations. In the navy the program encompasses the T008. HIFASS, and
HAGIS systemsgin the ground forces it covers the Tactical Operations
System (T08), the Tactical Fire Direction System (TACFIRB), and an
automatic system for determining position. recognition, and data trans-
mission called the Position Location and Reporting System (FLRS): in

the air force it includes the Tactical Information Processing and Interu-
ception System (TIFI). work on the cam program was begun in 1978 and
should be completed in 1986.

In the opinion of American military specialists, practical realisation
of the principles of construction of the “(:63 system depends primarily
on continuous. reliable. and secret communications between couand
centers and subordinate forces. Moreover. there must be direct real-
time data transmission among computers on special high-speed automated
channels and a greater degree of 'specialization in col-land and control
of naval forces from shore installations. This increases the inortance
of circular comunications systems. There must be an improvement in the
exchange of information among all elements of fleet organisation (ex-
tensive automation and standardization of the processes of collection,
processing. and disseminating messages is contemplated). These require-
ments should be realized in the Naval Telecommunication System (HTS).
whose modernization is a constituent part of the program for building
the “(268. Figure 2 [not reproduced] shows the primary structural ele-
ments of the future Naval Telecommunication System.

OnOhore col-unication in the NTS system is accomplist through main
and auxiliary shore communications stations deployed in different re-
gions of the world. They are part of the U. S. Department of Defense's
automated communications systems AUTOVON and AUTODIN, which make pos-
sible telephone conversations and data transmission in discrete form.
The five main stations, located in San Francisco, Norfolk, Naples.
Honolulu, and the island of Guam, provide comnications for naval com-
manders in their zones of responsibility. coordinate and monitor the
work of auxiliary stations, and carry on circular transmissions. They
are part of the Fleet Satellite Broadcast (FSB) system of navy space
cos-unications which uses channels of the Fleet Satellite Communica-
tion (FLTSATCOM) satellite conunications system.

Development of the onshore part of the NTS system is proceeding by
automation of message processing and distribution to serve all conand
and control elements and naval institutions and provide reliable and
operational information exchange with ships. There are three basic
programs at the present time.*

 

4' See mum“ vormms onozmru No 6. 1978. pp 78-81 -
(Editor).

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
VCR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

The first program envisions creation of an automated system for mes-
sage exchange among subscribers at shore headquarters and services

(the Local Digital Message Exchange - LDHK). Each unit of it should
serve as a territorial center for processing messages and serve up to
10 subscribers. It is interlinked with the AUTODIN system, making it
possible for subscribers to reach the control elements of other
branches of the armed forces and central institutions of the Department
of Defense. At the present time units of the system have been deployed
at 17 naval communications stations.

The second program envisions creation of an automated message proc-
essing system. the Naval Communications Processing and Routing System
(NAVCOHPARS). for shore - ship - shore communication. It can per-
form all the functions of the LDMX system, but in relation to fleet
communications stations. and therefore it is supplemented by special
equipment that makes it possible to interlink vith transceivers and
track the position of ships. NAVCONPARS serves as the connecting link
between the AUTODIN system and the Fleet Satellite Broadcast System;
after full deployment of the FLTSATCOH satellite communications system
it will provide high-speed message transmission to ships from any shore
post. The system equipment includes two Spectrum 70/65 computers. One
serves subscribers in real time and the other is on stand-by or per-
forming subsidiary operations. The computer has tee modules for multi-
channel communication that connect 82 teletypes, tuo high-speed input
units. an optical reader. and 10 displays.

The third program envisions building "remote information exchange
terminals" (RIXT's). They are being organized at various shore com-
mand and control agencies. Using this equipment subscribers will have
direct access to information files stored in the LB“! and NAVCOHPARS
systems. formulate messages rapidly for dispatching after receiving

the required information. and receive correspondence from other points.
Plans call for setting up a total of 95 points provided with this equip-
ment.

The FLTSATCOH system (decimeter wave band; first satellite launched in
February 1978) is receiving primary emphasis in the organization of
ship - shore - ship communications. It will provide data trans-
mission for the navy on 10 radio channels (one is allocated for circu-
lsr transmissions). Three data exchange subsystems have been organ-
ized using them: a general-purpose subsystem; a subsystem for exchange
with submarines; and a subsystem for exchange among fleet command
centers. The first. the Common User Digital Information Exchange Sub-
system (CUDIXS) is designated for exchange of digital information among
shore and ship coomand and control elements. It consists of several
radio networks. each of which is controlled by a main station and
covers a group of 60 ships. Fifty subscribers of the group (small-
displacement ships) transmit only. They receive information by the
circular communications system.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The other 10 subscribers have equipment for two-way information ex-
change. The exchange regime is constructed following the principle
of time sharing as assigned by the main station. It periodically as-
signs each subscriber a time interval during which it is authorised

to transmit or receive messages. The main station is the intermedi-
ate link between the NAVCOHPARS system and the satellite co-unication
terminal stations. thus allowing ship subscribers to be part of the
AUTODIN system.

The new possibilities offered by satellite communication will. in the
opinion of American military specialists. call forth a significant in-
crease in information flows in share - ship — shore conunications.
This will require automation of data processing not only on share but
right on the ships. Work is underway on the Naval lbdular Automated
Comunications System (NIMMCS). which envisions building an auto-
mated comnications system. Its assignment includes automating the
following functions: "scanning" information transmitted by the cir-
cular system and selecting messages from it for the particular ad-
dress; processing textual and graphic information: organizing data
storage and retrieval: distribution of messages to internal addresses
and transmission from the ship to other objects. The apparatus of the
system must be interlinked with all types of ship comnications. but
it is oriented primarily to circular satellite co-unications and the
digital information exchange system. NAVHACS is composed of func-
tional hardware and software nodules whose number and composition de-
pend on the class and designation of the ship. A total of six types
of sets are envisioned. The simplest are already in series production
and are being installed on small ships. The most complex are in the
testing stage. Plans call for ships to be fully equipped with the
NAMCS system by 1982.

According to infatuation in the foreign press, the U. S. naval com-
mand has begun supplying satellite conunication terminal equipment
to its ships without waiting for full deployment of the FLTSM'COH sys-
tem (the second and third satellites are to be launched in late 1978
and early 1979). At the present time about 90 percent of the termi-
nals are capable of receiving circular communications and about 30
percent can carry on telephone conversations and transmit data along
satellite communications channels. Some of the flagships will be
equipped with oscs-z Department of Defense satellite comunicetions
terminal stations to establish direct comnication with organs of
the higher military-political leadership and the naval comnd. This
range has greater noise immanity. but in the opinion of American mil-
itary specialists widespread use of it in the navy will be limited

by the high cost of the terminals and the necessity of stabilizing
antennas.

In addition to these systems, the traditional types of shortwave.
medium-wave. and long-wave radio communications continue to be impor-
tant for organizing shore - ship - shore commmication. In addition
to them circular transmission of cot-tends to submarines under water
may be carried on in the medium-long range band through relay aircraft
of the TACMD system.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shortwave and ultrnahurtwave communications. which have undergone sig-
nificant changes. remain the primary form of close-in communication
among ships and between ships and aircraft. New types of solid-state
shortwave transceivers with special modes increase the speed of
data transmission to 2.h00 bauds. It will become the primary means of
communication in operational formations in the future. Existing ultra-
shortwave sets are to be replaced by standardized modular equipment
with improved noise immunity. Plans call for building combined short-
wave/ultrashortwave communications equipment for the airplanes of naval
aviation. which will make them compatible with standard marine commu-
nications equipment. A new system for communication between ships and
naval aviation is being developed on a special program. A laser sys-
tem is being developed for surface ships and aircraft to communicate
with submarines.

Special attention is being directed to the apparatus for enciphering
shortwave. ultrashortwave, and satellite communications channels.
This equipment will begin to be installed on ships. submarines. and
airplanes in 1979. Further plans are for the development and in-

stallation on ships of apparatus for group enciphering of all radio
channels.

COPYRIGHT: “Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1978

11,176
CSO: 1801

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

COMMENTS ON THE U. 8. GUANTANAHO BASE

Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYB OBOZRERIYE in Russian No 11, Nov 78
signed to press 3 Oct 78 pp 103-100

[Article by Lt Col Yo. Sedov: "The American Nilitsry Base at
Guantanano"]

[Text] Readers conrades S. S. Hiksdzo, V. H.
Titov. Yu. P. Ugol‘kov. and others have asked

us to tell about the Anerican silitsry base at
Guantansno. The article below fulfills this re-

quest.

Military bases in Latin Aserics slay an important oart in the Idli-
tary-strategic plans of Alerican iuperislisn. They are used as an
instrument of neocolonialist policy and a tool for U. S. intervention
in the affairs of other countries and suppressing the national liber-
ation aovesent in this region. There are sore than 50 bases belong-
ing to the United States of America in Latin America; the naval base
at Guantansso. located on the southeastern coast of socialist Cuba.
is particularly ioportant. It was established in conforaity with a
treaty imposed on Cuba in 1903 according to which the United States
leases 116.5 square kilometers of land and 37 square kiloseters of
territorial waters, including Guantsnsso Bay. The entire southern
part of the bay and the region stretching three wiles south fros its
south have been declared by the United States to be closed to naviga-
tion by the ships and vessels of other countries.

According to the foreign press, the base has a large nulber of sili-
tary and other facilities. including 1.600 service and residential
buildings. 16 weapons. ammunition. and supply depots. petroleu-
storage tanks. a center of the srned forces radio and television net-
work. ship repair yards. seny docks. and so on. The broad. deep.
well-protected harbor and the structures and equip-ant located in it
can sccosnodste and service up to 50 ships of different classes. in-
cluding aircraft carriers. The waterfront has a total length of 3,000

meters with depths of 10-17 meters at the docks.

40
FOB OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The base has two large airfielda. Livord Fielé‘with a runway of 2,600
meters and Hachllia with a runway of 1,500 meters. Air force and
navy planes are ntationed there.

According to a foreign press estimate, the bone is operated by about
7.000 people, 2.500 of them servicemen. In addition. there are
3.000-5.000 American sailors and officers on the ships of the U. S.
Second Fleet. which stands in the roadstesd of the bay. During the
"Caribbean crisis" in October 1962 the total number of U. 5. military
personnel at the base was raised to 20.000.

The Guantanamo Naval Base is used to monitor the Caribbean Sea sane

and approaches to the Panama Canal and for testing new types of vea-
pons. It is considered the most convenient base in the Atlantic and
each year more than 150 ships came to uork on cosbat training missions.

The base has been a center of provocation and sabotage against the Re-
public of Cuba for many years.

Despite the legal and fair demand of the Cuban people for the uncondi-
tional elimination of the American military base. the Pentagon con-
tinuea to hold it by force and use it for its own purposes, consider-
ing this strategic point to be a key naval installation in the
Caribbean region and in Central and South America.

COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye”. 1978

11.176

CSO: 1801 END

61
FOR O??ICIAL USE ONLY