FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/IUSOH
21 JUNE 1982

Translation
HE SERVE THE HOMELAND AND THE CAUSE OF COMMUNISM

BY

MAR SU Dmmuv Fenoaowcu Usnuov

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or iExcerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
HE SERVE THE HOMELAND AND THE CAUSE OF COMMUNISH

Moscow SLUZHIM RODINE. DBLU KOHMDNIZMA in Russian 1982 (signed to
press 15 Feb 82) pp 1-127

[Book ”We Serve the Homeland and the Cause of Communism," by Her
50 Dimitriy Pedorovich Ustinov. Voyenizdat, 100,000 copies. 127
pages; published in the series: 'Implementing the Decisions of
the 26th CPSU Congress”: passages enclosed in slantlines printed
in boldface: slantline-snclosed passages printed in italics
indicated by [it.)1 slantline-enclosed passages highlighted by
use of double-spaced words marked by [dell

CONTENTS
Introduction 1
Chapter One. In the Name of Communion and Peace on Berth 3
l. The USSR -- Vanguard of Socia1 Progress, Bulwark of International
Security 3
2. Important Point on the Road to Col-amnion 15
3. Leading Force of the Soviet Society 23
Chapter mo. Concern of the Party. Concern of the Entire People 30 I
1. Defense of the Achieveoents of Socialism -- An Objective
Necessity 30
2. The natiouvide Character of Defense of the Socialist Doaeland 36
3. CPSU Guidance - Basic Foundation of Soviet Military Organisa-
tional Develop-ant 39
Chapter Three. Guarding Peaceful Labor 65
1. Armed Forces of the Socialist State of All the People (.5
2. Apace Hith Scientific and Technolog.ca1 Advances $0
3. Shoulder to Shoulder with the Brother Arnies 55

[II - USSR - 4 7000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Four. Sunni: of Military Skill 60
l. Toward New Heights of Coabat Readiness 60
2. The Decisive Pbrce - Han ' 65
3. Increasing Effectiveness of Control 68
Chapter Five. High Quality of Training and Indoctrination 73
1. Study in a Proper Manner 73
2. Lofty Mission of the Officer 79
3. By the Entire Force of Party Influence 85
Conclusion 91

[Text] This book discusses how the Soviet people. under the guidance of the
CPSU, are implementing the grandiose plans for building coanunisn. the
struggle for peace and security of peoples specified at the 26th CPSU Congress.
The author reveals the totally popular character of defense of the socialist
homeland, the principal tasks and directions of further increase in the combat
readiness of the USSR Arned Forces. which are reliably guarding the peaceful.
productive labor of the Soviet people. This book is intended for a broad

readership.

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
INTRODUCTION

The USSR Armed Forces, just as the entire Soviet people, live and work under the
beneficial influence of the ideas of the 2fth CPSU Congress. Persistent, pur-
poseful work is being performed in subunirc, units, on naval ships, and in all
military collectives on carrying out the congress designs and on unswerving im-
provement of training and increasing the combat readiness of troops and naval
forces.

The 26th CPSU Congress became an important landmark in the heroic history of the
Leninist Party and Soviet people. in the history of the world socialist system,
the national liberation and international Communist and worker movement. It
signified s new and higher point in the forward movement of the Soviet homeland
toward communism, illuminated with the light of collective wisdom the prospects
of further comprehensive development of our nature socialist society. and
specified ways to preserve and strengthen world peace. The congress convincingly
demonstrated that our party is worthily carrying out its leadership and

guiding role in society and is proceeding on a faithful Leninist course, in
close unity with the people.

The program of building communism which was elaborated at the 26th CPSU Congress
was concretized at the November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenum and
formally stated in the USSR laws on state economic and social development plans
for 1982 and for the 11th Five-Year Plan, adopted at the Sixth Session of the
USSR Supreme Soviet. 10th Convocation.

Everything specified in these plans expresses the root, vital interests of the
people. Persiatently implementing them, Soviet citizens are displaying a high
degree of vigilance toward the aggressive intrigues of imperialisn. Through the
fault of militant U.S. and NATO circles. which have adopted a policy of under-
mining detente and toward achieving military superiority [prevoskhodstva] over
the USSR and the Warsaw Pact, the international situation became sharply ag-
gravated toward the beginning of the 1980's. Faced by a military threat proceed-
ing from imperialism. the Soviet Union is compelled to strengthen its defense
capability and to maintain its Armed Forces in a continu as state of combat
readiness.

Army and navy personnel clearly understand the high degree of responsibility
placed upon them by the party and people. They are tirelessly working-to master

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their potent combat equipment and weapont. are improving their field, air and
sea proficiency, their moral-political conditioning, are sndesvoring to carry
out combat training missions in an exemplary manner, and are strengthening
organization and discipline. Their active participation in socialist competi-
tion constitutes a vivid expression of the patriotism of Soviet servicemen.

The high praise which was given to the Armed Forces by C?SU Central Committee
General Secretary Mar SU Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, chairman of the Presidium of
the USSR Supreme Soviet and chairman of the USSR Defense Council, at the 26th
CPSU Congress, is inspiring servicemen to achieve new successes in combat and
political training and in their daily performance of duty. Together with the
entire people, army and navy personnel are campaigning to achieve an un-
swerving increase in the might and glory of their homeland. Solidly ranked
behind the Communist Party and its Leninist Central Committee, Soviet servicemen
are carrying out their patriotic and internationalist duty with honor. They
are worthily continuing the heroic traditions of the older generations. are
vigilantly guarding the peaceful labor of the people and the great socialist
achievements, and are faithfully serving the homeland and the cause of com-
munism.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter One. IN THE NAME OF COMMUNISH AND PEACE ON EARTH

l. The USSR -¢'Vanguard of Social Progress, Bulwark of International Security

From its very first foreign-policy action - Lenin's Peace Decree -- to the
Peace Program for the 1980's, adopted at the 26th CPSU Congress, the Soviet
State has been unswervingly dedicated to the cause of peace, freedom and
security of peoples. "Our struggle to strengthen peace and deepen international
détente," stated Comrade L. 1. Brezhnev in the Central Committee Accountability
Report to the 26st CPSU Congress. "is first and foremost a struggle to guarantee
for the Soviet people requisite external conditions for accomplishing the tasks
of construction which face them. with this we are also resolving a problem of

a truly worldwide nature, for today there is no more vital. more important
question for any people than the preservation of peace, than securement of the
very first right of each and every individual - the right to life."1

The present international situation is marked by an aggravation of the contest
between two currents in world politics. The Soviet Union and the other na-
tions of the socialist cosmnnity are consistently and firmly pursuing a policy
of holding the arms race in check, strengthening peace and detente, and
defending the sovereign rights and freedom of peoples. Standing opposed to this
policy is the policy of the United States and its accomplices. aimed at under-
mining détente, at escalating the arms race. and at crushing the liberation
struggle of peoples.

This contest is distinguished by extraordinary intensity. Aggressive 0.8. and
NATO circles are seeking at all costs to disrupt the present military-
strategic balance and to gain military superiority over the USSR and the Harsaw
Pact. They are attempting to place the socialist countries in a state of siege
[osadnoye polozheniye] and to push back the forces of national and social
liberation.

Taking the path of political adventurism, the 0.5. Administration is more and
more frequently resorting to an openly wermongering lexicon. high 0.8. of-
ficials assert. with a cynical disregard of the fate of peoples. that "there
are things which are more import:Lt than peace" and that so-called "limited"
nuclear war is entirely permissible and that victory can be won in such a war.
It is more and more loudly being claimed that the leading NATO power "should
be the strongest in the world," and statements are being made that the United

FCHR11FF1CIAI.IEHE("‘LY
FOR OFTlC1Al.USE1ONLY

States and its partners should intensively arm, and thus exert constant pres-
sure on the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries.

The administration in Hashington is attempting to place in doubt all positive
advances which were achieved jointly in the area of Soviet-American relations
in the 1970's. Those people who are invested with government authority in one
of the world's largest powers - the United States —- as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
noted, are much more anxiOus to talk "not shout detente but rather about con-
frontation, not about peaceful. mutually beneficial cooperation but about
utilisation of trade for military-strategic purposes, not about agreements on
the basis of equality and equal security [ravenstve i odinakovoy bezopasnosti]
but about dictate from a position of military superiority. not about elimina-
tion of focal points of conflict through joint efforts, but about creating more
and more new military bases, about building up one‘s military presence in
various regions of the world, not about holding the arms race in check, but
about 'additionel arming' [dovooruzhenii], not about limiting or banning various
weapons, but about building additional new. even more destructive means of mass
annihilation of human lives."2

In addition, they are not only talking about such a policy but are putting it in-
to practice. The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) which was signed in
the summer of 1979 has not yet gone into effect. The United States, followed by
certain other Western powers, is impeding the process of reaching an agreement
at the Vienna talks on mutual limitation of forces and arms in Central Europe.
Hashington has unilaterally refused to discuss question pertaining to limiting
military activities in the Indian Ocean and on'limiting the sale and delivery of
conventional weapons. It is making every effort to avoid entering into talks on
total and universal banning of nuclear weapons testing. The United States has
not yet ratified the treaties on limiting underground testing of nuclear weapons
and on underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes, treaties which

were signed several years ago. The treaty limiting antimissile defense systems,
which has been in effect since 1972, is being undermined.

All this is nothing other than disdain for the peace-seeking aspirations of all
peoples and outright opposition to ddtente. But there is no reasonable alterna-
tive to detente. This fact is clearly understood by those political leaders in
the West to whom a sober-minded approach to the objective realities of today's
world is not alien. Broad segments of the population in the capitalist countries
are also becoming increasingly more deeply aware of this. An anti-war, anti-
missile movement has been launched in a number of Western European NATO cOuntries
as well as in the United States itself -- an unambiguous response to the den-
gerous militarist policy of the leaders of this bloc.

The campaign for detente and for improvement of the international political
climate is an extremely complex and difficult business, which demands enormous
staying power and firmness, purposefulness and tenacity. "whoever thought,"
stated V. I. Lenin, "that it is easy to achieve peace, that it suffices merely
to mention peace and the bourgeoisie will hand it to us on a platter, is a very
naive individual."3

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
An increasingly deeper understanding by the masses of the vital necessity of
restraining aggressive imperialist forces and of the irreversible nature of the
catrstrophic consequences to which nuclear war can lead if these forces suc-
ceed in unleashing such a war is impelling millions of people throughout the
world to become actively involved in settling the root questions of world
politics and, of course, the principal, most burning question of how to preserve
peace.

Our country is making an enormous contribution toward preventing war. By its
high-principled and constructive approach to international affairs, by its will-
ingness for mutually beneficial cooperation with other countries on a basis of
equality, and by its consistency and firmness in pursuing a peace-seeking

policy. the Soviet Union has won from the peoples of the world enormous prestige
and gratitude. All people of good will see the Soviet Union as the tried and
proven vanguard of social progress of mankind and an invincible bulwark of inter-
national security snd peace.

The USSR proceeds from the position that preserving and strengthening peace is
inseparable from holding the arms race in check. It has done and is continuing
to do everything it can to lessen the threat of another world war. The foreign-
policy program advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress has become an important
normalizing, stabilizing and motive force in world politics. It contains an
extensive group of peace-seeking proposals. These include a deepening of
measures to build confidence in the military area and broadening of the area
of their application; immediate continuation of Soviet-American strategic arms
limitation and reduction talks; establishment of a moratorium on the deployment
in Europe of new medium-range nuclear missile weapons by the NATO countries and
the USSR, plus other proposals.

The Communist Party and the Soviet Government are working persistently to im-
plement this program. Urgent implementation of its provisions is becoming
particularly vital in connection with the unceasing growth of aggressiveness
on the part of imperialism and intensification of militarist preparations by
the United States and NATO. The Appeal of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics “To the Parliaments and Peoples of the world" has
evoked enthusiastic response in every corner of the world. This appeal em-
phasizes: PSecurement of peace has been, is now, and will continue to be the
highest goal of the foreign policy of the Soviet State..../

"In our nuclear age dialogue and negotiations are needed by all to an equal
degree, just as everybody needs peace, security, and confidence in the future."‘

Caution and careful consideration in foreign—policy steps, honest and at the
same time bold efforts in the name of international security and peace are
demanded in the present—day situation more than at any time in the past. All
Soviet peace initiatives are fully in conformity with these demands. They are
grounded on the principle of equality and equal security of all parties and are
permeated with the endeavor to overcome the aggravation in international
relations and to proceed further along the road of deepening detente and to
take concrete. practical steps to resolve the problem of limiting the arms race.
The USSR proceeds from the position that there is no area of disarmament and no
category of arms on which an agreement could not be reached.

5

F08‘0FF"JAI.USE¢3NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ihe endeavor on the part of the Soviet Union to hold the arms race in check and to
prevent a nuclear catastrophe was once again convincingly affirmed at the 36th
Session of the UN General Assembly, which adopted a number of most pertinent
resolutions on documents submitted by the USSR. A central place among them is
occupied by the UN General Assembly Declaration on Prevention of a Nuclear
Catastnnhe. It was adopted by the overwhelming majority of participants in the
session, in spite of attempts by the United States and other NATO countries,
which voted against the resolutions, to place in doubt the need for such a
declaration. It formally states that those nations and government leaders who

are first to resort to employment of nuclear weapons would be committing the
gravest crime against mankind.

An overwhelming majority of votes also supported another Soviet proposal -- to
conclude a treaty prohibiting the deployment in space of weapons of any kind.

For the first time in the history of the United Nations, the General Assembly
adopted a resolution, submitted by the GDR on behalf of all the brother socialist
countries, condemning the manufacture of neutron weapons.

Adoption by the international community of documents on disarmament, many of
which are based on ideas advanced by the Soviet Union, has become one more con-
vincing demonstration of the fact that the highly principled, peace-seeking
policy of the USSR, defined by the 26th CPSU Congress and expressed in the
Peace Program for the 1980's, enjoys the approval and support of the majority
of the world's nations.

The visit to the PRC by CPSU Central Committee General Secretary Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreoe Soviet, which took place
in November 1981, was an important political action in practical implementation
of the Soviet Peace Program. The new Soviet proposals advanced during this
visit constitute a constructive program for curtailing nuclear arms in Europe.
It proceeds from a most important principle -- the principle of equality and
equal security of all parties -- and is appraised by the progressive interna-
tional community as a new and weighty contribution by the USSR to the cause of
peace and the security of peoples.

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev's visit to the ERG is of special significance for the en-
tire aggregate of relations between East and West at the present complex stage of
world development. One of the main conclusions which follows from the Soviet-
West German talks is that nations, independent of their social system or par-
ticipation in various military alliances, should make every effort to continue
working jointly for the sake of strengthening peace and restoring a climate of
detente and confidence. And it is important that this be a reference point for
the practical policies of all nations.

The Soviet Union intends to seek positive results at the Soviet-American talks
being held in Geneva on nuclear arms limitation in Europe. It is also in

favor of the earliest possible resumption of talks between the USSR sndthe
United States on strategic arms limitation, while preserving all positive ad-
vances which have already been achieved in this area. The USSR believes that
the proposals made in 1978-1981 by the socialist countries participating in the
talks greatly help overcome the impasse at the Vienna talks on mutual reduction
of forces and arms in Central Europe.

IN)R'0F1W(]AI.IJSEZ(NNLY
The Soviet Union is marching shoulder to shoulder with the other [socialist
countries] in its consistent and firm struggle to hold the arms race in check,
for disarmament, peace and security of peoples. "The greatest good for all
mankind is the fact that the unified might of the socialist countries and
their vigorous policy in defense of peace restrain the aggressive aspirations
of the imperialists and create a decisive barrier in the path of unleashing a
nuclear missile world war by the aggressors," stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev.
"This result of theznncyofthesocialist nations benefits all mankind."5

Just. equal, truly fraternal relations bind the USSR with the nations of the
socialist community -- with Bulgaria, Hungary. Vietnam, the German Democratic
Republic. Cuba, Laos. Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia. The so-
cialist community has become the mightiest association of peoples in the his-
tory of the world. No other association can compare with it in rats of economic
growth, in scale and significance of social tasks being accomplished. or in
influence on world development.

The CPSU and the Soviet State are tirelessly concerned with strengthening the
unity, expanding and improving the comprehensive cooperation among the brother
nations and are doing everything to strengthen the international position of
the socialist commmnity and to build up joint efforts in the campaign for peace
and social progress. CPSU Central Committee General Secretary Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev, chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, is making an
outstanding contribution to this work, toward innovative development of
revolutionary theory and practice of building a new society.

Cooperation among the socialist countries rests on faithfulness to Marxism-
Leninism, socialist internetionalism, and a commonality of root interests and
goals. Internationalism is one of the main sources of the strength of social-
ism. It is a most important condition in the successful development of each of
the brother countries and the sure advance of our entire community. Such is the
dialectic of building and defending the new society.

The mutual relations of the brother peoples and nations are permeated by sin-
cerity, the deepest trust. and a spirit of genuine equality, friendship and
comradeship. The USSR Conscitution proclaims friendship, cooperation, and
mutual assistance with the socialist countries to be the cornerstone of Soviet
foreign policy. The constitutions of the majority of brother nations also
stress the ideas of friendship and cooperation with the Soviet Union.

Communist and worker parties comprise the guiding and organizing force of the
socialist community. A fundamental unity of views on all major problems of
socioeconomic development, international politics, and coordinated, harmonious
efforts in accomplishing the tasks of building socialism and cosmumism con-
stitute a result of their continuous interaction.

In recent years the brother countries have been compelled to conduct this
building process in increasingly complex international conditions. The world
economic situation has worsened. The process of detente has been impeded
through the efforts of imperialist reaction and its stooges. The United States
and NATO are escalating the arms race. The ideological struggle in the world

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

arena is becoming aggravated. Reactionary forces are stepping up their at-
tempts to underline the international solidarity of the socialist nations and
to shatter the foundations of socialism from within.

They were counting particularly heavily on events in the Polish People's
Republic, seeking to destroy the socialist system in this country, to restore
a bourgeois order in Poland, to detach Poland from the socialist community, and
thus to attempt to alter the results of Uorld ﬂar II and postwar development.

Relying on the worker class and on the support of all Poland's patriotic forces,
Poland's duly constituted authorities organized and 1ed the resistance to
counterrevolution. The situation in Poland is gradually stabilizing. Polish
Communists and all genuine Polish patriots have the full support of the

brother peoples and nations in this effort.

The life-giving bonds which link the nations of the socialist community are in-
dissoluble. Strengthening of these ties and close interaction in building and
defending the new society are fully in conformity both with the national and in-
ternational interests of the brother peoples.

Today, when the reactionary forces of imperialism and their accomplices have
undertaken a massive assault against détente, peace and the rights of peoples,
unity of actions by the socialist countries in defense of these great values
and in accomplishing the tasks of building is more important than ever before.
Such a unity is a guarantee of success in the contest against imperialism and
reaction and a guarantee of fuller utilization of the advantages of the so-
cialist economic system and the capabilities discovered by advances in sci-
ence and technology.

Steady strengthening of the unity of the socialist countries is promoted by
their constantly deepening [political cooperation [ds]/ and development of the
entire system of bilateral and multilateral relations of the brother parties
and nations, including the Warsaw Pact Organization. The activities of this
specifically defensive organisation, and particularly its Political Consultative
Committee, have an enormous role to play in European affairs, in international
affairs as a whole, and in the campaign for peace, preservation and strengthen-
ing of détente, and the campaign to lower the levels of military confrontation
in Europe and other regions of the world. The initiatives advanced at the
Political Consultative Committee meetings in Bucharest, Moscow and Harsaw con-
stituted an important contribution toward strengthening peace and international
security. '

Political cooperation among the socialist countries is a living, creative process.
It is constantly being enriched and taking on new, fruitful forms. A most im-
portant place in political cooperation is occupied by regular contacts among

the leaders of the brother parties and nations. A special role in such
practical contacts is played by friendly get-togethers and talks in the Crimea.
The most important tasks pertaining to development of cooperation among the
socialist nations are discussed during these meetings, and further steps toward
strengthening peace and international security are coordinated.

I17R!0FF1(]AI.IISEI(MNLY
A large contribution toward deepening political cooperation among the brother
parties and nations is made by regular exchange of party-government delegations,
meetings of Central Committee secretaries for international affairs and matters
of ideological and party-organizational work, and expanding contacts between
party organizations at all levels -— from republics, krays and oblasta to
rayons and large enterprises. Contacts between government agencies, public
organizations, and production collectives are also successfully developing.

[Economic cooperation [ds]/ among the socialist nations also promosesthe
building of a new society, a guarantee of the security of the brother nations,
preservation and strengthening of peace. Opening wide the door to realization
of the advantages of the socialist mode of production within the framework of
the socialist community, it ensures dynamic and stable development of the
brother countries. Indicative in this regard are the more than 30 years of ac-
tivity of the Council for Economic Mutual Assistance. In the period 1975-1980
growth in the level of industrial output of the CBMA member nations was more
than triple the world average. And their rate of growth of national income,
which has increased by two-thirds in the last decade, was almost double that of
the developed capitalist countries.

Steady growth of production, acceleration of scientific and technical advances
and, on this basis, a constant growth of national prosperity are provided by
socialist economic integration. It is encompassing more and more new domains,
is assuming an increasingly rapid pace, and is being embodied in implementation
of long-range specific-purpose programs. The successes of joint labor are
attested by the construction of such major projects as the "Soyuz" [Alliance]
natural gas pipeline, the "Mir" [Peace] power system, the Ust-llimsk Pulp and
Paper Plant, the Erdenet Mining and Concentrating Combine in Mongolia, nickel
plants in Cuba, and many other construction projects. The "Interkosmos"
program has become a vivid symbol of the fruitful friendship and cooperation
among the brother peoples and nations. All that has been accomplished by the
socialist countries in economic development and in raising people's living
standards comprises an entire era, as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stressed.

New proposals on further development of economic cooperation among the social-
isr nations, advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress, are being sequentially im-
plemented. These proposals have received enthusiastic support in the brother
countries. The aim is to turn the comingtwo five-year plans into a period of
intensive production and scientific-technical cooperation among the socialist
nations and to supplement coordination of their plans with coordination of over-
all economic policy. Bringing the structures of economic mechanisms closer to-
gether, development of direct links between ministries, associations and enter-
prises taking part in co—production, the establishment of joint firms, plus
others,constitute important problems of economic cooperation. Resolution of
these problems should promote comprehensive deepening of interaction among the
economies of the socialist countries, improvement of its efficiency, and
further unification of our efforts and resources.

Deepening cooperation in the economy, science and technology is promoting
satisfaction of the needs of all the brother nations, growth of the economic
and defense might of the socialist community, and is expanding the capabilities
of genuine socialism to hold in check international forces of reaction and
aggression.

9

FOR OFTWCJAJ.IJSEZ(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A most important component of the joint struggle by the socialist cauntries for
peace and social progress is coordination of their efforts in the [area of
ideological work Idol]. The commonality of our communist philosophical outlook
and faithfulness to Marxiampleninism -- that all-conquering teaching under the
banner of which all revolutionary forces of the present day are uniting - gives
this work enormous effectiveness.

Recent years have been marked by a sharp activation of imperialist propaganda
and intensification of hostile anti-Soviet, antisocialist campaigns, aimed at
slandering'socialism and distorting everything taking place in the socialist
countries. Such propaganda and such campaigns have been elevated in the United
States and certain other countries to the rank of state policy and have been
transformed into unbridled psychological warfare.

Particularly important in these conditions are aggressiveness and purposeful-
ness of ideological and all political indoctrination work with people, and
efficient cooperation among the mass information agencies of the socialist
countries. the truth of genuine socialism, its great humane nature, its firm
adherence to peace and, together with this, convincing, objective exposure of
the incurable flaws and evils of the capitalist system and the reactionary.
aggressive nature of imperialism constitute a powerful weapon in the struggle
against our class enemies.

[Cooperation in the area of strengthening defense [dsll is of the greatest im-
portance for successfully guaranteeing the security of each of the brother
countries and the entire socialist community as a whole. "we," stated Comrade
L. I. Brezhnev, "devote unabating attention to this task. This applies first
and foremost to relations with the member nations of the Warsaw Pact, which is
a powerful instrument of political and defense cooperation of the socialist
nations."6

The multifaceted cooperation between the Soviet Union and the nations of the
socialist community is expanding and growing stronger year by year. A tireless
joint search is being conducted for ways to achieve the best possible combina-
tion of national and common interests and efficient accomplishment of the
grandiose tasks of building socialism and communism.

Permested by a spirit of socialist internationalism, the friendship of the
brother countries is becoming increasingly deeper and more fruitful. The world
of socialism has made into a reality relations between nations which are truly
relations between peoples, relations in which millions and millions of people
directly participate. This is a fundamental achievement of socialism and
represents a great service by socialism to mankind.

Relations are also constantly developing between the USSR and those socialist
countries which are not members of the Warsaw Pact or the Council for Economic
Mutual Assistance. The friendship between the Soviet Union and the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has deep roots. Soviet-Yugoslav cooperation is
advancing in many areas. The USSR expresses inalterable solidarity with the
struggle of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for peaceful, democratic
unification of the homeland without outside interference. Our country seeks to
deepen and enrich and its relations with the DPRK.

10

FOR10FFKJALI£HEONLY
Faithfulness to socialist internationalism, equal, mutually beneficial coopera-
tion and mutual assistance are giving a powerful acceleration to the development
of the socialist countries and are leading not simply to an increase but to a
multiplication of their forces in the struggle to build a new society, for peace
and social progress. This conclusion is confirmed by the wealth of practical
revolutionary experience of the contemporary world. Objective reality also
graphically shows the result of departure from the firm faundations of Marxism-
Leninism and distortion of the principles of socialism and its essence in
domestic and foreign policy. The experience of socioeconomic development of

the PRC during the last two decades can serve as a severe lesson of this type.

Time has fully confirmed the correctness of the appraisals which our party made
of Haoism and its petit-bourgeois, nationalist essence. The present Chinese
leaders, as was indicated at the Sixth Plenum of the Central Committee of the
CPC, held in June 1981, continue to view Haoism as the foundation of the
ideology and policies of the CPC. A number of anti-Soviet points have been
confirmed in PRC policy in the international arena. It is focused on a
struggle against the USSR, on aggravation of the international situation, and
on increasingly more common cause with the most aggressive imperialist circles.

As regardsthe Soviet Union, it consistently advocates normalization of relations
with the PRC and unswervingly pursues a policy of peace and good-neighbor rela-
tions. This policy is both in the interests of world peace and in the genuine
interests of the Chinese people, for whom the Soviet people unfailingly have
feelings of respect and friendship.

The USSR and the other nations of the socialist community are constantly con-
cerned with consolidation of all antiimperialist, progressive forces in the
struggle for peace and social progress. They devote paramount attention to the
development of mutually beneficial economic and scientific-technical coopera-
tion with [countries which have become liberated from colonial oppression,/
particularly with nations of sOcialist orientation, countries which have chosen
the road of socialist development. These countries have in the nations of the
socialist community reliable and true friends and natural allies in the
struggle against imperialism, for national independence, for peace and social
progress.

Cooperation between the USSR and liberated nations encompasses various
domains -- politics and the economy, interparty relations and defense, culture
and tourist travel, and training of indigenous cadres. In recent years the
Soviet Union has concluded treaties of friendship and cooperation with Angola,
Ethiopia, Mozambique, Afghanistan, the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen,
Syria, and the People's Republic of the Congo. One of the first such treaties
was signed with India in 1971. The USSR trades with more than 80 nations of
Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Trade volume with these countries has more
than tripled in the last decade and is continuing to grow.

Attempting at any cost to impede development of the revolutionary process and
to isolate the liberated countries from the Soviet Union and the entire ao-

cialist community, imperialism resorts to crude pressure, blackmail, and out-
right political sabotage. Cynically flouting the rights and aspirations of

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

peoples. it seeks to portray their liberation struggle as a manifestation of
"international terrorism" and to represent as involvement in terrorism the
assistance the socialist countries render to liberation movements. By means
of this lie, the Hashington administration figures to crush national liberation
movements by encOuraging domestic counterrevolution in liberated countries and
by external aggression.

This is not a new technique. And the aim which it pursues is quite obvious.

It consists in restoring imperialism's lost international position, in restoring
to it the role of arbiter of the destiny of peoples, and to place an obstacle
in the path of progressive reforms throughout the world. Imperialism views as
the main obstacle on the road toward achieving this aim the socialist community
and its assistance to liberated countries. Hence attempts to distort and
slander this assistance.

Respecting the sacred right of peoples to determine their own fate, the Soviet
Union and the other socialist nations do not interfere in the internal affairs
of liberated countries and do not seek any advantages whatsoever for them-
selves. The assistance and support of the socialist community help achieve
progressive secioeconomic and cultural reforms in liberated countries, preserva-
tion of their sovereignty, and strengthening of their independence in the face
of the feeble neocolonialist intrigues of imperialism. Assistance in
strengthening defense capability. which the USSR and the other brother na-
tions give liberated countries at their request, also pursues this goal.

The Soviet Union always has opposed and continues to oppose the export of
revolution. But we also cannot accept and never will accept export of counter-
revolution. we hold this high-principled position. Our attitude toward the
events pertaining to Afghanistan is also grounded on this position. Imperialism
attempted to export counterrevolution to this country. This situation forced
the government of Afghanistan to request assistance froa the USSR. And such
assistance was given to Afghanistan. It was highly praised by Babrak Karmal,
general secretary of the Central Committee of the People's Democratic Party of
Afghanistan and chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan, noting that "if heroic Afghanistan had not been given
assistance by the great Soviet Union, a revolutionary, free. independent and
nonaligned Afghanistan would not exist today."7

This statement clearly shows the great hypocrisy of attempts by imperialist
propaganda to represent the temporary entry into Afghanistan of a limited
Soviet military contingent as "intervention." This step is in full conformity
with the UN Charter. Its vital necessity and timeliness were reaffirmed by the
cynical acknowledgement made in 1981 by the U.S. President that the bands en-
tering Afghan territory from without are being armed by the United States of
America and that Washington's military assistance to these bands will continue
in an increasing magnitude.

As for the question of withdrawal of the limited contingent of Soviet troops
from the DRA. this question can be resolved on the basis of a political

settlement of the Afghanistan situation in conformity with the program ad—
vanced by the government of the DEA on 14 May 1980 and on 24 August 1981. The

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
USSR is prepared to withdraw its troops on agreement with the Afghan Government.
For this to come to pass, there must be a complete cessation of sending
revolutionary hands into Afghanistan, and there must be reliable guarantees
that there will not be renewed intervention. The Soviet Union has already
demonstrated its faithfulness to its word, in June 1980, by withdrawing from the
DEA, on agreement with the Afghan Government, those Soviet military units

the presence of which was no longer necessary. This became possible as a
consequence first and foremost of serious defeats inflicted on the counter-
revolutionary bands sent [zasyiayemykh; also translates as "infiltrated"] into
that country.

Thanks to the international assistance of the Soviet Union rendered to the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, the plans of imperialist and other
reactionary circles to destroy the achievements of the April Revolution in that
country failed. The policy of the People's Democratic Party and the government
of the DRA is in conformity with the national interests of Afghanistan,
strengthens the power of the people, and is leading to sequential stabiliza-
tion of the situation in this republic.

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev once again emphasized the firmness of the interns-
tionslist position of the USSR in his acceptance speech when awarded the
highest decoration of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan -- the Order of
the Sun of Freedom. “...Just as the Soviet Union has assisted the Afghan
people in defending their revolutionary achievements," he stated, "our country
is also prepared to help Afghanistan in the future to ensure a just political
settlement in the interests of international peace and stability."8

The Soviet Union views as legitimate and just to the highest degree the aspira-
tion of young nations to defend their acquired freedom and independence and

to defend their territorial integrity against the intrigues of imperialism.
This aspiration is embodied in particular in the activities of the Organization
of African Unity and the Organization of Solidarity of the Peoples of Asia and
Africa. They play an important role in uniting the efforts of the peoples of
these continents in the struggle against neocolonialism, hegemoniem and racism,
for preserving and strengthening peace. The antiimperialist activity of other
political and economic organizations and associations of liberated countries

is also growing.

The nonalignment [neprisoyedineniya] movement has been and continues to be an
important factor in international relations. Emerging more than two decades
ago. today it unites approximately 100 nations of different continents with a
population of more than one-and-a-half billion.

The USSR and nonaligned nations occupy common or close positions on many root

problems of the present day. Development of friendship and comprehensive co-

operation wlththesenations has been and continues to be a fundamental policy

of the USSR. Such cooperation objectively promotes the cause of strengthening
peace and social progress.

/The world Communist and worker movement] constitutes a mighty force of the
antiimperialist front. It has grown to an even greater extent in recent years.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Its influence has expanded. The political vanguard of the international worker
class - Communist and worker parties - has also grown stronger. Today such
parties are active in 96 different countries. Communist ideas are capturing
the minds and hearts of additional tens and hundreds of thousands of people
throughout the world.

The CPSU, which is one of the fighting detachments of the world Communist nove-
ment, is fighting persistently for unity and cohesion of the brother parties
and is working purposefully on further expansion and deepening of comprehen-
sive cooperation with them on a foundation of Harxism-Laninism and proletarian
internationalisn. Continuous contacts and mutual exchange of information help
the Communists of all countries in their daily work. The common struggle of
the brother parties against aggressive imperialist policy, for socialism and
peace is fostering unity of the world Communist movement and increase in its
prestige.

Normalization of the international political climate constitutes a two-way

process. which presupposes meeting efforts, good will on the part of nations
with opposing social systems, and their mutual confidence [doveriyeg also

translates as ”trust"). Obviously there can be no trust without reciprocity
and equality, just as there can be no genuine international security without
equal security for all parties. It can be ensured only if, as Comrade L. I.
Brezhnev noted, ”all parties treat building a firm peace as a common task."9

Such is objective reality. The CPSU forms and implements its policy toward the
[capitalist national taking this reality into account. The main thing in this
policy is an organic combination of the principles of peaceful coexistence,

mutually beneficial cooperation, and a firm rebuff to the aggressive intrigues

of imperialism.

Recent years have been marked by a considerable activation in the Western na-
tions, particularly in the United States, of opponents of peaceful coexistence
and of improving relations with the Soviet Union and the other socialist
countries. This has been dictated by further aggravation of the general
crisis of capitalism, by deepening of the antagonistic conflicts within the
bourgeois society. and by an increase in the interimperialist struggle for
markets and sources of raw materials and energy. Military-industrial com-
pleaes are exerting increasing influence on all realms of life in the im-
perialist nations and on their foreign policy. Herein lie the causes of the
present aggravation of the international situation, and from here emanates the
growing threat to the cause of peace and social progress. Reactionary in-
perialiat circles, particularly the United States, are counting not on develop-
nent of cooperation with the Soviet Union, not on mutual understanding, but on
the so-called'position of strength" proclaimed by ﬂashington.

history attests to the fact that such hopes in regard to the Soviet Union have
always proven false. We are capable of standing up for ourselves. And today
we have at our disposal, more than at any time in the past, everything needed
for this. This is why the only possible real platform for relations between
the nations of the socialist and capitalist systems is talks based on the prin-
ciple of equality and equal security, peaceful coexistence, and mutually
beneficial cooperation.

16

FOB OFl-‘lCIAL USE ONLY
Our country has always supported and continues to support development of rela-
tlons with the Western countries - relations of equality grounded on mutual
respect and confidence and on consideration of mutual interests. The CPSU end
the Soviet State realistically appraise the fact that the situation in today's
world depends in large measure on the status of.Soviet-American autual rela-
tions and sincerely seek to have normal relations with the United States. such
an approach is in the interests of the peoples of both countries and of the
entire world. The USSR inaltersbly adheres to this approach.

During the years of detente considerable experience has been amassed in the
area of cooperation among nations with differing social systems. including the
USSR and the United States. Utilizing this experience, proceeding honestly
and constructively, seeking to achieve a just resolution of international
problems with the aid of negotiations -- the Soviet Union views this as a
manifestation of genuine political wisdom and responsibility, both to the
people of one's own country and to all mankind.

The USSR consistently advocates that the positive process begun in 1975 by

the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe should continue
without interruption and become deeper, and that the principles and

provisions of the Final Act adopted at that conference should be strictly ob-
served. The USSR and the entire socialist community view the Madrid meeting of
representatives of participating nations in the All-European Conference
precisely from this standpoint. Reaching an agreement to convene a European
conference on confidence-building measures, European security and disarmament
would be in conformity with the fundamental demands of cooperation.

Peaceful cooperation between countries of differing social systems on the
European continent is continuing in spite of efforts by the enemies of
détente. This applies both to political contacts and to economic, scientific-
technical and cultural relations.

The policy which the Soviet Union is pursuing in the international arena is a
firm, consistent policy of development of cooperation, preservation and
strengthening of peace. Our dedication to the cause of peace is steadfast. It
proceeds from the nature of socialism. Peace is dear to the Soviet people. We
need it in order to accomplish tasks of building. Tirelessly strengthening

the economic and defense might of the socialist homeland and its international
prestige, Soviet citizens are maintaining a high degree of political vigilance
and readiness to defend the great achievements of socialism, the cause of
peace and social progress. Under the guidance of the party of lenin, they are
confidently striding along the road of October toward communism.

2. Important Point on the Road to Communism

Socialism exerts its principal influence on world development by its successes
in the economic domain. It is precisely in the realm of the economy and
economic policy that we find the decisive front in the competition between

socialism and capitalism. As was stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress, the
foundation for accomplishing social tasks and strengthening the nation's

15

FOR OFFKJAI.USE¢NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

defense capability, and the foundation of a vigorous foreign policy is being
constructed precisely here. It is precisely here where the requisite precondi-
tions for successful movement toward communism by the Soviet society are being
created.

The Soviet economy has today gone far in its development. The productive
resources of our society are mightier than at any time in the past. The
scientific and technological revolution, changing the countenance of many in-
dustrial processes and entire industries, is successfully advancing and at an
increasing pace. Soviet science occupies a leading position in the major

fields of knowledge. Our country's economic power is ensuring a dynamic forward
movement in all areas of building the material and technological foundation of
communism and is reliably guaranteeing the comprehensive advance of society.

Tullest and most efficient utilisation of the capabilities and advantages of
the socialist economic system is being achieved thanks to the consistent inr
plementation of Leninist economic policy by the C980. The party views

guidance of the nation's economy as the heart of its multifaceted activities.
The meaning and content of these activities are defined by an inalterable
program demand of the CPSU - everything in the name of man, everything for the
good of man. This is the party's general line of policy. The decisions of the
26th CPSU Congress constituted innovative development of this policy line. The
November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenum concentrated the attention of
party and people on the most urgent questions of economic development. In his
brilliant speech at the Plenum, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev comprehensively demon-
strated the great political, organizational and economic work accomplished
since the 26th CPSU Congress and noted the increased labor and political ac-
tiveness of the masses. He profoundly revealed ways to achieve further im-
plementation of the congress decisions and presented a detailed description,

a political and social evaluation of the plan for the second year and the en-
tire llth Five-Year Plan as a whole.

The most important features of the five-year plan include the following: in-
tensification of the social thrust of economic development, enhancement of the
role of intensive factors and efficiency of societal production in forming a
stable rate of economic growth and improvement in the structure of the economy,
and an increase in the end results of economic activity which advances more
rapidly than expenditures on achieving the results.

The party and people are faced with large and complex tasks. Speaking about
this, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev expressed confidence that they will be accoar
plished. "We have everything needed for successful performance: highly-
developed productive resources, sociopolitical and moral unity of the Soviet
people, a precise strategy of movement forward, embodied in the congress
decisions," noted Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. "It is now up to the entire party
to raise even higher the level of organisational work in the area of economic
development.”10

The Soviet people, under party guidance, are working with inspiration in all
areas of building communism. Our national wealth is steadily increasing. The
people's prosperity is growing, as is our country's production and

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
scientific-technical potential. The sociopolitical and ideological unity of
the people, the alliance of the worker class, peasantry and intelligentsia, and
the friendship of all nationalities and ethnic groups in the USSR are growing
stronger. Socialist democracy is deepening. The defense capability of the
state is increasing. The Soviet Nation is advancing confidently in all areas
of building the material and technological foundation of communism.

In conformity with this economic strategy, the party is concentrating the
efforts of Soviet citizens on achieving a transition to lintensification,l in-
creasing production efficiency and improving work quality, maximally utilising
the advantages of the socialist economic system, scientific and technological
advances, the vast economic capabilities and reserves, and achieving all-out
economy in all types of resources.

Fulfillment of these demands comprises a basis for accomplishing the main task
of the current five-year plan - securement of further growth in the prosperity
of the Soviet people. It also includes creation of increasingly more favorable
conditions for comprehensive development of the individual. for highly
productive labor, for strengthening the health and improving rest and recreation
for Soviet citizens, and development of education, science and culture - in
short, everything which comprises our socialist way of life.

Implementation of the large and diversified program for increasing the people's
prosperity is possible only on the basis of dynamic and stable development of
material production. As we know, [an increase in national income] is a
synthesizing indicator of such development. It will grow by 18 percent in the
llth Five-Year Plan, and at least 40 percent by 1990, according to calculations.

Acceleration of scientific and technological progress, improvement in the
structure of the economy and distribution of productive resources, improvement
in planning and management, and boosting of the level of economic administra-
tion are subordinated entirely to achieving the goals of economic strategy and
successful accomplishment of the task of intensification of societal production
and securement of higher economic performance results with and“: expenditures of
resources.

The party organically links a shift of the economy toward efficiency and
quality with work to improve all branches of production on the basis of [ac-
celeration of scientific and technological progress] and extensive utilization
of advances in science and technology. We are talking about technical re-
tooling of production, building and universal adoption of fundamentally new
equipment and materials, and application of high-productivity energy and
materials-economizing technologies.

In the current five-year plan the rate of equipment renewal is being accelerated
by approximately 50 percent. New, advanced industrial processes are being
aggressively adopted, and the power-worker ratio is increasing. Product
quality is also improving. Presently more than 85,000 industrial products are
manufactured with the state Seal of Quality. This is three times more than at
the beginning of the 10th Five-Year Plan.

17

FOR 0i1ﬂClAl.USll(MNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The efficiency of science is increasing, and its ties with production are deepen-
ing. In addition to elaboration of theoretical problems, it is concentrating

its efforts to an ever increasing degree on solving key economic problems and

on discoveries capable of introducing truly revolutionary changes in production.
Discoveries in the area of nuclear power engineering, space and laser tech-
nology, electronics and chemistry, and in other areas of science and tech-
nology possess great potential. And it is very important that less time be
required to reach practical incorporation of the results of scientific dis-
coveries and that the path of inventions and innovator solutions to the

factories, fields and livestock units not be blocked by sluggishneaa, routinism,
bureaucratic delays and red tape.

Implementation of scientific and technological advances generates great social
effect in addition to economic effect proper. It fosters the elimination of
the considerable differences between intellectual and physical labor, enhance-
ment of the role of creative functions in productive activity, improvement of
working conditions, and protection of the environment.

[An increase in labor productivity] is of key significance for intensification
of the economy and a steady increase in its efficiency. The main factor of
economic growth is to be found precisely here. Labor productivity throughout
the nation's economy must be increased sufficiently, noted Comrade L. l.
Brezhnev, "that in this country it not be lower but higher than in the most
developed capitalist countries. The socialist system gives us every possibility
to accomplish this. It is only a matter of being able to utilize these
capabilities correctly, to learn to manage efficiently and thriftily."11

Ninety percent of national income growth is to be obtained in the llth Five-
Year Plan through increasing labor productivity. Successful accomplishment of
this task presupposes all-out acceleration of total mechanization and automa-
tion of production, adoption of the brigade form of organization of labor,

and a gradual reduction in the percentage share of low-skilled, manual, and
particularly heavy physical labor. An important role is played by increasing
production at existing enterprises, with a stable or even decreasing number of
employees. Growth in labor productivity is inconceivable without a high degree
of organization, discipline, and responsibility in each and every section, in
every production team, and at every work station.

Intensification of the economy imposes high demands both on the entire economy
and on each sector. The party devotes particular attention to stable, balanced
[growth of heavy industry./ More and more new large enterprises are coming on-
stream. The Sayan-Shushenskiy Hydroelectric Power Station, the Chernobyl',
Kursk, and Armenian nuclear power stations, the Zaporozh'ye and Uglegorsk GRES'B
[State Regional Electric Power Plant], Europe's largest, the Atomsh Plant,
the Lisichansk and Pavlodar oil refineries, meat-packing combines in Lipetsk
and Zhitomir, the Main Kakhovka Canal, plus many other facilities came on-line
in the last five-year plan. The family of industrial giants was joined by
KamAZ [the Kama Truck Plant) in the first year of the llth Five-Year Plan.
Designed output was reached ahead of schedule at the Leningrad Nuclear Power
Station, and new generator units were brought on-line at a number of other
large electric power stations. Total length of track on the ”construction

18
FOR OFFHJA1.USE(N‘LY
moject of the century" - the Baikal-Amur Mainline - went past the 2200 kilo-
neter mark in 1981.

Territorial-production complexes are developing briskly in

the European part of the RSPSR, in the Urals, Siberia, in the Far East. in
Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. The establishment and development of an entire com-
plex of branches as well as servicing facilities are a characteristic feature of
the present stage of their formation.

The following facts give a graphic picture of the level presently reached by
Soviet industry. Soviet industry produces more than three times as much per
capita than the world average. Total USSR industrial output volume comprises
one-fifth of world production. This is approximately as much as is produced

by all the countries of Western Europe combined, yet the total population of
these countries exceeds by one-third that of the Soviet Union. The USSR is now
the world leader in production of oil and steel, cement and mineral fertilisers,
road diesel and electric locomotives, plus many other important products.

Concentrating the efforts of the Soviet people on resolving the most pressing
economic problems and on correcting bottlenecks and disproportions which still
exist in the economy, the party focuses paramount attention on the [fuel-energy
complex [ds]/. The task of improving its structure has been placed on the
agenda. It is necessary to reduce the percentage share of oil as a fuel, to
replace it with natural gas and coal, to speed up the development of nuclear'
power. and to continue the search for fundamentally new energy sources. The
llth Five-Year Plan is the first stage in carrying out the USSR energy program
drawn up at the initiative of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. Components of this
program include the USSR Unified Power System, which presently encompasses an
area with a population in excess of 220 million. as well as this country's
Unified Gas Supply System. They are steadily growing and improving.

In the /metallurgical industry [dsll there is consistently being implemented
a policy of radical improve-eat in the quality of metal and metal products
simultaneously with production growth, increase in output of efficient metal
products, reduction of losses and waste, and decrease in expenditure of metal
per unit of end product. Production of substitutes is expanding. Their em-
ployment in place of traditional materials generates considerable economic ef-
fect. The employment of 1 million tons of pipe made of polymer materials,

for example. can replace 5 million tons of steel pipe. Savings in capital in-
vestment will amount to 1.7 billion rubles, with savings of approximately 0.7
billion rubles in pipeline construction.

A transition by the economy to an intensive emphasis is directly dependent on
the development of [machine building [ds)/, for it is machine building which
provides renewal of fixed assets and technical retooling of various areas of
the nation's economy. It opens the door to everything new and advanced
created by scientific and engineering thought. And the more rapidly these new
innovations are put into production and embodied in highly efficient, reliable
machines, instruments, and production lines, the more successfully the problems
of improving the efficiency of the economy are resolved.

19

FOR OFHGAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Securement of a rapid rate of growth of the base branches of industry leads
to increased manufacture of those products which determine technological
progress. At the same time this creates a solid foundation for increasing
the manufacture of consumer durables.

The party views improving supply of consumer durables to the public as a primary
task. Much has been done to accomplish this task in the first year of the
llth Five—Year Plan. For the current five-year plan as a whole, manufacture

of such goods will increase by 180 billion rubles over the preceding five-year

' period. This is more than their entire output volume in 1980. The product

mix is expanding and being updated, the quality of consumer goods is improving,
and the sale of new, stylish, as well as inexpensive high-quality goods is
increasing. The work performed by trade enterprises, public food services and
personal services enterprises, as well as the entire service industry is
further expanding and improving.

Hork on a vast scale aimed at ensuring interlinked, balanced development of
those branches forming the [unified agroindustrisl complex] is continuing in

this country. Almost one-third of all capital investment in the nation's
economy is being funneled its this complex. A large portion of these funds is
earmarked directly for boosting agricultural production and transforming agricul-
ture into a highly developed sector of the socialist economy. Successful ac-
complishment of this task depends in large measure on how wisely the allocated
funds are utilized. Each and every hectare of land, each and every ruble in-
vested, each and every ton of fertilizer should produce maximum return.

Present party agrarian policy, the foundation of which was laid down by the deci-
sions of the March (1965) CPSU Central Committee Plenum, constitutes a con-
tinuation and innovative development of V. I. Lenin's teaching on the

agrarian question in new historical conditions -- in conditions of a mature
socialist society. Its sequential implementation ensures comprehensive,

dynamic development and a steady improvement in the efficiency of all sectors

of the economy, and is leading to an increasingly fuller satisfaction of the
public's demand for high-quality foodstuffs and industry's demands for raw
materials.

Accomplishment of the tasks facing agriculture is fostered by continuous
strengthening of its production potential and further development of such
specialized branches as rural construction, land reclamation and water
conservation, machine building for livestock raising and feed production, and
the microbiological industry. Economic and technological links between the
village and industry are expanding. The scientific potential of agriculture
is steadily growing. Hork is continuing on transforming the Non-Chernozem
zone of the RSPSR into a region of highly productive crop farming and live-
stock raising.

Attainment by our agriculture of those performance levels targeted by the
26th CPS" Congress will foster solution to such a serious problem as in-
proving supply of foodstuffs to the public. "The food problem -- both at the
administrative and at the political level," stressed Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
at the November (1981) CPSU Central Committee Plenum, "is the central problem

20

I1)! 0F1ﬂ€1Al.lﬁSE.(HVLY
of the entire five-year plan. A hi h rate of agricultural production con-
stitutes the basis for solving 1:." 2

The aim of the comprehensive food program is to unite efforts within agricul-
ture proper and in those branches of industry which serve agriculture, and to
subordinate the work of all these branches to a common and objective -- to

meet this country's food requirements. This program is being drawn up pur-
suant to a decision of the 26th CPSU Congress and will be included in the

llth Five-Year Plan. Puller utilization of local food resources as well as the
capabilities of subsidiary farm operations is called upon to play an im-
portant role in providing the population with food supplies.

Growth of this country's economic potential is determined to an enormous
degree by the state of [capital construction./ Improvement of its efficiency
presupposes a concentration of efforts in the main areas, on completion-tar~
geted projects, particularly those capable of generating the greatest
production growth. To design and build rapidly and at the same time with
quality, economically, and at a contemporary technological level -- this is a
demand of the present stage of development of society. The overall pace of
our forward movement depends in large measure on fulfillment of this demand
and on how things move ahead in construction.

Development and improvenent of the branches of the production infrastructure
is of considerable significance in intensification of the economy. The party
specified the tasks of improving the performance of /transportation./
particularly rail transport. Organization of transport hauls is steadily in-
proving, and measures are being taken to ensure efficient utilization of
rolling stock and to reduce idle time for freight cars, trucks, and vessels.
Considerable savings are being achieved in this regard by adoption of the
experience amassed by the Leningrad Transportation Center and the railroaders
of Eoscow and L'vovskaya Oblast.

Accomplishment of tasks advanced by the 26th CPSU Congress pertaining to
building new rail lines, increasing the technical equipment of existing
railroads, and ensuring precise coordination of all components of the
transportation system is proceeding at an increasing pace. Further improve-
ment of the job being done by transportation and improvement of its links

with other sectors of the economy will be accomplished on the basis of a long-
range combined program drawn up in conformity with the Basic Directions of
Economic and Social Development of the USSR in 1981-1985 and the Period up to
1990.

Achievement of excellent economic results depends in large measure on the
level of [direction of the economy, planning and management./ Discussing the
tasks of improving direction of the economy, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev Emphasized
that they must be carried out "taking into account the experience and

creative initiative of our people, considering the best available in the
experience of the brother socialist countries as well as developed capitalist
nations."13

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Questions pertaining to guiding the economy are not simply economic but also
political, party questions. Necessary for resolving them are mobilization of
the productive potential of our entire society and fullest elucidation and
utilization of existing possibilities. In recent years a broad aggregate of
measures have been carried out to improve the economic mechanism. The sys-
tem of planning and management is increasingly being aimed at improving work
efficiency and quality and at achieving excellent end economic results. Con-
siderable work is being done to adopt new forms and methods of planning, new
appraisals of the activities of work forces, and to increase the effectiveness
of economic levers and incentives.

A most important condition for implementing the party guideline calling for
improving the efficiency of societal production and work quality as a pivotal
economic task consists in steady growth of the social activeness of the masses
and their involved, active participation in the affairs of state and society.
Development and universal adoption of a flawlessly operating system of in-
centives, both moral and material, which would impel people to work with
maximum output and constantly to improve product quality,are assuming ever
increasing significance thereby. The civic awareness of all Soviet citizens,
their attitude toward labor and socialist property, their discipline and
knowledgeability on the job, in their daily activities, and in societal af-
fairs should be raised to a new and higher level. In the final analysis it
is this which determines the today and tomorrow of every Soviet citizen and
our entire society.

With a growth in the scale and complexity of production, any manifestations
of mismanagement, dishonesty, careless indifference, and all failures to
achieve established plans and targets inflict increasingly greater damage.
Suffice it to recall how great the price of work time is today. Every minute
more than 2.5 million kilowatt hours of electricity, almost 300 tons of
steel, 1600 tons of coal, approximately 800,000 cubic meters of natural gas,
and a vast quantity of other products are produced in this country. wasting
a single minute means irrevocably losing the results of the aggregate daily
labor of approximately 200,000 workers.

There is occurring a constant increase in the significance of fuller and more
efficient utilization of fixed productive assets, increased return on invested
capital, and economical expenditure of raw materials, fuel, energy, metal,
cement, and other materials. A most resolute rebuff should be given to any
and all encroachments on public property. All means and methods must be
utilized in order to close firmly all opportunities for parasitism, bribery,
profiteering, and for other non-labor income.

The economy ahouldbeecmuloel. This conclusion was affirmed at the 25th CPSU
Congress as one of the most important principles of the party's economic
strategy at the present stage of development of our society. Concrete ways

to solve problems connected with increasing return oninvestedcapital, maximum
equipment work-loading, and reduction of energy, fuel, raw and other materials
losses to a minimum were specified in a June (1981) decree of the CPSU Central
Committee and USSR Council of Ministers. It specifies a system of measures
aimed at radical improvement of all work pertaining to economy and efficient

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
utilization of resources. Strict observance of economy measures is the common
concern of our entire people.

Soviet citizens approach the solving of problems facing the country in a
stewardly, involved and responsible manner. Socialist competition is the most
vivid manifestation of such an approach and of patriotism on the part of the
working masses. More than 100 million persons participate in socialist com-
petition, seeking to achieve successful implementation of the decisions of the
26th CPSU Congress under the slogan "Bork Efficiently and Hith Excellent
Quality!" Initiatives aimed at achieving economy of material and labor
resources and at turning out high-quality products have become widespread. A
characteristic feature of socialist competition is its close link with the
scientific and technological revolution. It is becoming increasingly more
concentrated around the problem of and results and the moral aspects of con-
structive, productive labor and development of the individual.

The working person, his welfare and happiness occupy the center of the
party’s plans and the center of the entire life of our developed socialist so-
ciety. In the final analysis everything targeted to be accomplished in the
llth Five-Year Plan is subordinated to a single aim -- la further rise in the
welfare of the people./ Real per capita income has doubled just in the last
three five-year periods. All aspects of the lives of working people are encom-
passed by major socia1.measures. Implementation of some of the targeted
measures began in the first year of the current five-year plan. State as-
sistance to families with children is increasing, and pension support and
coverage is improving. The financial situation of 4.5 million families with
many children has improved and 14 million pensioners have received an increase
in their pensions since the 26th CPSU Congress. Wages of persons working in
the coal industry have increased.

The material benefits which our country's people receive from public consump-
tion funds are constantly increasing. Each year from 10 to 11 million Soviet
citizens move into new housing. The network of kindergartens, schools,
hospitals, clubhouses, libraries, cinemas, sanatorium-health resort and sports
facilities is expanding.

Soviet citizens understand well that comprehensive development of this country,
successful solving of pressing economic problems, as well as further improve-
ment in living conditions can be achieved only through their own labor. They
view the party's plans as their own vital concern and are working with initia-
tive and innovation in all areas of building communism, increasing the economic
and defense might of the socialist homeland.

3. Leading Force of the Soviet Society

Soviet citizens inseparably link our country's heroic past, glorious present,
and bright future with the Communist Party and with its wise leadership.
workers of city and village and members of the Armed Forces pour out their

souls and direct their deepest feelings to the party. They see the party as
the mind, honor and conscience of our era.

23

FOR 0511(1A1.USEI(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The CPSU constructs all its revolutionary-tranaforming activities on the basis
of eternally living. constantly evolving Marxist-Leninist teaching. All the
finest things which exist in the Soviet people are embodied in the party - its
fighting revolutionary spirit, its inexhaustible productive energy, in-
dustriousness and wisdom. "Conunists are truly the unbending core of our
society, its living sail," stated Comrade L. l. Brezhnev. "They are truly the
revolutionary vanguard of the people."14

The Communist Party, which is the guiding and directing force of the Soviet
society, is developing and growing strong together with it. Six-and-a-half
decades ago, in March 1917, its ranks totaled 24.000 Communists. The struggle
of the worker class for victory in the Great October Socialist Revolution was
led by a 350,000-man army of Leninist-Bolshsviks. Today the ranks of the CPSU
contain almost 18 million Communists. of like mind and like action. More than
half of them work directly in the domain of material production - the decisive
are a of societal affairs. Approximately 1.5 million primary and shop party
organizations and party groups are conducting active daily work among the
masses.

Constituting the nucleus of the political system of the Soviet society,
governmental and public organizations, the CPSU exercises comprehensive politi-
cal leadership over governmental and public organizations and the productive
activities of the entire people. The party directs the activities of govern-
mental and public agencies and organizations through Communists working in
them. and secures coordination of the efforts of all components of the politi-
cal system and economic mechanism in building communism.

Almost a million deputy-Communists are working in soviets of people's deputies.
They use their prestige and experience to ensure that every session of a
soviet and every meeting of the permanent commission is transformed into a
genuine council of people, into a collective search for the most correct
decisions.

The Soviet trade unions are a reliable support of the party among the masses
and a powerful means of development of socialist democracy. Many forms of
democratic participation by working people in production management. accelera-
tion of scientific and technological progress, and accomplishing sociocultural
and indoctrinational tasks have been born through the ingenuity of the masses.

The CPSU performs its lofty role of vanguard of the Soviet people in full con-
formity with the Fundamental Law of our nation. It states that all party or-
ganizations operate within the framework of the USSR Constitution. The party
never has taken and does not take the place of other organizations. 0n the
contrary, it always seeks to ensure that governmental and economic agencies as
well as public organizations work with maximum efficiency and carry out their
assigned tasks with initiative and innovativeness.

A lLeninist style/ -- a scientific. innovative style, to which subjectivism is
alien, from which complacency is excluded, and which opposes all manifesta—
tions of bureaucracy and formalism - is inherent in all CPSU guiding and
directing activities. The multifaceted activities of the C950 Central Com-
mittee and Central Committee Politburo -- this truly fighting headquarters of

24

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the party -- is a model of the Leninist style of leadership. ”It is precisely
hem," noted the 26th CPS!) Congress, "that the collective intelligence of the

party is accumulated and party policy, which expresses the interests all of
Soviet society, of all Conunists and party unaffiliated, is formed." 5

The purposeful, highly organized nature of the work of the Politburo, the
Central Committee, and the entire party is determined to an enormous degree

by the fact that for more than 17 years now Comrade L. I. Brezhnev has headed
the Central Committee. Our country, the brother socialist countries, and
millions of people of good will throughout the world extensively celebrated the
glorious 75th birthday of Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. Expressing the thoughts and
feelings of our country's Communists and the entire Soviet people, the CPSU
Central Committee, the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet, and the USSR
Council of Ministers noted the outstanding and meritorious services of Com-
rade L. I. Brezhnev. He is making an enormous, truly inestimabla contribution
to the struggle for the prosperity of our great homeland, the strengthening of
its economic and defense might, and for the triumph of the ideas of communism.
peace and social progress of mankind. Award to Comrade L. I. Brezhnev of the
Order of Lenin and a fourth Hero of the Soviet Union Gold Star, as well as the
highest decorations of a number of other countries constituted a moving
acknowledgement of these meritorious services.

An outstanding party and government leader, a faithful follower of the great
cause of Lenin, and acknowledged leader of the revolutionary forces of the
present day, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev enjoys the boundless respect and love of
the people. With his enormous capacity for work, political perspicscity,
his ability to maintain his composure and remain calm in the most critical
situations, his benevolence, his attention and sensitivity toward others, Com-
rade L. I. Brezhnev creates a healthy moral-political atmosphere within the
party and within our country. Such an atmosphere promotes growth in the so-
cial activeness of the masses, their initiative and innovativeness, a
flourishing of talents, of which there is an immense wealth in our people, as
V. I. Lenin stated. This enables the party successfully to accomplish the
most complex tasks and effectively to carry out the great mission of leading
force of society.

The great wealth of experience of our country and the brother socialist
countries convincingly affirms that [leadership by the Communist Party is an
essential and decisive condition for successfully building and defending the
new society./ It is not surprising that imperialist reaction and its
servitors are willing to expend any effort and resources in their attempts to
undermine and discredit the leadership role of Harxist-Leninist parties in
the socialist countries and to disparage the significance of this role. The
purpose of these attempts is to weaken and shatter the very political founda-
tion of socialism and to destroy the revolutionary achievements of the work-
ing people. Soviet citizens and the peoples of the brother socialist
countries offer a resolute and firm rebuff to the intrigues of our class
enemies and steadfastly follow their Communist vanguard.

A most important mechanism of development of the socialist society is a steady
growth in the leadership role of the party. This pattern is of a universal

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nature. Expansion of the scale and increase in the complexity of tasks being
accomplished and intensification of the activeness of all components of the
political system of the socialist society demand a steady rise in the level of
organizational and political indoctrination work among the masses. And only
the Conunist Party -- a political organization which is armed by Marxist-
Leninist theory -— can encompass the entire aggregate of internal and ex-
ternal conditions of societal development, secure effective guidance of the
activities of the working people, elaborate a correct policy. and organize
its practical implementation.

The CPSU is strong because of its monolithic unity with the people. It is
strong. as V. l. Lenin noted, due to its ability to establish contact, to draw
closer, and to a certain degree to merge with the worker masses. herein lies
an inexhaustible source of vitality of CPSU policy. The party has gained the
limitless trust and love of the people through its selfless service to the
people. The prestige of the CPSU is enormous and indisputable. The great
masses have become convinced through their own experience that the party is

- leading them along the only correct road.

Of course the role of leading and guiding force of society does not come
automatically. As Comrade L. l. Brezhnev noted, it "is earned, achieved in
the course of constant, ceaseless struggle for the interests of the working
people. And this role is consolidated by the fact that the party is con-
stantlylgeepening its links with the masses and lives by their needs and con-
cerns."

The indissoluble unity of party and people is a priceless possession of our
society. Forged out and tempered by decades of revolutionary struggle and
inspired productive labor, standing up with honor under the most difficult tests
of the Civil War and the Great Patriotic Her, [the unity of party and

people forms a solid foundation of the monolithic ideological-political, so-
cial and international solidarity of the Soviet society.l

Communist ideology forms the basis of the [ideological-political cohesion
[dsll of our society. It arms Soviet citizens with knowledge of the laws and
prospects of societal development. Communist ideals. standards and prin-
ciples, transforming into convictions, determine a person's attitude toward
civic duty. the line of one's daily conduct, and find concrete expression in
an indissoluble unity of word and deed, a vigorous life position, moral in-
tegrity and purity. Communist conviction is a true compass which enables one
correctly to gain one's hearings in any situation, even the most complex and
acute, to discern the class essence and thrust of the intrigues of a hostile
ideology. and to stop them firmly and resolutely.

The party has always viewed and continues to view as a program goal the forming
of a new man, a determining trait of the spiritual countenance of whom is Com-
munist conviction. It is proceeding toward this goal on a broad front,
utilizing all the capabilities of the mature socialist society and the entire
rich arsenal of organisational, political and indoctrinational means.’

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A most important place in the business of indoctrinating Soviet citizens is
occupied by the study of Harxist-Leninist theory, which has become a mass
process in conditions of developed socialism. Almost 23 million persons are
presently enrolled in study just within the party education system. The
practice of holding unified political days has been adopted everywhere. Tire-
lessly seeking to raise the level of party education, the CPSU seeks to ensure
that it teaches people, to quote V. l. Lenin, "to act as communism in fact
demands."1

An enormous role in forming social consciousness and in further strengthening
the ideological-political solidarity of Soviet citizens is played by the mass
information media. Their effective utilization promotes an improvement in the
level of knowledge, erudition, and intellectual aspirations of the Soviet
citizen.

The [social solidarity [dsll of the Soviet society is becoming stronger on the
firm foundation of socioeconomic transformations and under the determining
influence of Marxist-Leninist ideology and party policy; the process of
sequential drawing together of all classes and social groups and further
strengthening of their indissoluble union is deepening. Appraising the ex-
perience of development of the Soviet society in the last decades, Comrade

L. l. Brezhnev advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress the thesis that "the
development of a classless structure of society will take place primarily with-
in the historical framework of mature socialism."18

Implementation of the socioeconomic and cultural development plans specified
by the party is leading to a steady increase in the social homogeneity of our
society. In our country the worker class, the kolkhoz peasantry, and the
people's intelligentsia are united by common interests and ideals, and by
relations of collectivism, comradely cooperation and mutual assistance. The
social cohesion of the Soviet society is becoming increasingly strengthened
as there occurs a rise in the level of education, culture, and occupational
training of the broadest segment of the working people. An enormous role in
this is played by the gradual transformation of agricultural labor into a
variety of industrial labor, the effacing of social differences between works
ing people of the industrial and agrarian sectors of the economy, and by
equalizing the differences in material, cultural and living standards between
city and village.

The advance along the road to communism is accompanied by strengthening of
the /international solidarity [dell of our society. The mighty brotherhood
of more than 100 nationalities and ethnic groups, united six decades ago in
an indivisible union of a socialist state -- the USSR -- is filled with in-
exhaustible vital forces. Their source is the Leninist nationalities policy
of the CPSU. Increasing the material and spiritual potential of each republic,
and at the same time maximally utilizing it for the harmonious development of
the entire country, the Soviet people have attained truly historic achieve—
ments under the guidance of the party. The most substantial changes in the
economic, social and spiritual affairs of the Soviet society and in the

life of all the peoples of this country, as well as the profound democracy

of our multinational state are expressed in the new USSR Constitution and the
new constitutions of the union republics.

27

FOR 0F1ﬂ€1Al.USE|DNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The party views as its sacred duty indoctrination of working people in a
spirit of Soviet patriotism and socialist internationalism, and a prOud
feeling of belonging to the great indivisible Soviet homeland. The ex-
perience of building a new society and its armed defense as well as a great
wealth of revolutionary practical experience convincingly affirm that it is
impossible to be a patriot without being an internationalist, and on the
other hand as well, it is impossible to be an internationalist without being
a patriot of the socialist homeland. The unity of root interests, tasks of
building. and the historical destiny of all the Soviet peoples makes our so-
ciety even more cohesive and powerful.

In elaborating a course of policy and general prospects of building com-
munism, the party constantly studies and fully takes into account the in-
terests of all classes and social groups, all nationalities and ethnic

groups in the USSR. It unites revolutionary theory with daily practical ac-
tivities and is supported by the high degree of social activeness and
political innovativeness of the masses. This defines the genuinely popular
character of the organising and guiding activities of the CPSU. meodying,

as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted, the collective intelligence of the finest
sons and daughters of a great people, the party scientifically expresses trite
policy that which the people realize, that which conform to the greatest
degree to the requirements of this country's socioeconomic development and its
dynamic forward movement along the road toward conunism.

Precisely such comprehensive substantiation, political insight and realism
characterise the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress. Working hard to im-
plement them, the Soviet people display enormous political and labor active-
ness. The coamon cause of building communism and common concern for
strengthening the economic and defense might of the homeland and the position
of world socialism, for ensuring peace and international security unite
Soviet citizens even more strongly behind the Coammnist Party. The uncon-
querable strength of the CPSU lies in its indissoluble unity with the people.
The mighty, all-conquering strength of the Soviet people lies in a unity with
the party and in its wise leadership.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Haterisly XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
Moscow, 1981, pp 4-5.

2. PRAVDA, 3 Nov 1981.
3. V. 1. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 35, page 116.
4. PRAVDA, 26 June 1981.

5. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom: rechi i stat'i" [Following a Leninist
Course: Speeches and Articles], Moscow, 1973. Vol 2, page 588.

6. lbid.. page 124.

28

INJRIOFFICJAI.IHSEI(N§LY
7.

8.

10.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

"Privetatviye XXVI-emu e“yezdu KISS ot kommunieticheekikh. rebochikh,
neteiona1'no-demokraticheakikh i eoteimlieticheekikh partly" [Heeaagea of
Greeting to the 26th CPSU Congreee from Communist. "other, National
Democratic and Socialist Parties], Moscow. 1981, page 307.

PRAVDA, 17 Dec 1981.

PRAVDA, 3 Nov 1981.

L. 1. Brezhnev. "Rech' na plennme Taentral'nngo Komiteta KPSS 16 noyabrya
1981 soda: postanovleniya plenuma TeK KPSS" [Speech at the 16 November
1981 Plenum of the CPSU Central Committee: CPSU Central Committee Plenum
Decree], Moscow. 1981. page 12.

PRAVDA, 20 Dec 1981.

Brezhnev, "Rech'...,"

op. cit., page 4.
PRAVDA, 20 Dec 1981.

"Materialy...," op. cit., page 218.
Ibid., page 69.

Ibid., pp 218-219.

Lenin. op. cit., Vol 41, page 302.

"Meterinly...," op. cit., page 53.

29

F0l‘0FFKJAl.USE(ﬂNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter Two. CWO!“ 0? m PARTY, concern 0! THE ENTIRE
PEOPLE

1. Defense of the Achieve-eats of Socialisn -- An Objective Necessity

Concentrating their efforts on rm interrelated areas - building comment
and strengthening peace, the CPS!) and the Soviet people are devoting unabated
attention to ensuring the nation's security end reliable defense of socialist
achieve-eats.

Defense of the revolutionary achievements of the working people is an objective
necessity. ”Any revolution," stated V. I. Lenin, "is worth something only if
1: is able to defend 1:»1:...."1 u long as there continues to be a threat
to the achievements of socialisn we must, noted Vladimir ll'ich, accompany our
steps toward peace by increasing our nilitery preparednessgwe nust be alert,
and assiduously preserve the defense capability of our country end our Red

Arly.2

The Co-unist Party has inalterebly been guided by these instructions of Lenin
and continues to be guided by then at all stages in the development of the
Soviet State. It organized, led and ensured the victory of the struggle of
the young Red Amy against the hordes of foreign nilitary intervention and
domestic counterrevolution. which were attenpting to strangle the socialist
revolution in its cradle. It worked persistently to strengthen the combat
power of the Soviet Arned Forces in the 1920's and 1930's, when inperialist
reaction engaged in naasive preparations for new aggression against the USSR.
It was the organizer and inspirer of the world-historic victory of the Soviet
people and their Armed Forces in the Great Patriotic Her.

The heroic history of our socialist homeland graphically confine the ,in-
mutable truth that there is no force in the world capable of shaking socialise
and defeating a people which perceived itself to be the country's ssster and
which views the defense of our country as its own vital concern.

The lessons vhich the Soviet people taught repeatedly to aggressore who dared
encroach upon our land went for naught. Fanciers of military adventures and
imperialist reactionary circles refused to abandon their insane plans to crush

socialism by force of arms. Such plans were made in the United States at the
end of the 1960's and in the 1950's. They were counting on a successful sneak

30

MOFHCIALIISEONLY
attack on the USSR with the employment of nuclear weapons. It was only the
great combat power of the Soviet Armed Forces and the development of our own
nuclear weapons in this country in response to U.S. blackmail which restrained
the United States from aggression.

But calculations of achieving military superiority over us and thus giving them
a free hand to implement a global policy of dictate and brigandage continue to
entice militant imperialist forces. These forces see the Soviet Union and the
other nations of the socialist community as the main obstacle in the path of
reestablishing the international position lost by imperialism. They are seek-
ing at all costs to hinder the strengthening of genuine socialism, to weaken
and crush the national liberation struggle of peoples and the world Comnist
and worker novement.

Adventurian and willingness to gamble away the vital interests of mankind for
the sake of their own narrow, selfish aims are today being increasingly nore
glaringly revealed in the policy of imperialism. "The situation has never
been so serious." noted Comrade 1.. I. Brezhnev, "since the end of world War
II."3 In whatever part of the world reactionary regimes, imposed upon peoples,
begin to split apart, the forces of imperialism. particularly U.S. imperialism,
are dispatched to that area without delay, in order to consolidate by fire and
sword an "order" which is to the liking of the monopoly bourgeoisie and to
defend the "vital interests" of those circles which profit on the exploitation
of other countries and peoples and on plundering their national wealth.

One of the clearest manifestations of [intensification of the aggressiveness

of imperialism/ is the unprecedented [growth of its military preparations [(3)].
Military expenditures of the United States and the other NATO nations are in-
creasing year by year. In the United States, for example, they totaled 225
billion dollars in 1982, while they exceed 263 billion dollars in the draft
budget for 1983. In the coming five years (to 1986) u.s. militarist appropria-
tions will reach the sum of 1.5 trillion dollars, that is, an amount which in
current prices will exceed by sixfold u.s. military expenditures during all of
World War 11.

These appropriations are intended, as 0.5. leaders state, to maintain

"the most powerful and soot flexible armed forces" and to achieve military
superiority over the Soviet Union and the other socialist countries. The
United States has announced a new, unprecedented program of building up its
strategic nuclear forces. Deployment of the next generation of nuclear and
conventional weapons is proceeding at an accelerated pace. New mass destruc-
tion weapons are being developed, including chemical and bacteriological.
Manufacture of neutron weapons has begun. adoption of which into the 11.8.
arsenal is leading to the creation of a new and sophisticated mode of un-
leashing nuclear war.

Following in the wake of aggressive U.S. policy, U.S. NATO partners are also
accelerating their military preparations: Great Britain, the ERG, and other
countries. For example. the direct nilitsry expenditures of all NATO member
nations increased from 104 billion dollars in 1970 to 25!. billion in 1980.
These expenditures have exceeded 1.6 trillion dollars over the last 10 years and
are continuing to rise.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR.OFTW(1AL USEIJNLY

Large quantities of new tanks, aircraft, artillery and other weapons systems
are being delivered to the troops. NATO strategic stockpiles are being in-
creased, and intensive measures are being taken to increase the bloc's
mobilization capabilities and to improve its infrastructure. The numerical
strength of NATO Joint Forces in Europe exceeds 3 million men. The armies
of the nations of this bloc total almost 5 million men.

Particularly dangerous to the cause of peace is the plan for nuclear missile
"additional arming" of NATO, which specifies the additional deployment in
western Europe of approximately 600 new U.S. medium-range missiles [rsket
sredney dal'nosti]. If this plan were to be implemented. NATO would obtain a
50 percent advantage over the USSR in delivery vehicles and approximately a
100 percent advantage in nuclear warheads. This would upset not only the
existing balance in Europe but also the balance of USSR and U.S. strategic
forces, and a qualitatively new military-strategic situation would arise. The
fact is that strategic targets in the USSR constitute targets for U.S. mis-
siles. and these missiles can be utilized as first-strike weapons. There
would arise a'serious threat to the security of the USSR and its allies.

Naturally the Soviet Union cannot remain indifferent to such a prospect. The
Soviet Union, as was quite explicitly stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress, will
not permit a change in the existing parity of forces to the advantage of the
United States and NATO. Our position on this matter is clear and unambiguous.
It is grounded on strict observance of the principle of equality and equal
security of both parties.

This principle is a meaningful platform for resolving all problems connected
with military confrontation in Europe. NATO, however. is constantly drawing up
and implementing new large-scale plans for modernization of armies. contrary
to this principle. The offensive potential of the arly of the P86 is growing
particularly intensively. primarily through a sharp increase in number of
tanks. The Bundeswehr has become the main NATO striking force in Europe. A
buildup of Nest German naval forces, including submarines, is proceeding at an
accelerated pace. The FRO has been virtually turned into an arsenal of 0.5.
nuclear weapons. Such a large quantity of these weapons has been deployed on
the territory of the PRC that their density is greater than in any other part
of the world. All this attests by no means to a love of peace on the part of
NATO, as is claimed in the Nest.

Growth in the aggressiveness of imperialism is also expressed in /increased ac-
tiveness of its bloc strategy Idol]. There is being revealed increasingly sore
distinctly a tendency toward expansion of the functions and realm of actions

of NATO. Exercﬂns and maneuvers conducted in NATO are essentially rehearsals
for unleashing and conducting a war against the Soviet Union and the other
nations of the socialist conunity.

In addition to existing imperialist military-political alliances. the United
States is attempting to establish new ones, in particular the Pacific Associa-
tion, the South Atlantic, Near Eastern, and other military blocs. Ignoring

the lessons of its own history, the United States is encouraging the rebirth of
Japanese militarism. Playing up to Nhshington, Japan's imperialist forces are

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
intensifying military preparations, in violation of that country's constitution.
The campaign which they are mounting around territorial clains against the

USSR is of an openly hostile, anti-Soviet character. At the same time Tokyo,
within the framework of the Japanese-American "security treaty," is expanding
its participation in U.S. military-strategic efforts in the area of East Asia
and the Pacific.

Beijing is performing the role of active accomplice of the most militant im-
perialist forces. It is intensifying attempts to bring the United States and
NATO into a clash with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact and is conducting
subversive, aggressive actions against neighboring countries, particularly
against Vietnam, Laos, and Kampuchea.

The invasion of socialist Vietnam by Chinese troops in February-March 1979
revealed the true countenance of the Beijing rulers and revealed the full
depths of the danger presented by their aggressive, adventuristic policy.
China's acts of provocation against the SRV and its threats against Laos
and Kampuchea are continuing. Beijing is participating as Washington's
assistant in the undeclared war against Afghanistan.

Figuring on exploiting for their own interests the hostility on the part of
the Beijing leadership toward the Soviet Union and the entire socialist com-
munity, the United States, a number of other RAID countries and Japan are
expanding military-political relations with China. Particularly dangerous is
the decision by the U.S. Government to sell modern weapons, including of-
fensive weapons, to Beijing. A strategic alliance between U.S. inperialisn
and Beijing hegenonism is being forged behind the backs of the Chinese and
American peoples.

A sinister growth of aggressiveness by imperialism is also traced in U.S. ef—
forts to [expand and improve its network of military bases and military
facilities, particularly those deployed around the USSR and the other socialist
countries [ds]/. Hashington is displaying feverish activity in the Near and
Middle East. Military bases are being built in Israel and Egypt, in Oman and
Saudi Arabia, while old bases on Bahrein, in Kenya and Somalia are being
renovated. In Africa and on the Arabian Peninsula the United States is build-
ing storage facilities for stockpiling tanks, artillery and other heavy
equipment designated for the "rapid deployment forces." The backbone of these
forces in the region would be U.S. troops to be stationed in the Sinai pur-
suant to a U.S.-lsraeli-Bgyptian deal calling for so-called "multinational
forces to maintain peace on the Sinai Peninsula." Under the pretext of
protecting U.S. ”vital interests" in the Mediterranean, large contingents of
U.S. troops have been concentrated here. And there are two U.S. carrier
groups virtually on permanent station in the Indian Ocean. Pakistan is
gradually being turned into the Pentagon's nain bridgehead in Southwestern
Asia.

The United States is essentially endeavoring to consolidate its military
presence throughout the world. At the present time the total nunber of U.S.
military bases and facilities exceeds 1500, situated on the territory of 32
countries. All these are bridgeheads for aggression, on which are concentrated

33

IKHlOFFNJAl.US£(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

more than half a million U.S. military personnel. From these bases U.S. im-
perialisa threatens the security of peoples.

The threat to peoples emanating from 0.8. military bases and facilities is
particularly great because the United States is furnishing the forces stationed
there not only with the most modern conventional weapons and combat equipment
but with nuclear weapons as well. For example. there are more than 7000
nuclear warheads at U.S. military bases in Western Europe; there are approx—
imately 1500 nuclear warheads in the Pacific zone, plus an additional more than
7000 on board the warships and tenders of the 0.8. Atlantic and Pacific fleets.

The danger is also heightened by the fact that 0.8. military bases are virtual-
ly beyond the control of local authorities. while the nuclear weapons deployed
there can be utilized without the knowledge or consent of these authorities.
This situation not only flouts the sovereignty of the nations in question but
also turns them into nuclear hostigea of the United States.

U.S. imperialism is undertaking intensive efforts to [expand focal areas of
tension and to ignite armed conflicts [ds]l. Washington is the inspiring force
behind and is also essentially a direct accomplice to escalation of aggressive
actions by Israel.” It is heating up the explosively dangerous situation in
the Near East, is guiding the expansionist policy of the Israeli aggressors,
and is giving them every possible support within the framework of so-called
"strategic cooperation." The scale of the threat with which the Near Eastern
focal area of tension is fraught goes far beyond the boundaries of this

region in connection with the fact that Israel possesses a nuclear potential,
which Washington claims to be an "uncontrolled element." This means that an
armed conflict in this region could escalate into a nuclear conflict.

The United States is interfering in the internal affairs of sovereign nations
in practically every part of the world. It is strongly engaged in equipping
the bands which are making incursions into the DEA. The South African racists
are engaged in brigandage with direct U.S. complicity. Intrigues by 0.8. im-
perialism in Latin America are continuing. Antipopular,tyranniea1 regimes are
being maintained by 0.5. money and weapons in El Salvador and Chile.
Washington is spending funds lavishly to step up the struggle against na-
tional liberation movements in this region. At the same time it is exerting
steadily increasing military pressure on socialist Cuba. Employing absolutely
groundless pretexts, the United States is escalating tension around the

Island of Freedom and is Outright threatening it with “punitive actions." The
United States is crudely meddling in the internal affairs of socialist Poland.

Recently the United States has been increasingly more extensively employing the
methods of international terrorism and has been undertaking attempts to revive
the "big stick" policy which has been rejected by peoples, only now in a
nuclear version. In conformity with this policy the 200,000—man "rapid
deployment forces" are being formed, and various combat equipment, including
nuclear weapons, are being prepositioned to "forward basing points" both in
Western Europe as well as in Asia and Africa. U.S. Government spokesmen make
no secret of the fact that the United States is preparing for the employment

of nuclear weapons in local wars.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lntensification of the aggressiveness of U.S. imperialism is manifested in the
most concentrated form in imperialism's [military-strategic conceptions [ds]/.
Clearly expressed in the "new nuclear strategy” proclaimed by Hashington is
the fact that the United States is counting primarily on a "preemptive," sneak
nuclear attack on the Soviet Union and the other nations of the socialist com-
munity. There is a great deal of talk across the ocean [i.e., in the United
States] about the permissibility of a so-celled "limited" nuclear war and

the possibility of winning such a war, "having in a state of readiness a
guaranteed destruction potential." They seek to instill in the population of
the Western countries the idea of the acceptability of employing nuclear
weapons and to dull the people's vigilance.

There can be no “limited" nuclear war. This, as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress, is an outright attempt to deceive peoples.
if U.S. imperialism unleashes a nuclear war, in Europe, for example, such a
war would at the very outset lead to irreplaceable losses and the most
disastrous consequences for the countries situated there and to the an-
nihilation of entire peoples and their civilization which has been in existence
for many centuries. In addition, it would inevitably and irreversibly as-
sume a worldwide character. This is why the calculations of those who hope

to ignite a nuclear fire and limit it to the territory of the European con—
tinent, while themselves remaining at a safe distance free the flame, to make
their allies the target of a devastating response strike, are both cynical and
illusory. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev emphasizes that "only a person who has
decided to commit suicide could initiate a nuclear war in the hopes of winning
it. No matter how much power the attacker possesses, no matter what mode

of initiating nuclear war he selects he will not achieve his objective.
Retaliation will inevitably follow."

In addition to elaboration of various versions of initiation and conduct of
nuclear war, Washington specifies the possibility of a "protracted conven-
tional war" in various parts of the world. Such a war, as the Pentagon
strategists e nVIisage it, by no means excludes the possibility of a nuclear
war. but on the contrary serves as a kind of supplement to it. Top U.S. mili-
tary officials have stated tine and again that the United States should be
prepared for the initiation and simultaneous conduct of large and so-ealled
"small" wars in various parts of the world. The Pentagon, for example, is
making plans for the conduct of a "small" war in the Persian Gulf region,
specifying the employment both of conventional and nuclear weapons.

The content, character and thrust of the aggressive ideas and actions of im-
perialism. particularly U.S. imperialism, show that imperialism, in pursuing
its global aims, is in fact undermining detente and aggravating tension and
confrontation. Fanciers of military adventures should not forget that the
Soviet Union has adequate resources and means at its disposal to defend its
vital interests against any and all encroachments. If it becomes necessary,
the Soviet people, as Comrade L. I. Brezhnev noted, "will find the capabiity
to undertake any additional efforts and to do everything necessary to ensure
reliable defense of their country."5

The Soviet Union proceeds from the position that the basis for strengthening
peace is retention of the already existing parity, gradual lessening of

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military confrontation, reduction of armed forces and arms, while guaranteeing
equal security to all parties. It is insanity to figure on victory in the
arms race, and even more soin a nuclear war. And it is a dangerous madness.
We do not seek military superiority over the Heat. we seek only reliable
security. And an approximate equality and parity is sufficient in order to
guarantee this security. This is the inalterable approach of the USSR to this
question. And the threadbare myth of a "Soviet military threat," which a1-
legedly is forcing the Heat to engage in an intensive effort to arm itself,

is utilized by imperialist propaganda as a smoke screen to conceal the
aggressive aspirations of the United States and NATO. This has been convincing-
ly demonstrated. for example, in a book entitled "Otkuda iskhodit ugrora mdru"
[whence Comes the Threat to Peace], published in this country at the beginning
of 1982. The myth of a "Soviet military threat" has been disseminated by
those who profit on the arms race, for massive ideological preparation for
aggression, in order to deceive the world community and to cool down the op-
position by world public opinion against the militarist plans of the United
States and NATO.

A high degree of vigilance toward the intrigues of the forces of international
reaction and aggression is particularly essential today. These forces pos-
sess powerful modern offensive weapons, enormous economic, scientific-tech-
nological and military potential, and considerable manpower and natural
resources. Their aggressive preparations and their wihﬂ military-strategic
ideas and plans present a genuine threat to world peace.

The Soviet Union and the other nations of the socialist community place in op-
position to this threat a policy of a firm and consistent struggle for peace
and the security of peoples, for social progress, and continuous readiness
effectively to repulse any aggression. They are doing everything possible to
ensure peaceful conditions for building a new society and reliably to defend
the achievements of socialism on earth. This is objectively in conformity with
the root interests both of the Soviet people, the peoples of other socialist
nations, and of all mankind.

2. The nationwide Character of Defense of the Socialist Homeland

Defense of the socialist homeland is of a genuinely nationwide character in its
content, goals and tasks. V. I. Lenin saw an inseparable link between defense
of the socialist state and the root, vital interests of the broad worker
masses as an inexhaustible source of the strength of the new system and the
might of the army of a new, socialist type. "Never," he stated, "will defeat
come to that people in which the majority of workers and peasants have
perceived, felt and seen that they are defending their own, Soviet rule -- rule
by the working people, that they are defending that cause the victory of which
will guarantee to them and their children the opportunity to enjoy all the
benefits of culture and all things created by man's labor."6

All the multifaceted activities of the Communist Party and the Soviet State
pertaining to guaranteeing the security of the USSR, its allies and friends are
constructed on the firm foundation of Leninist teaching on defense of the
socialist homeland. Guided by this teaching, the CPSU is innovatively develop-
ing it applicable to concrete historical conditions.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The nationwide character of defense of the socialist homeland is manifested es-
pecially fully in time of war, when the masses rise up to repulse aggression
and rout the enemy. The actions of combat troops on the battle front and
strenuous labor by working people on the home front to furnish the army with
everything it needs merge into a single mighty stream of struggle by the en-
tire people to achieve victory.

At the dawn of Soviet rule, in the incredibly complex and difficult conditions
of foreign military intervention and civil war, the worker class and the
broad masses of our country's working people, guided by the Bolshevik Party,
showed the most serious attitude, as V. I. Lenin noted, toward defense of the
Soviet Republic and unparalleled. truly great heroism. Assessing the results
of this struggle, Vladimir Il'ich stressed: "...He drew an unprecedently
large mass of people into a conscientious attitude toward the war and into ac-
tive assistance of the war effort.... This was the basic reason why we ul-
timately defeated a powerful adversary."7

The Great Patriotic Hat constituted the most vivid embodiment of the totally
national character of the defense of socialism. Our entire vast country
became transformed into a unified military camp ranked solidly behind the
Communist Party -— organizer and inspirer of the selfless struggle by the
Soviet people on the battle front and on the home front. Soviet servicemen,
receiving the undivided support of the people, courageously and skillfully
smashed the hated foe. Their staunchness, self-sacrifice and courage in-
fused new energy into those who were working wholeheartedly on the home front
for the war effort, providing the Armed Forces with everything they needed to
defeat the enemy. This was a patriotic feat unparalleled in history.

Our victories in wars against imperialist aggressors with their large armies,
furnished with weapons and combat equipment which were the latest hardware at
those times, demonstrated to the entire world the might and invincibility of
the socialist societal and governmental system and the indisputable advantages
of the socialist over the capitalist military organization. A world war
today, if imperialism succeeds in unleashing such a war, will be an incom-
parably more severe test of the army and people than ever before in the past,
and will be accompanied by an unprecedented exertion of all this country's
material and spritual resources. This demandsadvance and comprehensive
preparation of the socialist state and the entire people to repel aggression.

The Soviet people understand this well. For them there is nothing more dear
than freedom, independence and happiness for their native land. They are
devoting their labor, energy, and talents to the job of increasing its wealth
and fame. They view its defense as their own vital concern. Precisely for
this reason the defense might of the socialist nation is invincible.

v. i. Lenin's statement that it is impossible to wage a modern war against
imperialism without serious economic preparations is more valid today than
ever before.8 The Communist Party and the Soviet State, organizing and
guiding the productive activity of the toiler masses, concentrate their main
effort on economic development, the highest aim of which is to achieve a
steady improvement in the people's living standards. At the same time they

37

FOR‘OFFKJAI.USE!0NIN
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devote unabating attention to strengthening national defense and do everything
necessary to achieve full satisfaction of its requirements.

Successful accomplishment of defense tasks, which are constantly becoming more?
complex, is ensured by the powerful economic and scientific-technological poten-
tial which has been created in our country. Further developing and increasing
this potential, Soviet citizens are achieving through their selfless labor a
steady rise in living standards and a steady strengthening of the /material
foundational of this country's defense capability and Armed Forces combat

power.

Whatever area of building communism in which a Soviet citizen works, he con-
tributes his share toward strengthening the might of the homeland and in one
way or another participates in accomplishing the tasks connected with defense
of the socialist homeland. Worker and kolkhoz farmer, engineer and technician,
scientist and designer - each and every citizen of the Soviet Union sees his
own personal interests and destiny in inseparable unity with the interests

and destiny of the homeland. All defense measures of the party and state

rest on the unanimous support, on the inexhaustible initiative and productivity
of the Soviet people.

The totally popular character of defense of the socialist homeland also finds
expression in steady strengthening of the lsociopolitical foundational of the
nation's defense capability and Armed Forces combat power. This is a logical
result of the coalescence of the root interests and close cooperation on the
part of all classes and social groups, all our country's nationalities and
ethnic groups in a great cause -- the building of communism and defense of
the socialist homeland. The entire Soviet people -- a new historical com-
munity of people -- today comprise the social foundation of the army and navy.

Defense of the socialist homeland is defined by our Constitution as the

sacred duty of each and every citizen of the USSR. And Soviet citizens are
carrying out this duty with dignity and honor. In conformity with the USSR
law on Universal Military Service Obligation, they are serving in the ranks

of the Armed Forces, thus taking direct part in accomplishing the tasks of
defending the socialist homeland. The workers of this country's cities and
villages are actively participating in civil defense measures. The family, the
school, work forces, trade unions, and other public organizations are making
their contribution to the cause of defense of the socialist homeland.

Lenin Komsonol plays an enormous role in instilling excellent moral—political
qualities in Soviet youth and in Armed Forces personnel. Its role is par-
ticularly important since young people comprise three-fourths of Armed Forces
personnel. Under the guidance of Communists, Komsomol organizations par-
ticipate daily in indoctrination of politically active servicemen who possess
knowledge of military affairs, who are totally dedicated to the party and
people, and who are ready at all times to defend the Soviet homeland.

USSR DOSAAP performs considerable sass-defense work. More than one-third of
conscripts receive good training in its training organizations and study oc-
cupational specialties needed both for the Armed Forces and for the nation's

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
economy. DOSAAF is correctly called a preparatory classroom of that great
school of life which consists of service in the ranks of the Armed Forces.

Further deepening of the totally popular character of defense of the socialist
homeland is fostered by continuous strengthening of the [spiritual foundational
of this country's defense capability and the combat power of the Armed Forces.
Developed socialism ensures particularly favorable conditions for growth of

the ideological maturity, expansion of the political outlook, and improvement
in the overall level of culture and social activeness of Soviet citizens, in-
cluding army and navy personnel.

The Soviet society, as was noted at the 26th CPSU Congress, is a society of
people of labor. Productive labor of initiative is increasingly being
transformed into a primary necessity of lifefbr every Soviet citizen. Military
labor also provides wide opportunity for initiative. Our servicemen are work-
ing persistently to raise their ideological level, are mastering modern weapons
and combat equipment, are becoming physically conditioned, and seek to achieve
full and high-quality accomplishment of training schedules and curricula, as
well as all tasks which the party and people assign the Armed Forces.

The monolithic sociopolitical and ideological unity of the Soviet people gives
the Armed Forces invincible strength and constantly nourishes their unswerving
dedication to the party, to the homeland, and to the high ideals of communism.
An indissoluble community of interests, goals and ideals, a coalescence of
patriotic and internstionalist accomplishments of the workers of city and
village and fighting men of the army and navy serve as a guarantee of

further growth of the fighting strength and combat readiness of the Soviet
Armed Forces and a guarantee of reliable defense of the achievements of so-
cialism and peace.

3. CPSU Guidance - Basic Foundation of Soviet Military Organizational
Development

Concern by all the people for strengthening national defense, improving the
Armed Forces, and securing peaceful conditions for building communism is
expressed in the policy of the Communist Party and in its daily guidance of
military organizational development. The party elaborates military, including
military-technical, policy and military doctrine, guides the daily life and
activities of the army and navy, and directs the development of Soviet military
science and art of warfare, training and indoctrination of military cadres

and all personnel, and work aimed at increasing the combat readiness of the
Armed Forces, at development of their internationalist ties with the armies of
the brother socialist nations, and strengthening of the fighting alliance.

The party organizes and directs military organizational development in a close
unity and interlink with accomplishment of political, economic, social, and
ideological tasks. V. 1. Lenin pointed to the exceptional importance of this
interrelationship. He stressed that the organizational development of our
army was able to lead to successful results only because it was carried out in
a spirit of the overall building of a Soviet society.9

39

FOR:0FFKJA1.USIIONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The thesis of the party's leadership role in strengthening the nation's
defense capability. in development and improvement of the military organiza-
tion of the socialist society was formulated on the initiative of V. I. lenin
in a party Central Committee decree dated 25 December 1918. "...The policy of
the war ministry, just as that of all other government agencies and establish-
meats," the decree stated, "is conducted on the precise foundation of the
general directives issued by the part in the person of its Central Committee
and under its immediate supervision." 0 This thesis was formally stated in
the CPSU Program, where it was stressed that "Communist Party guidance of the
Armed Forces and strengthening of the role and influence of party organiza-
tions in the army and navy constitutes the fundamental basis of military or-
ganizational development."

Party guidance of military organizational development encompasses all areas in-
volving strengthening this country's defense capability and increasing the
combat readiness of the Armed Forces. [Elaboration of military policy/ is the
most important of these. This process is based on continuous, comprehensive
analysis, objective appraisal and correct consideration of the world military-
political situation, the specific features and trends of this country's socio-
economic development. V. I. Lenin pointed to the enormous importance of con-
crete analysis of a concrete situation.12

Soviet military policy is a component part of all policy of the party and
state. A high degree of policy effectiveness is achieved through unity of
political, economic, and military leadership. It is permeated by the ideas of
Leninist teaching on defense of the socialist homeland, by a spirit of
proletarian, socialist internationalism, and is inseparably linked with con—
sistent implementation by the CPS" of a peace-seeking course of policy in the
international arena. "Fidelity to the cause of peace and peaceful coexistence
with other countries," noted Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "is determined by the
very character of our society. Precisely for this reason there are no ad-
vocates of war, aggression and edventurism in policy in this country, nor will
there be such advocates."15

The just goals of our peace-seeking course of policy in the international arena
is also reflected in [Soviet military doctrine./ Its content covers the tasks
of defending socialist achievements, the peaceful labor of the Soviet people,
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the USSR, and the security of our
friends and allies. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev stated this with extreme clarity in
an interview for the magazine DER SPIEGEL. "The Soviet Union," he stressed,
"threatens nobody and has no intention of attacking anybody. Our military
doctrine is also of a defensive nature. It excludes preventive [preventivnyyel
wars and the concept of 'first strike' [pervogo udaral."1

Attempting to distort the essence of Soviet military doctrine, Western
politicians and strategists ascribe expansionist features to it. The
malevolence of such assertions is obvious. The thrust of military doctrine
depends entirely on the class nature of the state and its policies. Aggressive,
expansionist aims are alien to the Soviet socialist state. Its foreign policy
is a policy of peace, friendship and cooperation among peoples. The

defensive thrust of Soviet military doctrine also proceeds inalterahly from it.

40

INDI‘OFIICIAI.USEZ(NULY
The USSR always has been and remains an opponent of the concepts of the so-
called "first disa'ning strike" [pervogo obezoruzhivayushchego udara].
"limited" nuclear war, just as any other nuclear war, and similar concepts.
Our country's efforts are aimed at preventing both a first and any other
strike, at preventing nuclear war, at eliminating the very threat of occur-
rence of such a war.

Inaily organizational work/ occupies a most important place in Communist Party
activities pertaining to guiding military organizational development. It encom-
passes questions pertaining to development and strengthening of the material
and spiritual foundations of the defense capability of the Soviet State and in-
creasing the fighting power and combat readiness of its Armed Forces. The
CPSU directs the work of government agencies. public organizations and of-
ficinls connected with ensuring this country's security and strengthening its
defense capability. It guides the training. correct selection and placement of
command, political and engineer-technician cadres in the army and navy and
mobilizes all personnel for capable utilization of the material-technical
foundation of the Armed Forces and allocated resources in the interests of a
steady increase in combat readiness.

The party devotes constant attention to improving party-political work in the
army and navy and to comprehensive indoctrination of Soviet servicemen. It
demands of military cadres thorough study of the experience of the Great
Patriotic War and innovative assimilation of this experience. Further comr
prehensive development of cooperation in the area of defense with the brother
socialist countries is an object of unrelenting CPSU concern.

[The importance of party direction of military organizational development is
steadily increasing/ in present-day conditions. This is dictated by a number of
factors.

The primary point here is the [increasing complexity of tasks [dsll connected
with organizing defense of the socialist homeland in an era of nuclear and
other mass destruction weapons. "...The nature of modern weapons," em-
phasizes Comrade L. 1. Brezhnev, "has become such that if they are put into
play, the future of all mankind would be the stakes of the game."15 Never
before has the task of preventing war. restraining aggressors. and preserving
peace been so acute. And never before has the CPSU as ruling party had such
enormous responsibility for ensuring our country's security, for guaranteeing
conditions of peace for building communism, and for defense of the achievements
of socialism and peace.

Enhancement of the role of party direction of military organizational develop-
ment is also caused by [qualitative changes taking place in the status of the
Armed Forces and military affairs as a whole [ds]/. In conditions of rapid
development of science and technology, more and more new tasks are arising
which pertain to technical equipment of the army and navy, and consequently
to the development, manufacture, delivery and deployment of modern weapons.
This in turn demands elaboration of new forms and modes of military operations,
continuous improvement in the organizational structure of the Armed Forces and
the system of training, as well as development of military scientific thought.

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And the party, as the guiding and directing force of society, organizes accom-
plishment of these tasks, enlisting the requisite manpower and resources.

Enhancement of the role of party direction of military organizational develop-
ment has also been evoked by the increased significance of the /moral-political
factor [dsll in war. A contemporary war, especially a nuclear missile war, if
the imperialists unleash such a war, will radically alter the people's entire
tenor of life and will be accompanied by psychological stresses of unprecedented
magnitude. The enormous scope, ferocity and acuteness of military operations
will demand of Armed Forces personnel and of the entire people the greatest
physical and moral exertion. In these conditions the Communist Party, as
always, will constitute that cementing and mobilizing force which forms the
foundation of the unbending staunchness of the masses and their will to defeat
the aggressor decisively. By its consistent, purposeful ideological and
political indoctrination work, the party continuously forms in Soviet citizens
excellent moral-political qualiﬁes, tie willingness and capability to surmount
the isnense burdens and deprivation of war and fully to carry out their duty

to defend the socialist homeland.

The role of party direction of military organizational development is also in-
creasing as a consequence of broadening of the [internationalist tasks [dsll of
the Soviet State and its Armed Forces pertaining to defense of the achievements
of socialism. The magnitude of these tasks and the scale of work pertaining

to coordinating with the other nations of the socialist community joint eco-
nomic, political and military efforts have increased substantially and are con-
tinuing to grow. Increasing attention is demanded by questions connected with
elaboration of cosnon views on the character of today's war, the modes of its
conduct, on the organizational principles of armed forces organizational
development and improvement, and on the content, forms and methods of training
and indoctrinating personnel. A most important role in successfully resolving
all these and many other questions is played by our party's vast revolutionary
experience and great international prestige, as well as its consistent

Leninist internationalist position, which enjoys the approval and support of
all brother parties.

Exercising daily supervision of the process of strengthening this country's
defense, army and navy daily life and activities, the CPSU takes all these
factors into account and continuously improves its political, theoretical,

and organizational work. There is no element or area in military organiza-
tional development in which is not felt the constant beneficial influence of
the party, its Central Committee, the Central Committee Politburo, and CPSU
Central Committee General Secretary Hat su Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, chairman of
the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and chairman of the USSR Defense
Council. Lenin's ideas on defense of the socialist homeland receive further
innovative development and practical embodiment,and current problems of mili-
tary organizational development receive thorough and detailed elaboration in
his writings and speeches, in his exceptionally fruitful activities in the area
of leading the party and nation.

L. I. Brezhnev is making a large contribution toward development of teaching
on the leadership role of the Commuﬂst Party, including in the area of defense,

‘2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in conditions where genuine socialism has emerged beyond the framework of a
single country and a fundamentally new correlation of class forces has been
created in the world arena. "Experience indicates," emphasizes Comrade

L. I. Brezhnev. "that the victory of a socialist system in a given country

can in today's conditions be viewed as final a n d the restoration of
capitalism can be considered out of the question only if the Mist Party,
as the guiding force of society, firmly implements Harxiet-Leninist policy in
development of all the donaina of societal affairs; only if the party tireless-
ly strengthens national defense and defense of the country's revolutionary
achievensnts, if it retains and instills anong the people vigilance toward the
class enenry and inplacability toward bourgeois ideology; only if the principle
of socialist internationalism is faithfully observed and the unity and
fraternal solidarity with the other socialist comtries are strengthened."16

The outstanding victories of the Soviet Armed Forces over the enenies of the
socialist homeland and today's qualitative state of the army and navy graphical-
ly and persuasively confirm the decisive significance of CPSU guidance over
military organizational development. This wise guidance is a reliable guarantee
of the invincible defense night of the Soviet Union, a continuous high state of
Armed Forces fighting efficiency and conbat readiness.
FOOTNOTES

1. V. l. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Conplete Works], Vol 37, page 122.
2. Ibid., Vol 40, page 268; Vol lob, page 300.
3. PRAVDA, lo February 1982.
lo. PRAVDA. 21 October 1981.
5. PRAVDA. 3 November 1981.
6. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 38, page 315.
7. 1bid., Vol 52, page 160.
8. lbid., Vol 35, page 390.
9. Ibid., Vol 1'00, pp 76-77.
10. "KPSS o Vooruzhennykh Silakh Sovetskogo Soyuza: dokumenty 1917-1981"

[The CPSU on the Arned Forces of the Soviet Union: Documents. 1917-1981],

Moscow, 1981. page #2.

11. "Program Romnisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza" [Program of the
Conunist Party of the Soviet Union], Moscow, 1976. page 112.

12. Lenin, op. cit.. Vol 61, page 146.

(03

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘I’K’IAI. USP. ONLY

13. PMVDA. 20 Decenber 1981.
110. PRAVDA, 3 November 1981
15. PRAVDA, 26 June 1981.

16. L. I. Brezhnev. "Leninskin kurul" [Following a Leninist Course], Vol 2,
pp 329-330.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter Three. GUARDING PEACEFUL LABOR

1. Armed Porces of the Socialist State of All the People

Our Armed Forces have a glorious, truly heroic biography. It was created by
all the generations of defenders of the socialist homeland - from the led
Guard of 1917 to our servicemen of the 1980's. And to whatever page in this
biography we turn, each vividly attests to the steadfast dedication on the
part of Soviet fighting men to the people, the homeland, and to the great
cause of the party -- the cause of communism.

1n the unparalleled ordeals of the Civil War and the Great Patriotic War, in
selfless military labor in wartime and in time of peace, the Armed Forces have
honorably justified their mission which consists, to quote V. I. Lenin, in
"guarding the achievements of the revolution. our people's rule... the entire
new, truly democratic system against all enemies...."

In this lofty mission is to be found the root, fundamental difference between
the Soviet Armed Forces and the arnies of exploiter states, which are anti-
popular in their class essence and political function. The apologists of im-
perialism attempt to present bourgeois armies as supraclase agencies, which
allegedly stand "beyond politics“ and serve ”the entire nation." V. I. Lenin
called such claims vulgar. hypocritical, lying doctrine. This doctrine is
especially convenient for concealing the attempt on the part of the monopoly
bourgeoisie to use the army as its obedient instrument for achieving anti-
popular, aggressive aims.

In contrast to the bOurgeois army, which by virtue of its class nature and
function is separated from the people and is in opposition to the worker
masses, the armed forces of the socialist state are an integral part of the
people, sharing a common life. common concerns and interests. Their develop-
ment and improvement take place in a common channel with the development and
improvement of the entire system of socialist societal relations.

In the course of building a new society in our country, improving socialist
democracy and organization of the state, the Soviet Armed Forces were
transformed from an agency of a state of dictatorship of the proletariat into
an agency of a state of all the people. The need for the Soviet Armed Forces
is dictated by the existence of a military danger enanating from imperialist

£5

FOR‘OFFKJA1.USB‘0NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circles, while military might is directed exclusively toward defending against
aggressors the peaceful, productive labor of the Soviet people and the great
socialist achievements. Our Armed Forces are carrying out their great mission
shoulder to shoulder with the armies of the other nations of the socialist
community.

In conditions of a sharp aggravation of the international situation, the role
and responsibility of the Soviet Armed Forces for guaranteeing the security of
the USSR, our friends and allies, and preserving world peace are greater than
ever before. The increased aggressiveness of imperialism and increased mili-
tary preparations by the United States and NATO, directed against the USSR and
the other socialist countries, demand that the Soviet Armed Forces be main-
tained in a high state of combat readiness and that their technical

equipment, organizational structure, forms and methods of training, instruc—
tion and indoctrination of servicemen be improved.

The present stage of development of the Armed Forces is marked by a further im-
provement of qualitative indices in personnel mastery of weapons and combat
equipment, by a steady improvement in field, air and sea proficiency, and by
strengthening of organization and discipline. The combat teamwork of combined
units, units, and warships is improving.

Excellent sociopolitical features characteristic of the Soviet Armed Forces,
particularly Ifirm sociopolitical cohesionl, are expressed in the daily
practical activities and patriotic deeds of servicemen.

All Soviet servicemen -- from private to marshal -— are representatives of our
society's amicable classes and social groups. They are united by a community
of social-class interests, a scientific, materialist ideology. and Communist
morality. The beautiful word "comrade,” without which intercourse between
Soviet citizens wearing shoulderboards would be inconceivable, serves as an
embodiment of the fighting unity of the men of our Armed Forces. More than
90 percent of officers, warrant officers, noncommissioned officers, and en-
listed personnel are Communists or Romsomol members. All Soviet servicemen
see one another as loyal fighting comrades, performing shoulder to shoulder
the sacred duty of defending the socialist homeland.

The deepening process of development of a classless structure of our developed
socialist society gives particular firmness to military collectives. Logically
reflected in development of the Armed Forces, it fills military discipline with
vital force, ensures great effectiveness of the principle of one-man command,
and fosters achievement of coordination and unity of will and actions on the
part of all personnel in the interests of effective accomplishment of the

tasks facing the army and navy. The commander's order is perceived by sub-
ordinates as a command of the homeland. Precise and unquestioning execution

of an order is fully in conformity with the inner convictions of servicemen.

The solid sociopolitical unity of Soviet servicemen determines their con-
scientious attitude toward patriotic and internationalist duty and serves as
one of the inexaustible sources of selfless execution of any and all missions
on the battlefield, even the most difficult.

66

FIHI(Hﬂﬂ(JAl.USE(NVLY
Our Armed Forces are today. just as the party foresaw at its 8th Congress, "an

army [of all the people [it.]/ [obshchenarodnoy; also translates as "totally
popular" or "nationwide“] in the true sense of the word..."2 m is «posed in
their social-class and ethnic structure, in a vital, undivided unity with the
people. Performance by the Armed Forces of their assigned tasks pertaining to
defending the socialist homeland is an essential and important element of the
nationwide cause of building communism.

Direct participation by military personnel in the political, societal and
economic activities of the people is also assuming increasingly more diversi-
fied forms. Military personnel are elected to party and soviet bodies and
carry out their duties in a worthy manner. Representatives of the Armed
Forces are doing a fine job in public organisations and unions of creative
artists.

Considerable housing and large numbers of buildings used for social and cul-
tural-services facilities are erected by military construction workers. A num-
ber of important projects for the economy have been constructed with their
participation, and they have helped build thousands of kilometers of hard-
surface roads. Railway troops are involved in construction of a number of

rail lines and are working in the eastern section of the Baikal-Amer Hainline.
Soviet military personnel make an active contribution toward harvesting our
nation's crops and performing other tasks for the nation's economy.

They play an important role in our country's sports activities. Just in the
most recent winter and summer Olympics, army and navy athletes, competing as
members of USSR national teams, have won #5 gold, 47 silver. and 29 bronze
medals.

Diversified patron relationships between work forces and military units con-
stitute stirring evidence of the close unity between people and army. Hutual
visits, performing arts get-togethers, reports on labor achievements and ful-
fillment of socialist pledges, joint recreation evenings, exchange of

amateur talent concerts, plus other measures have firmly become a part of
their daily practical activities.

Maneuvers and exercises conducted in the Armed Forces become vivid demonstra-
tions of the close unity between the people and the army. The "2apad-8l"
[West-81] exercise, for example, was accompanied by numerous manifestations of
affection and respect on the part of Soviet workers toward their armed
defenders. Everywhere the troops and naval forces performed. the public
greeted them with great cordiality and warmth and surrounded them with concern
and attention.

Such an outstanding feature of the Soviet Armed Forces as the [fraternal
friendship among servicemen of different nationalities] is also becoming in-
creasingly more conspicuous in conditions of developed socialism. The sons

uf all Soviet brother peoples are living, serving, and carrying out responsible
tasks pertaining to defense of the socialist homeland side by side in army and
navy units. "Our army," stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "is also a special army
in the sense that it is a school of internationalism, a school of indoctrination

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oI feelings of brotherhood, solidarity and mutual respect of all nationalities
and ethnic groups in the Soviet Union. Our Armed Forces are a united, har-
monious family, living embodiment of socialist internationalism."3

:hrongpatriotic feelings are characteristic of army and navy personnel, just as
they are of all Soviet citizens —- feelings of general national pride, which
impel them sacredly to preserve the honor and dignity of the armed defender of
the socialist homeland and irreproachably to carry out their military duty.

[Communist ideological content, political maturity, and discipline on the part
of servicemen] -- qualities which comprise one of the most important traits of
the Armed Forces -- are being manifested increasingly more fully. It reflects
the ideological~political conviction, moral strength and spiritual wealth of
the Soviet people. Its sources lie in the socialist societal system, in
Marxist-Leninist ideology and CPSU policy, and in our Soviet way of life.

The Soviet serviceman is indoctrinated by the party in lofty revolutionary
ideals and in the traditions of selfless and wholehearted service to the social-
ist homeland, patriotism and internationalism. Our country's working people,
the peoples of the brother socialist countries, and all honest people throughout
the world see in him a person with a high sense of duty and outstanding moral
qualities. The Soviet servicemen possesses a broad political outlook, profes-
sional skill, an unbending will to beat the enemy in combat, a high degree of
organization and discipline, and an initiative-filled, innovative approach to
carrying out his assigned tasks. Commons: moral fiber, genuine humanism,
selflessness and courage, and willingness to accomplish deeds for the sake of
the homeland are united in his countenance.

Describing today's servicemen at the 26th CPSU Congress, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
noted: "Today the sons and grandsons of the heroes of the Great Patriotic War
stand in the ranks of defenders of the homeland. They have not experienced

the harsh ordeals which fell to the lot of their fathers and grandfathers, but
they are faithful to the heroic traditions of our army and our people. And
whenever the interests of national security and the defense of peace demand it.
when it is necessary to help victims of aggression, the Soviet servicemen ap-
pears before the world as a selfless and courageous patriot and interns-
iionalist, prepared to surmount any and all difficulties."4

implementation of the party's policy line directed toward comprehensive,
harmonious development of the individual Soviet citizen and a steady improve-
ment in the people's living standards and cultural level also has the most
beneficial effect on the Armed Forces. The high overall level of preparation
of the young people who enter the army and navy enahkm them quickly to master
the complex weapons and combat equipment, to learn the "secrets" of military
expertise, to grow intellectually and to develop physically.

The importance of the /beneficial indoctrinational role of the Soviet Armed
Forces] is increasing in present-day conditions. This role is a distinctive
feature precisely of a socialist army, which serves the people, the ideas of
lreedom. justice and humanism, and defends the interests of the working
people, the cause of peace and social progress. This also defines the content
and thrust of all personnel training. Our Armed Forces are deservedly called

48

FOR‘0FFNJAI.USE13NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a school of political, combat and moral indoctrination, a school of courage,
industriousness, collectivism, organization, and discipline.

The Communist Party and Soviet people highly value the indoctrinational role of
the Armed Forces. Comrade L. I. Brezhnev has spoken of it repeatedly with
great warmth. Such an appraisal places great responsibility on commanders,
staffs and political agencies, army and navy party and Romsomol organizations,
and on all Soviet servicemen. They are called upon tirelessly to be concerned
with further increasing the indoctrinational role of the Soviet Armed Forces.
This demand proceeds directly from the CPSU Central Committee decree entitled
"0n Further improvement of Ideological and Political Indoctrination Work" and
from the proceedings and decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

The necessity and importance of a steady increase in the indoctrinational

role of the Armed Forces are dictated by many objective and subjective factors,
and particularly by the increase in complexity of the tasks performed by the
army and navy and the increased demands on their combat readiness.

The significance of the indoctrinational effect of military service is deter-
mined by the fact that it comprises an important stage in the life of practical-
ly every one of our young men. This stage coincides with the period of

the most intensive forming of the individual, one's civic and social develop—
ment. And how many noncommissioned officers and enlisted personnel, upon being
discharged into the reserves, retain for their entire lives the fine quali-
ties acquired in the army and navy and invariably remember with gratitude the
school of military service!

A great dealof expaiame haindoctrination work has been amassed in the Armed
Forces. It indicates that an essential condition for success in this work is
thoughtful and profound analysis and consideration of new phenomena and
processes taking place in military affairs and changes in the technical equip-
ment or troops and naval forces, in personnel, in the content and character of
military labor. Strengthening of the material foundation, improvement of the
training and indoctrination process, and increased skill and pedagogic expertise
on the part of commaLd, political and engineer-technician personnel make it pos-
sible continuously to improve the forms and methods of ideological and

political indoctrination work. It is important skillfully to utilise the in-
doctrinational possibilities of drills and exercises, flight operations and
naval cruises, missile launchings, and alert duty. All these combat training
activities produce the greatest results if they take place in a situation
maximally approximating actual combat. One must always bear in mind the well-
knuwn truth that it is impossible to teach without indoctrinating, just as it

is impossible to indoctrinate without teaching.

of course the indoctrinational role of the Armed Forces is carried out not only
within the framework of military service. The army and navy exert considerable
forming and shaping influence on the younger generation and on preinduction
youth. They make a substantial contribution toward the military-patriotic in-
doctrination of Our country‘s entire population. Military personnel take ac~
tivc part in publicizing heroic fighting traditions, in instilling in working
people pride in the glorious past of our socialist homeland and the Soviet

59

FOR 0FFKJAI.USE(NNLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Armed Forces. and in turning a high degree of vigilance toward the hurluuvs
ol the imperialist aggressors. Commanders, political agencies, army and navy
party and Komsomol organizations greatly assist local party and soviet agencies,
Komaomol committees, and DOSAAF organizations in preparing for and holding All-
Union "Zarnitsa" [Summer Lightning] and "Orlenok" [Eaglet] military sports
games, in youth excursions to sites of revolutionary, combat and labor glory

of the Soviet people, and in the activities of the mass network of technical,
marksmanship and other study groups and sections.

of course we have not examined here all the sociopolitical features of the
Soviet Armed Forces, but only those in which are most clearly revealed their
historic function, socialist nature, and totally popular character.

The entire life. work and aspirations of army and navy personnel are in-
separable from the life and activities, the thoughts and goals of the entire
Soviet people. Strong by their fighting revolutionary spirit. unwavering Com-
munist conviction, and close solidarity behind the party. they are selflessly
and dedicatedly carrying out their sacred duty to the homeland.

2. Apace Hith Scientific and Technological Advances

V. l. Lenin viewed interlinked strengthening of the material and spiritual
aspects of the socialist military organizations to be an essential condition
for ensuring reliable national defense and a high degree of Armed Forces fight-
lng strength and combat readiness. "The very finest army and people who are
the most dedicated to the cause of the revolution," stated Vladimir ll'ich,
"will be immediately annihilated by the enemy if they are inadequately armed,
supplied with provisions, and trained."5

The character of military operations, the scale, modes and forms of battles
and operations and, in the final analysis, success in accomplishing the mis-
sions facing the Armed Forces are determined to an enormous degree by the
weapons and combat equipment they possess, by how well provided they are in a
material-technical respect. Aware of this fact, the Communist Party and the
Soviet people, carrying out Lenin's behests, are tirelessly concerned to en-
sure that our army and navy develop space with modern scientific and tech-
nological advances. Unquestionably implementation of the economic plans
specified at the 26th CPSU Congress will also foster improved technical equip-
ment of the Armed Forces.

He fee] that it is of fundamental importance to emphasize in this connection
the following circumstance. The class essence and the goals of utilization of
scientific and technological advances in military organizational development
proceed from the socioeconomic system of the state and its policy. They are
diametrically opposite in socialist and imperialist countries.

Inherent in imperialism is a tendency toward a steady growth in the influence
of the military-industrial complex and stepped-up militarization of all
aspects of life and activities in the bourgeois society -- the domestic and
foreign policy of the ruling class, bourgeois ideology, science, and culture.
The finest achievements of man's genius are subordinated in imperialist

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nations to the antipopular interests of the monopolies, which are endeavoring
to preserve capitalism at all costs and, consequently, to retain the capability
to exploit the working people within their own country and the peoples of other
countries. The imperialists view military force as the main instrument for
securing these interests. while relying on military force, they also pursue a
policy of dictate, oppression, and unceremonious interference in the affairs

of other nations and peoples. The arms race, which is being escalated by im-
perialism, promotes an increase in this military force. The monopolies in-
crease their profits by constantly manufacturing new weapons. In order that

these profits not decline, they do everything they can to escalate interna-
tional tension.

in the capitalist countries, particularly the United States, militarism almost
totally dominates science. The latest advances in science and technology are
invariably turned against the working people, against the cause of peace and
social progress.

Socialism, a new societal system, placed scientific and technological
achievements in the service of the people for the first time in history. In
the military it utilizes these advances in the interests of preventing unjust,
predatory wars, in the aim of restraining aggressors. In the Soviet Union and
the other nations of the socialist community there are no classes, social
strata and groups interested in war. Socialism by its very nature is devoted
to peace and places the working man and constant concern for his welfare and
happiness at the focal point of all the affairs of society.

Our dedication to the cause of peace is consistent and unwavering. It not only
does not exclude but on the contrary presupposes a most attentive attitude
toward national defense. We are strengthening our defense might precisely in
order to ensure peaceful conditions for building communism. The character of
development of events in the world arena, the specific features and trends in
the international military-political situation are comprehensively taken into
account thereby. In present—day conditions, when the aggressive preparations
or imperialism have become sharply intensified and calculations of achieving
military technological superiority over the USSR are becoming increasingly more
clearly evident in U.S. strategic plans. we are compelled toxmdnudn the level
of equipment of our Armed Forces adequate to ensure that they cannot achieve
superiority over us.

Proceeding from a profound and realistic analysis of the international situa-
tion and taking into account the state and development prospects of military
affairs. the Communist Party, on the basis of the socioeconomic and scientific-
technical achievements and capabilities of the Soviet society, is elaborating
and implementing a policy of technical equipment of the army and navy which
ensures practical and balanced development of all types of weapons. Emphasis
is placed on those weapons which play a determining role in increasing the
readiness of the Armed Forces to repel potential aggression. The CPSU guides
the activities of scientific organizations and industry and concentrates
their efforts on the most promising problems, solution of which, simultaneously
with accomplishment of pressing economic tasks, promotes strengthening of
national defense.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Union possesses experienced scientific cadres and an elaborate net-
work of scientific research establishments in all branches of knowledge. Our
industry is capable of turning out the most complex products, including all
types of the most advanced weapons. Possessing great capabilities to develop
and manufacture modern military equipment, the USSR is compelled to take
necessary measures to guarantee its own security and that of its allies in the
face of a buildup of military potential by the United States and its NATO
partners. It would not, however, like to enter competition in this area with
anybody. Our position on this matter has been clarified repeatedly in
documents of the Communist Party and Soviet Government, in the writings and
speeches of CPSU Central Committee General Secretary Comrade L. I. Brezhnev,
chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet. "We are not attracted
to the idea of peace based on mutual deterrence [ustrashenii]," stated Comrade
L. 1. Brezhnev. "He prefer a peace whereby arms levels become smaller and

smaller6 while the scope and quality of cooperation in all areas grow and im-
prove."

U.S. imperialist circles are counting primarily [on strategic nuclear weapons]
in their attempts to achieve military technological superiority over us. When
the United States had a monopoly on nuclear arms, they were counting on utiliz-
ing them to blackmail peoples and nations, to maintain an "order" in the world
to the liking of Washington, and to "hurl back" socialism.

The Soviet Union was faced with the necessity of bringing this extremely
dangerous U.S. monopoly to an end as quickly as possible. He too developed
nuclear weapons. As history has shown, this was a correct, farsighted step.
Nuclear weapons became a mighty shield which provided security for the USSR,
its national interests, and the interests of the brother socialist nations.

At the same time it dampened the ardor of the imperialist warmongers who, fol-
lowing the barbaric bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. time and
again threatened the world with the atomic bomb. If there had been no such
weapon in our arsenal, it is possible that aggressive imperialist circles would
have long ago plunged the world into the abyss of nuclear war.

We have never sought and do not now seek superiority in nuclear weapons; we
consistently advocate limitation and the total banning of such weapons. Only
extraordinary circumstances -- outright nuclear aggression against the Soviet
State or its allies -- could force us to resort to a response nuclear strike as
an extreme means of self-defense.

Endeavoring to prevent another war, we are doing everything possible to prevent
aggressive imperialist circles from achieving superiority over the USSR in
/conventional weaponry] as well. The performance characteristics of our tanks,
artillery systeas,mortars, fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft, warships, other
weapons and combat equipment are improving. Their capabilities are increasing,
as are their power, range and accuracy, maneuverability, reliability and
survivability. Fire control and control of maneuver are becoming automated.
All this increases weapon efficiency and reliability of hitting ground, air,
and sea targets.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The present level of science and technology makes it possible to resolve
problems of further qualitative improvement of weapons. But employment,
servicing and maintenance of new weapons are considerably more complicated,

and they impose greater demands on personnel training. They are also leading
to substantial organizational changes in troops and naval forces. Therefore

a statement by V. I. Lenin rings particularly true today, that "it is impos-
sible to build a modern army without science...."7 And while our science as a
whole is increasingly becoming a direct productive force, [Soviet military sci-

ence/ is more and more becoming one of the major factors in improving the Armed
Forces.

There is no doubt whatsoever that no matter how complex a contemporary war may
be, no matter how dynamic, diversified, and sometimes conflictive the course of
such a war, the development of military actions is determined in the final
analysis by objective [ob"yektivnym1] laws. Soviet military science is work-
ing on studying these laws and seeking ways to utilize them in a skillful
manner. The correctness of its fundamental theses and its indisputable
superiority over bourgeois military science are convincingly confirmed by the
entire heroic history of our Armed Forces.

Marxism-Leninism constitutes a solid ideological-theoretical and methodological
foundation of Saviet military science. It provides a correct understanding

of the essence, character and features of wars and military organizational
development [voyennogo stroitel'stva], problems of preparing for and conducting
combat operations, and serves as an accurate compass in solving other

pressing problemscf military affairs and in determining the main directions of
further development of our military theory and practice. Comrade L. I Brezhnev
is making a large contribution to Soviet military science.

The 26th CPSU Congress gave a new creative impulse to Soviet military science.
Guided by its decisions, our cadres are developing military science in con-
formity with the demands of strengthening national defense and improving the
Armed Forces, and with their practical tasks. They concentrate main attention
on thorough cognition of the essence of the most important and significant
phenomena in the military domain and on broad scientific synthesis and in-
novative utilization of our vast combat experience.

Much has been accomplished here, but still more remains to be done. The in-
creasing complexity of the processes taking place both in societal development
as a whole and in military affairs demands of Soviet military science in-
creasingly deeper penetration into the character and features of conteﬂpory
war. elucidation of the mechanism of manifestation of its laws, continuous and
comprehensive analysis of the mechanisms and trends of arms development and
modes or conduct of military operations. The importance of prompt elaboration
"r scientifically substantiated ways of accomplishing strategic, operational
and tactical missions is increasing, as is the importance of thorough

analysis and synthesis of advanced know—how and shortening the time required
for adopting it into the practical activities of combat and operational train-
lng of troops and naval forces.

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The essence of the processes taking place in military affairs cannot be com-
prehended without a thorough study of the experience of past wars. Without
this it is also impossible correctly to predict the future and to elucidate the
specific features of a war with the employment not only of existing but also
of future military equipment. It is no less important continuously to study

the development of military affairs abroad and to analyze changes taking place
in the armies of the imperialist nations.

Practical realities demand a steady strengthening, persistent development and
deepening of the interrelationship between military science and the social,
natural and technical sciences. Military science should constantly be en-
riched with the most effective methods of investigation and advances made in
other sciences. Still one of its most important tasks is the search for ways
and means of increasing the fighting strength and combat readiness of the

armed forces as an essential condition for reliable defense of the socialist
homeland.

The Lcninist thesis that the viewpoint of practical realities should be the
first and principal point of view of the theory of knowledge is widely known.
Genuine science is based only on objective data, fortified by precise ex-
periment, by practical realities, on rigorous practical testing of scientific
conclusions. Subjectivism, conceit, and complacency are alien to it.

Purposeful utilization of scientific and technological advances also greatly
influences [Soviet art of warfare [voyennoye iskusstvoll. An increase in the
spatial scope of battles and operations and their more highly dynamic nature
place on the agenda the necessity of elaborating and mastering new modes of
conduct of military operations which correspond to the contemporary level of
arms development. Accomplishment of this task is becoming no less important
than the development and manufacture of new weapons and combat equipment,
furnishing them to the troops and naval forces, and mastery of this hardware
by personnel.

Art of warfare corresponds to its purpose only when it reflects the combat
capabiiities of troops and naval forces. Their training in turn shOuld meet
the demands of the art of warfare, its theses and conclusions. Success is
ensured by a unity of theory and practice. In the final analysis it is
precisely this which determines Armed Forces organizational development and
t raining.

Development of the art of warfare constitutes a continuous and complex process,
encompassing all its parts -- strategy, operational art, and tactics. The
scOpe of [strategy [dsll is increasing,and the content of its tasks is
becoming more complex. Weapons have become more powerful, and there has been
an increase in the role of strategic leadership [atrategicheakogo rukovodstva]
in A rmced Forces training and control. The framework of operational art
loperativnogo iskusstva] is expanding. New principles of conduct of combat
operations, connected with improvement of military equipment, are advancing to
the forefront in operational art. Substantial qualitative changes are also
taking place in [tactics [ds]/. New weapons are making it possible to achieve
reliable delivery of fire on the enemy, permit continuity of attack, the

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
element of surprise and swiftness of attack. continuous combination of fire
and maneuver, and a high degree of stability and aggressiveness of defense.

Ali component parts of the art of warfare are in a dialectical unity. Their
interlinked development is an indispensable condition for successfully ac-

complishing the diversified and complex tasks of Armed Forces organizational
development and training.

In our Armed Forces development of military science and the art of warfare is
the business not only of top-echelon army and navy personnel and military sci-
entists. At practically all levels of the army and navy organism,offieers
are displaying growing interest in military theoretical knowledge and sci-
entific methods of investigation, and are conducting an innovative search for
the most effective forms and methods of mastering modern weapons, maximum
utilization of their capabilities, and optimal modes of conduct of combat
operations. Further improvement in the performance results of this work is
promoted by a rise in the level of military-theoretical and professional-
tcchnirai training of officer cadres and all personnel. In an organic com-
bination with the continuous improvement of technical equipment of the army
and navy, it helps steadily increase the combat readiness of the Armed Forces
and strengthen this country's defense capability.

3. Shoulder to Shoulder Hith the Brother Armies

The USSR Armed Forces are performing their great historic mission to defend
the achievements of socialism, the cause of peace and social progress together
with the armies of the other nations of the socialist community. A socio-
political trait which has been characteristic of our Armed Forces from the
very first days of their existence -- Iconsistent intermndonalism [posledovstel'-
nyy internatsionalizmll -- is manifested persuasively and vividly in daily
training and performance of duty, and in joint accomplishment of missions per-
taining to guaranteeing the security of the brother peoples and countries. It
is given particular force by the fact that it is organically merged with ardent
Soviet Intriotism. wherever a Soviet serviceman may be stationed beyond the
borders of the homeland, wherever he may be called upon to perform his duty -
in a group of forces temporarily stationed on the territory of a brother na-
tion. on board a warship crossing the expanses of the World Ocean and paying
friendly visits to foreign ports ~- in all places and at all times he is

aware that he is a representative of the Land of Soviets, and he carries high
the honor and dignity of a citizen of the USSR.

The Harsaw Pact Organization has for more than a quarter of a century now
served as an embodiment of proletarian, socialist internationalism in action.
Embodied in this organization and receiving further development are Leniniat
ideas about the objective necessity of a close economic, political and military
alliance of the socialist countries and on mandatory consolidation of their
economic, sociopolitical and military capabilities in order to achieve

reliable collective defense of the revolutionary achievements of working
people.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he Harsaw Pact Organization differs radically in goals, tasks and character
from imperialist blocs, which are intended for aggressive, predatory wars,
for the struggle against socialism, against national liberation movementS.
against peace and social progress. The Harsaw Pact Organization is specifical-
ly a defense organization established to protect socialist achievements from
the aggressive encroachments of imperialism. Characteristic of the military
blocs of imperialist nations, particularly NATO, are an unequal position of
the members, domination of the strong over the weak, and an endeavor by cer-
tain nations to secure their own selfish interests at the expense of others.
Fundamental in the Warsaw Pact is the principle of sovereignty of the member
nations. This is clearly expressed both in the structure of the Harsaw Pact
Organization and in the composition, authorities and procedure of actions by
its main political body -- the Political Consultative Coumdttee.

Being a voluntary military-political alliance of free and equal nations, the
Harsaw Pact reliably guarantees their sovereignty and security. This is why
all the brother parties and peoples view its strengthening and development as
a vital necessity, as their internationalist duty. Carrying out this duty
consistently and unswervingly, the socialist nations bear in mind the fact
that imperialism is continuously increasing the might of its military machine.
They must take cognizance of the radical changes which have taken place in
the character of modern war and the fact that the imperialist aggressors are
counting on delivering a sneak attack.

Opposing the aggressive preparations of imperialism with a high degree of
vigilance and constant readiness to repel an attack, the Warsaw Pact countries
maintain at the requisite level the combat power of the Joint Armed Forces.
This power is based on the economic and spiritual potential of the socialist
community and serves as an insurmountable barrier in the path of implementa-
tion of the aggressive plans of imperialism, which carry a threat to world
peace.

The goals of military—political cooperation by the brother countries within
the framework of the Warsaw Pact are noble. "We established this alliance,"
stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "primarily for the purpose of opposing the
threat of imperialism and the aggressive military blocs it has established,

in order to defend the cause of socialism and peace through common efforts."8
The 26th CPSU Congress highly praised the activities of the Warsaw Pact 0r—
ganization, stressing that the military-political defensive alliance of so-
cialist countries is faithfully serving the cause of peace and possesses
everything necessary in order reliably to defend the socialist achievements of
pvuplcs.

The Harsaw Pact Organization is based on /a commonality of economic and
sociopolitical system, ideology and morality, the root interests and goals
ol the brother socialist nations./ The brother Communist and worker parties
comprise the heart of their indissoluble alliance, figuratively speaking its
living soul, its organizing, guiding and directing force. They direct the
constructive activities of peoples building a new society and are tirelessly
concerned with strengthening the defense might of the socialist countries
and developing cooperation and combat teamwork among the brother armies.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The Hinisters of Defense Comittee does a big job of ensuring harmonious
organizational development of the Joint Armed Forces. An important role in
this organizational development is played by the Joint Command, Staff and
Technical Comittee of the Joint Armed Forces. 'i‘hey implement the coordinated
decisions of the Political Consultative Committee, guide the activities of

the Joint Armed Forces, elaborate and carry out concrete measures to increate
the fighting proficiency and combat readiness, to strengthen the friendship
and improve the interaction of the allied armies. The activities of these
bodies increase the effectiveness of the joint efforts of the socialist na-
tions to guarantee their collective security.

[Cooperation among the armed forces of the Harsav Pact member nations is
constantly developing in various areas.l One of these includes [coordination
of armed forces development plans [ds]/, and particularly limplementation of a
uniform military-technical policy (dsll, as vell as [execution of coordinated
measures in the area of improving combat readiness [ds]/.

The allied amiss generously share with one another all they have that is new
and actively participate in weapon development and standardization. Manufac-
ture of weapons and combat equipment is also organized in conformity with this,
which makes it possible to concentrate efforts on the main thing and to save
considerable material and financial resources. An increasingly larger role is
being played by international socialist division of labor, specialization and
co-production in the defense industry, coordination of scientific research and
experimental design activities in the military domain.

Another area encompasses [joint measures pertaining to combat, political and
operational training and mutual exchange of experience in personnel training
and indoctrination ldsll. The brother armies hold joint operational-
strategic and operational-tactical exercises. At these exercises they work
on questions pertaining to training comanders, staffs and all personnel, im—
prove form and methods of control, combat teamwork of troops and naval
forces, modes of combat and combat service support. strengthen relationships
of comradeship and friendship, and build on traditions of combat brotherhood.
Joint exercises demonstrate the unity and cohesion of the allied armies and
the high level of field, air and sea proficiency of personnel. They serve as
a genuine school of patriotic and internationalist indoctrination of servicemen.

An important role in assimilation in the Joint Armed Forces of advanced know-
huu in training troops and naval forces, instruction and indoctrination of per-
sonnel is played by joint courses of instruction, conferences, and other
measures. Coordinated military scientific work is done in a planned manner,
detailed research is conducted on current problems of military affairs, and the
most effective forms and methods of employment of forces and weapons are sought.

Primary attention in the development of military science and art of warfare

is focused on elaboration of uniform views on the character and modes of combat
operations of allied troops and fleets. With each passing year there is an
increase in the contribution to military science by all the armies of the "area:
Pact member nations. The brother amiss innovatively utilize the conclusions

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Soviet military science and art of warfare, the wealth of combat experience
of the USSR Armed Forces. and their experience in combat and political training,
instruction and indoctrination of personnel.

[Mutual assistance in training highly skilled officer cadres [ds]/ also helps
strengthen the fighting alliance of brother armies. Successful accomplishment
of this task is promoted by extensive utilization of the highly developed
training facilities of the Soviet Armed Forces and their substantial amassed
experience in training and indoctrinating officers. The other allied armies
also have much valuable experience in training military cadres. All this makes
it possible steadily to improve the system of training officer personnel of the
Warsaw Pact member nation armies, helps deepen their cooperation and increase
the combat power of the Joint Armed Forces.

[Cooperation among the political agencies of the allied armies [ds]/ is constant-
ly developing. They share their experience in party-political work, patriotic
and internationalist indoctrination of personnel. Their activities are con-
structed on the basis of guidelines of the Communist and worker parties of

the nations of the socialist community, taking into account both common interna-
tional missions and the national features and traditions of each army. Cul-
tural and sports contacts among the brother armed forces are deepening.

Vigorous, continuous work is being conducted in all these and other areas of
cooperation. They all are more closely uniting the servicemen of the brother
armies and prompt them to devote all their resources and energy to military
labor aimed at ensuring peaceful conditions for building a new society and
the reliable security of each of the allied countries and the entire socialist
community.

Unswerving dedication to the ideals of proletarian, socialist internationalism
increases the moral-political potential of the Warsaw Pact Joint Armed Forces
and increases the effectiveness of this defense organization not only as a
reliable guarantor of the achievements of socialism but also as an instrument
of peace and international security.

The Soviet Union and the other Warsaw Pact nations selflessly assist liberated
countries which have taken the road of progressive development in defending
their territorial integrity, independence, and sovereignty. lmperialist
propaganda seeks to distort the profoundly just nature of such assistance.

In spite of their malicious lies, however, millions upon millions of people in
various parts of the world are seeing increasingly more clearly that assistance
by the socialist countrieahas a progressive thrust, promotes the ideas of
freedom and security of peoples, and is in conformity with the genuine in-
terests of all mankind.

increasingly broader segments of the international community, for example,

are becoming convinced that the Afghan working people are receiving with
gratitude the support of the Soviet Union. This support is coming from true
friends. It is dictated by faithfulness to treaty obligations, is a response

to a request by the government and friendly people of Afghanistan, and serves

as an expression of the sincere sentiments of Soviet citizens and their selfless
performance of their lofty,noble duty as internationalists.

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Soviet servicemen who have had the honor to carry out the mission, as members
of the limited contingent of Soviet troops, to give internationalist assistance
to the Afghan people, are through their daily deeds building upon the outstand-
ing traditions of patriotism and internationalism of the USSR Armed Forces.
These traditions are our wealth and a weapon which does not become obsolete.

It is passed on like a relay baton from generation to generation and is doing
a fine job of serving the cause of defending the revolutionary achievements of
the working people. This weapon continues to be in faithful hands today, when
the intrigues of imperialist and other reactionary forces place us before the

necessity of keeping our powder dry and tirelessly concerning ourselves with
strengthening joint defense.

Attempts by aggressive imperialist circles and the accomplices of imperialism

to do detriment to the position of genuine socialism and the national

liberation movement are doomed to failure. The Soviet Union and the socialist
community as a whole possess everything they need to restrain any aggressor.
They are devoting unabating attention to strengthening the Warsaw Pact Organiza-
tion, development and deepening of the close cooperation among the brother
socialist armies.

Wholeheartedly dedicated to their people, party, and the cause of communism,
the Soviet Armed Forces are marching shoulder to shoulder with the brother
armies, reliably defending the revolutionary achievements of the working
people, the security of peoples, and world peace.
FOOTNOTES

1. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 35, page 216.
2. “KP88 v rezolyutsiyakh i resheniyakh s"yezdov, konferentaiy, i plenumov TsK“

[The CPSU in Resolutions and Decisions of Congresses, Conferences, and

Central Committee Plenums], Moscow, 1970, Vol 2, page 69.

3. L. l. Brezhnev, "Leninskim kursom: rechi l stat'i" [Following a Leninist
Course: Speeches and Articles]. Moscow. 1974. Vol 4, page 61.

a. "Haterialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 66.

5. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 35, page 408.
6. PRAVDA, 23 Hay 1981.
7. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 40, page 183.

8. Brezhnev, op. cit., Vol 4, page 68.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()I-‘FK’IAL USE ONLY

Chapter Four. SUMMIT OF MILITARY SKILL

l. Toward New Heights of Combat Readiness

Our Armed Forces possess great combat potential. As Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
stated, it represents a solid fusion of a high degree of technical equipment,
military expertise, and indomitable morale. The capability of the army and
navy to realize this potential swiftly and to the fullest degree in order to
repel potential aggression is reflected in their continuous high state of
combat readiness, which is determined first and foremost by the quality of
field, sea and air proficiency of personnel, by the degree of their mastery
of weapons and combat equipment, by the level of moral-political conditioning,
discipline and organization of troops and naval forces, and by skill in their
control and management. In the final analysis combat readiness is, as Comrade
L. l. Brezhnev stressed, "the summit of troop combat skill in peacetime and
the key to victory in war."1

The party and its Central Comaittee, elaborating mainline directions of im-
proving the combat readiness of the Armed Ebrces as a task of primary im-
portance, proceed from the position that in present-day conditions combat
readiness should not only be maintained at a high level but also should con-
stantly improve, in order that no surprises catch us napping. This demand is
dictated by many interlinked factors.

These include first and foremost Ian increase in the aggressiveness of im-
perialism and intensification of its military preparations.l The United

States and its NATO partners, continuously building up their arsenal of ag-
gression, are directing it chiefly against the Soviet Union and the other na-
tions of the socialist community. Hence the necessity of continuous improve-
ment of the combat readiness of our Armed Forces. No matter where troops and
naval forces are stationed, their most important mission is to work persistent-
iy to master the most effective techniques and means of repelling aggression

in conditions of enemy employment of all the weaponry in his arsenal.

This applies to all branches of service, all combat arms and naval forces with-
out exception, including special troops - signal troops, railway, motor
transport and others -~ which have long since ceased to be "auxiliary"
[vspomogatel'nymi]. But first and foremost those troops and naval forces
stationed on the forward lines of our homeland and the socialist community,

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
who are standing alert duty, should be in a high state of combat readi-
ness.

1heneedfor constant improvement hxthe combat readiness of the Armed Forces

is also dictated by the [character and features of a potential war, and par-
ticularly by the increased significance of the time factor./ In the past weeks
and sometimes months were required to bring forces and weapons into a state of
readiness to attack an aggressor. in today's conditions this time may run into
only hours or even minutes. The potential adversary today possesses weapons
and has established force groupings capable of initiating military operations
at any time. Naturally this cannot help but reflect on the timetable for
carrying out combat readiness measures.

The necessity of further increasing Armed Forces combat readiness is pre-
determined in large measure by an increase in the role of the element of sur-
prise. In the conceptions of conduct of war adopted by the armies of the im—
perialist nations, main emphasis is placed on the surprise delivery of a
"preemptive" strike, figuring that this will ensure them the strategic ini-
tiative and superiority in subsequent prosecution of the war. Therefore cur
troops and naval forces should be constantly prepared to repulse aggression
with maximum effectiveness.

The lduty of alliance to defend the achievements of socialism jointly with
the armies of the other Warsaw Pact national also demands a steady increase
in the combat readiness of the USSR Armed forces. They should be constantly
ready to ensure the security of the nations of the socialist community,
shoulder to shoulder with the brother armies, to defend both their national
and common interests. This is achieved by carrying out coordinated measures
to improve the combat readiness of the armed forces of all the Harsaw Pact
member nations.

Combat readiness is an extremely large, complex and multilevel category. It
embodies enormous efforts and material expenditures by the Soviet people to
provide the Armed Forces with modern weapons, combat equipment, all the means and
resources essential for maintaining them in peacetime and comprehensive sup-
port of combat activities in case of war.

Combat readiness has a quite specific, concrete content for each Armed Forces
structural level, for each military collective and each servicemen, while
duties pertaining to maintaining and steadily strengthening it are rigorously
regulated by laws and other basic documents. The USSR Constitution states

that it is the duty of the Armed Forces to the people reliably to defend the
socialist homeland and to be in a continuous state of combat readiness
guaranteeing an immediate rebuff to any aggressor. The need to maintain a con-
linuous state of combat readiness is specified in the military oath and in
general military regulations. when swearing the oath, every Soviet servicemsn
solemnly swears to be prepared at all times to come to the defense of his home-
lnnd -- the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics -- and to defend it courageous-
ly. skillfully, with dignity and honor, sparing neither his blood nor his very
life in order to achieve total victory over our enemies. This is also

demanded by the Internal Service Regulations of the USSR Armed Forces. They

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FK’IAI. USE ONLY

particularly stress the personal responsiblity of the commander to the Com-
munist Party and Soviet Government for constant combat and mobilization
readiness of the subunit, unit, or warship entrusted to his command. Con-
crete demands pertaining to maintaining combat readiness are imposed on each
and every serviceman by field manuals, regulations, directives, and orders.

A decisive role in maintaining the combat readiness of troops and naval forces
at an adequate level is played by lofficer cadres./ They organize and direct
the training and indoctrination process and the military labor of personnel.
Their precision work performance, ideological maturity, professional training,
pedagogic skill, and ability to unify and lead the soldier masses directly
determine successful accomplishment of the missions assigned to subunits. units,
warships, and combined units and, in the final analysis, the level of combat
readiness of the Armed Forces.

Responsible jobs pertaining to maintaining troops and naval forces in a con-
tinuous state of high combat readiness have been entrusted to warrant officers --
officers' closest assistants. These are highly skilled specialists, genuine
experts at their job, who possess a skillful mastery of highly complex combat
equipment and possess a great deal of experience in training and indoctrinating
personnel.

Noncommissioned officers -- the numerically largest detachment of command
cadres -- make a large contribution toward maintaining a high level of combat
readiness. Constantly in the very heart of the troops, they are the irmmdiate
superiors of the enlisted personnel, train and indoctrinate subordinates on a
daily basis, and actively affect strengthening of organization and discipline
in the subunits and successful accomplishment of combat and political train-
ing tasks.

All-out increase in combat readiness is inseparable from [excellent moral-
political and fighting qualities of personnel./ As military affairs become
increasingly more complex, the volume of combat training tasks steadily in-
creases, the character of military labor changes qualitatively, and moral-
psychological and physical stresses increase. All this imposes high demands
on the Soviet servicemen, on his ability successfully to carry out his duties.
and the tasks of the vehicle crew, subunit, unit, and warship in any, even the
most stressful and complex combat situation.

A constant increase in Armed Forces combat readiness depends directly on the
/degree of mastery of weapons and combat equipment by personnel./ Without the
ability of each and every servicemen, each and every military collective to
take from any modern weapon that which is contained within its design and
maximally to utilize its combat capabilities, a high degree of combat readiness
is inconceivable.

The better the technical equipment of troops and naval forces, the most surely
. personnel master weapons and combat equipment and the most effective methods
of their employment in battle, the greater is the combat readiness of the sub-
unit. unit, warship, and combined unit. This is one of the most important
mechanisms of Armed Forces training.

62

FOR OFTﬂCIAL‘USEGDNLY
Primary emphasis in the troops and fleets is placed on mastering the latest
weapons and combat equipment, and this is correct. But one must bear in mind
that weapons in use also include models of preceding generations. This situa-
tion is connected on the one hand with the rapid pace of scientific and tech-
nological advances in military affairs, and on the other hand with the impos-
sibility of simultaneously reequipping all troops and naval forces with new
weapons. Therefore, while focusing personnel on the mastery of new weapons,
it is important at the same time not to permit failure adequately to appreciate
those weapons which have been longer in service and which are still being used
in the units and on warships. Personnel are obliged skillfully to utilize the
combat capabilities of all weapons and combat equipment in the current in-
ventory.

Combat readiness of troops and naval forces is grounded on their Icombat
proficiency and their ability to fight in a contemporary manner,/ to gain
victory over a strong, well—armed and trained adversary. Mastery of the sci-
ence of winning never has been a simple or easy matter. Today, when the fire-
power and striking power of the army and navy have increased immeasurably,
when the character of combat has changed radically, it has become an even more
complex matter to achieve a high level of field, air and sea performance,
demanding enormous daily efforts on the part of all personnel.

in improving one's combat performance and military skill, it is necessary con-
tinuously to monitor the appearance of new weapons, combat equipment, and new
tactics on the part of the potential adversary, in order to oppose them with
highly effective weapons and modes of combat.

of great importance for improving combat readiness is [close teamwork among
the different military services, combat arms, and special troops./ Motorized
riflenen and tankers, missile crewsandartillerymen, antiaircraft gunners and
paratroopers, pilots and sailors possess everything they need for successful
accomplishment of any combat mission. But they will become much stronger if
their actions are coordinated, if the combined power of their weapons is
brought to bear on the aggressor. Not one combat mission can be accomplished
without precisely organized and continuously maintained coordination among the
diversified forces and weapons in modern combat.

ln conditions where combat operations are characterized by great scope and
dynamism, when troops and naval forces are armed primarily with crew-served
weapons, a high degree of coordination on the part of weapon crews, vehicle
crews, and subunits is of particular importance for maintaining combat
readiness at the requisite level. It is achieved by certain knowledge and
precise execution of one's duties by each and every serviceman, by highly-
dcveioped mutual assistance, and by a high degree of interchangeability of
personnel.

The importance of capability successfully to perform missions in the face of
strong hostile electronic countermeasures has increased substantially in the
training of personnel. A large role in improving combat readiness is played by
full and comprehensive combat (operational), rear services, and other types

of support.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are no trivial matters, no insignificant items in ensuring combat readi-
ness, while any mistake, miscalculation or delay in the combat situation as a
rule is paid for in blood. Hhatever post is assigned to a servicemen, he
should be constantly concerned by the thought of whether he is capable and
prepared immediately to carry out a combat order. Has he done everything to
achieve successful performance of combat missions by the subunit, unit, or war—
ship? Complacency is equivalent to a step backward and therefore is absolutely
intolerable. Adequate combat readiness can be ensured only by persistent labor,
only by continuous movement forward -- from each achieved level to the next,
higher level.

Aggressive intrigues by imperialist reaction, which possesses combat-ready
force groupings and nuclear missile weapons which can be brought into action
within minutes,incalculably increase demands on [vigilance by the personnel

of our Armed Forces./ There is no combat readiness without vigilance. "To
miss an opportunity or to become flustered," wrote V. I. Lenin, "means to lose
everything."2 A high degree of constant vigilance should be characteristic of
every Soviet servicemen. The responsibility for defense of the homeland
placed on the Armed Forces by the party and people obliges servicemen to be
vigilant everywhere and at all times: when standing alert duty, on guard duty
and garrison duty, when performing combat training and other tasks, both on
and off the unit compound or warships.

The 26th CPSU Congress highly praised the combat readiness of the Soviet Armed
Forces. We in the military are Justly proud of this praise. At the same time
it obliges us to devote unrelenting attention to combat readiness and to ensure
that we continue in the future reliably guaranteeing the peaceful labor of
Soviet citizens, peace and the security of other peoples.

2. The Decisive Force - Man

One of the most important points of Harxist-Leninist teaching on war and the
army -- the thesis of the dialectical unity and interrelationship between man
and military equipment -- is convincingly embodied in the high degree of combat
readiness of the Soviet Armed Forces. Han and military equipment play a
strictly determined role in this unity. The high-principled approach of
Harxism—Leninism to appraisal of this role is that man, with his professional,
moral-psychological and physical qualities. occupies a dominant status in
relation to hardware at any stage of its development. Military hardware always
has been and continues to be merely an implement of military activity. And
only thanks to man's labor does it, just as any other equipment, to quote

K. Marx, rise from the dead.3

The development of new weapons, particularly nuclear missile weapons, the
equipping of a number of armies with these weapons, and the extensive automa-
tion of control processes do not detract from the role of man and the sig-
nificance of his professional, moral-psychological and physical qualities.
"...No matter how high the degree of an army's technical equipment," stated
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "man, possessing a consummate mastery of the equipment,
remains the principal, determining force in war. This is especially important
today, in the age of nuclear missile weapons, when the fate of a war will be
decided by people who have mastered weapons and combat equipment, who are

66

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
conditioned morally and physically, who are totally dedicated to their homeland,
party and people." This conclusion constitutes an innovative development of
the Harxist-Leninist view of the correlation between man and military hardware
applicable to the concrete historical conditions of the present day.

Man's decisive role in battle is dictated first and foremost [by the specific
features of contemporary war,/ material preparations for which are being con-
ducted by aggressive imperialist circles at an accelerated pace. If these
circles succeed in unleashing a war, it will inevitably assume the character of
a clash between two opposing social systems, unprecedented in its violence and
uncompromising nature. and will constitute the severest test of man's spiritual
and physical resources. There will be a great increase in the stress of combat
activity, a sharp increase in psychological and physical stresses which per-
sonnel will be forced to bear. In these conditions the combat missions facing
a combined unit, unit, and warship can be successfully accomplished onlybythose
personnel who feel the deepest, unwavering, to quote V. I. Lenin, "conviction
in the ‘ust nature of the war and awareness of the necessity of sacrificing
their lives for the welfare of their brothers...."5 Precisely such a convic-
tion and such awareness are formed in Soviet servicemen by the entire tenor of
life in our society, our Armed Forces, by the purposeful work done by com-
manders, political agencies, party and Komsomol organizations.

While contemporary war imposes extremely high demands on a servicemen in general,
these demands are immeasurably greater on an officer, for an officer, and
particularly a commander,must, just as every soldier, staunchly overcome the
difficulties and dangers of battle. But in addition, he must continuously and
firmly direct his troops in any situation, even the most complex, maintaining
a high degree of fighting spirit in his men, giving them an example of

courage and fearlessness, leading them and inspiring them to successful ac-
complishment of the assigned mission. Hence special demands on the entire
aggregate of qualities characterizing the personality of today's Soviet of-
ficer. It is difficult and perhaps impossible to overemphasize their im-
portance.

Man's decisive role in contemporary war is also dictated by the fact that
[weapons per so cannot ensure success./ Needed for this are people who have
received appropriate moral-political and professional training and preparation

and who are capable, as V. I. Lenin noted, "of knowledgeably utilizing the
latest advancements in military hardware."6

The history of war abounds in examples of how well—equipped troops which pos-
sessed an inadequate mastery of their weapons went down to defeat. He also
know of facts of an opposite nature, where superior art of warfare and combat
skill, multiplied by strength of spirit, made up for the inadequate technical
equipment of troops and produced victory. One fights not by numbers but by-
skill. Tnis Suvorov precept 'antinues to be valid today. The ability to take
from highly complex modern weapons everything of which they are capable and of
competently operating and utilizing them in combat with maximum effectiveness
creates the preconditions for successful accomplishment of any combat missions.
Such an ability presupposes, alongside individual skills, the very highest
degree of coordination of actions by many individuals -- skilled, precise ne-
tinns. totally subordinated to the single will of the commander and directed
toward achieving victory in battle.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFK'IAI. USE ONLY

Today's serviceman is required not only to possess excellent mastery of all
modes of the most effective employment of the weapons and combat equipment
entrusted to him but also clearly to understand the missions of the subunit,
unit, and warship, precisely to know his place and role in performing these
missions.

indoctrination in servicemen of a high degree of organization and responsibili-
ty is one of the most important parts of the job performed by commanders,
political agencies, party and Komsomol organizations. The key to success here
lies in establishing respect and demandingness in the mutual relations among
servicemen, in military personnel understanding the primacy of the interests of
society over personal interests and a striving toward flawless performance both
of one's immediate service duties and of all combat and training tasks as-
signed to a military collective.

This is especially important today, when improvement of weapons and combat
equipment is causing an increasingly deeper division of military labor and
engendering new military technical specialties. Maintenance and combat em-
ployment of modern weapons demand a degree of serviceman occupational training
which ensures mastery of any weapon and combat equipment in the shortest pos-
sible time and makes it possible, when necessary. successfully to replace a
comrade who has become disabled.

Knowledge alone, even profound, diversified knowledge is insufficient to en-
sure that weapons and combat equipment are adequately controlled by a service—
man and that he can obtain from them everything of which they are capable.
Also needed are solid skills in weapons employment in the highly complex
conditions of today's combat. But since these conditions are not and cannot
be accommodated within the framework of any standards, the innovativeness and
initiative of personnel assume prhnary significance. Alongside discipline,
courage. bravery, self-sacrifice and other qualities which have always been
and continue to be integral attributes of military valor, the ability to
perform aggressively, with a full energy Output and for an extended period
or time is demanded of personnel. In short, out servicemen today, stresses
Comrade L. l. Brezhnev, must be capable "of combining the traditions of self-
less courage of their fathers with consummate knowledge of the most advanced
military hardware."7 This will enable them to perform in a worthy manner the
responsible and honorable mission assigned to them by the party and people.

The conceptions of bourgeois theorists differ sharply from Marxist-Leninist
views on the correlation between man and military hardware. They place man and
military equipment in opposition to one another and attempt to examine them
isolated from the concrete sociopolitical environment and historical situation.
Some of them absolutize the role of weapons, particularly nuclear weapons, and
view means of automation as "higher beings," which are allegedly capable of
replacing man. Such an absolutization of weapons and equipment in fact

serves for justification of arms buildup and at the same time for training un-
thinking executors of orders and transforming the soldiers of imperialist armies
into a kind of "appendage" of modern weapons.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Other bourgeois military theorists advance conceptions in which absolutization
of weapons and combat equipment exists side by side with the forced acknowledge-
ment that man nevertheless constitutes the principal instrument of war. Recent-
ly such conceptions have been reflected even in official dOCuments of im—
perialist armies. This is connected with the fact that attempts to push man,
with the aid of electronic computers, out of the domain of control of combat
equipment and troops have proven fruitless. Acknowledgement of man's most im-
portant role in war, however, by no means signifies that the imperialists have
given up their attempt to transform the personnel of their armies into a blind
instrument of antipopular, aggressixe, reactionary policy. By all means they
implant among military personnel cruelty, disdain for man, his dignity, and his
very life, as well as for all the valuable things of civilization. Brainwashing
of personnel in the armed forces of the United States and its NAIO partners is
carried out in a spirit of militarism and aggression, anti-Sovietism and anti-
communism. And it is bearing its sinister fruits. Testimony to this includes
the crimes committed by the U.S. military during the aggressive 0.8. war in
Vietnam, atrocities perpetrated by British soldiers in Ulster, and the bloody
crimes perpetrated by the Israeli murderers in the Near East.

By bribery and lies, by political filtration and purges, and by strict preserva—
tion of the bourgeois caste officer corps -- by all these and other means
monopoly capital makes mass armies into its obedient instrument. Equipped with
the most modern arms. these armies represent a considerable force, designated

to protect the reactionary interests of the bourgeoisie. But precisely because
this force stands opposed to the people, it lacks genuine ideological and moral-
political stimuli, as a consequence of which, as is indicated by the facts of
history, the armies of explbiter states fail in the final analysis to withstand
the great moral and psychological stress and begin to disintegrate in a dif-
ficult situation and to lose their war-fighting capability. This pattern has
invariably been manifested in the past, and it is particularly applicable in
present-day conditions.

The armies of exploiter states do not and cannot have that which comprises the
main attribute of socialist armies and is the life-giving source of their
invincible might -- the justice of the goals which socialist armed forces serve,
their genuinely humane function, which corresponds to the root interests of

the worker masses. Of course another important element is the personnel of the
socialist armies - ideologically conditioned and totally devoted to the people
and the secialist homeland. Only socialism engenders mass heroism and self-
sacrifice. "The strength and fortitude of the Soviet Armed Forces," noted
Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "are grounded on a strong awareness of their patriotic
duty by all military personnel, by their profound ideological conviction and
boundless faith in the ideals of communism. This potent weapon of our army
always helped it defeat our enemies, from the very first days of its existence."8

Exercising day-by-day guidance of the Armed Forces, the CPSU devotes unabating
attention to this powerful spiritual weapon and is constantly concerned to
ensure that the ideological-political, moral-combat and psychological training
of army and navy personnel is always up to the level of the highest demands of
the time.

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

3. Increasing Effectiveness of Control

The combat readiness of the Armed Forces is directly dependent on the level of
leadership of troops and naval forces, on the ability of commanders, staffs,
and all control agencies to organize and unify personnel, to mobilize their
will and energy for the accomplishment of assigned missions. To control ef-
fectively means to ensure unconditional attainment of stated objectives and
maximum efficient utilization of the combat capabilities of subunits. units,
warships, and combined units. This requires a confident understanding of
events, predicting situation development, drawing up well-substantiated plans,
reaching feasible decisions, and persistently implementing them.

Even a cursory enumeration of the demands imposed on control shows what
qualities are essential to the military leader. These qualities naturally

do not come by themselves. They are acquired through persistent study and con-
stant independent work in the process of daily activities. Innovative em-
ployment of progressive control methods and means, thorough analysis of com-
bat experience, and mastery of all the finest of that which has been amassed

by a wealth of practical experience in troop training, teaching and indoctrinat-
ing personnel are of primary importance.

Improvement of control in the Armed Forces is accomplished in conformity with
the general demands which the CPSU imposes on leadership in all areas of
building communism, on all party. soviet and economic management cadres.
"Authorities -- and considerable authorities -- are given to leader personnel

in order that they utilize these authorities in full measure," stated Comrade

L. 1. Brezhnev at the 26th CPSU Congress. "But each and every leader should
also constantly bear in mind his great responsibility -- responsibility to those
b y whom he has been entrusted with the job of leading, to the party and the
people."9

'rhe responsibility of the military leader for successful control of troops and
naval forces is unprecedentedly high in present-day conditions. This proceeds
from radical changes in the means and modes of waging war. Even with adequate
technical equipment and well trained personnel, the combat capabilities of
subunits, units. warships and combined units will remain unutilized and per-
formance of missions will be under threat of failure if control is not reliable.

The role of control is great in accomplishing tasks of combat and political
training and combat readiness, just as in achieving the objectives of an
operation or battle. The more purposeful and efficient control is, the more
fully it is in conformity with present-day demands, the greater are the

results of accomplishment of the tasks facing the Armed Forces. The most im-
portant conditions for efficiency of control are extensive adoption of sci-
entific organization of labor, advance planning methods, and aggressive utiliza-
tion of modern computer hardware.

It would be a mistake, however, to think that merely fulfillment of these con-
ditions guarantees success. One can make a correct decision, prepare a good

plnn, and advance an excellent idea. But if one does not organize their
execution, they will remain an unimplemented scheme. Nothing is accomplished

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
automatically. Everything is determined by people who see an objective, know
the ways to achieve it, and possess the requisite knowledge, skills and means

to do so. It is not mere coincidence that our party views control as the
science of working with people. To master this science means to master the sci-
ence of winning. And to achieve this, every officer must work persistently and
tirelessly to raise his level of Harxist-Leninist training, to broaden his
operational-tactical horizons, and improve his ability to operate in a complex
and stressful situation.

Based on general scientific foundations and Leninist principles of management
of the socialist society, the theory and practice of control of troops and
naval forces also have their own specific features. They are dictated by the
specific features of contemporary war as well as tasks pertaining to defense
of the socialist homeland, and military activities proper.

Profound knowledge of the laws of warfare and comprehensive consideration of
their operation and forms of manifestation in concrete conditions make it pos-
sible correctly to determine the main, most important trends in development of
military affairs, correctly to estimate the situation and its possible changes,
and to make the most expedient decisions. in other words, relying on knowl-
edge of the laws of warfare and guided by the fundamental principles and
methods of troop and naval forces control, one can foresee [predvitet'] the
development of events and thus to a significant degree ensure successful ac-
complishment of assigned missions.

Foresight is of enormous significance in all domains of human activity.

V. l. Lenin appraised it as an essential condition for correct determination of
the basic directions of societal development. Possessing the priceless gift of
foresight, V. I. Lenin deeply revealed the sources and internal relationships
of the highly complex events and processes taking place in society, and with
scientific certainty predicted the possible paths of their subsequent
development. The entire history of mankind in the 20th century confirms the
ingenhus perspicacity of our great leader.

Foresight plays an enormous role in the military realm, and this is under-
standable. The cost of errors and miscalculations in this area is too high -
for it is a matter of our country's security, the strength of its defense, and
the capability of the Armed Forces to offer a devastating rebuff to any
aggressor. Miscalculations in appraising the potential development of events,
in determining the sequence of performance of tasks and the importance of
various work areas, just as mistakes in decisions, are particularly dangerous
in present-day conditions. And this is primarily because the magnitude of the
probable consequences of these miscalculations and errors has increased im-
measurably. Their correction is extremely difficult and sometimes impossible.

The importance of foresight in strategic, operational and tactical leadership
and in elaborating any decision is greater today than ever before. without
this it is impossible to prepare troops and naval forces for successful opera-
tions. This is why it will obviously be no exaggeration to state that [to
control in present-day conditions means first and foremost to foresee./ Ef-
fective management of the organizational development and improvement of the

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Armed Forces is impossible without considering the main development trends in
the military-political situation, the attained level and future growth
prospects of the economy, the sociopolitical and spiritual development of the
Soviet society,'scientific and technological advances. No less important is
a timely and objective appraisal of the resources and capabilities of the
potential adversary, taking into consideration trends in their change. Suc-
cess in accomplishing the missions assigned to troops and naval forces
depends in large measure on the ability to look into the future in the train-
ing of subunits, units, warships, and combined units, and to ensure that it
is in conformity with the demands not only of today but of tomorrow as well.

As an integral part of a scientific approach to organization of training and
indoctrination of personnel and to preparation for and conduct of the modern
operation and battle, foresight is taking on particular significance in con-
nection with the fact that troops and naval forces are armed with powerful,
swift and long-range weapons, which have a high technical readiness, and

in view of the necessity of making optimal decisions as a rule in an extremely
short period of time and in a stressful, swiftly and sharply changing situation.

It is quite obvious that a decision will be most expedient only if it is
grounded on thorough operational-tactical calculations, on a profound and
comprehensive situation analysis, and on precise consideration of the situa-
tion. the state and capabilities of friendly troops as well as the ad-
versary's forces, the developing correlation of forces, the influence of the
radiation situation, terrain conditions, weather and other factors. 0n the
whole making a decision is always a complex creative process and is always
somewhat of a step into the unknown. Every decision involves risk to one
degree or another, since it is based most frequently on incomplete, at times
contradictory data and is made under the active influence of the adversary.
Risk, however, is by no means a random action in the hope of a favorable out-
come of a battle or operation. On the contrary, it is the ability to dis-
cover concealed situation factors and, recognizing the adversary's chain of
reasoning, to beat him to the punch and impose one's own will on him.

No matter how complex the problem of foresight is, it can be solved and solved
successfully. For this the military leader of any echelon should work per-
sistently to develop in himself the ability deeply and comprehensively to
analyze the situation and to elucidate those most important elements which can
determine the course and outcome of a battle and operation. It is also very
important to work persistently to master the skill of recreating an overall
picture of events on the basis of individual details, which at times seem in-
significant. and to select the appropriate modes of combat actions and

forms of maneuver in order to anticipate the adversary's intentions, to

ensure effective employment of one's own men and weapons, and to utilize all
available opportunities for achieving success.

Foresight makes it possible better to organize control and to ensure im-

plementation of the specified battle or operation plan and execution of the
adopted decision. But all this under the condition of high reliability and
survivability of communications equipment and adequate efficiency of control
agencies. We are dealing with at least three aspects here. Communications

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
should be secure, protected against hostile jamming, and be stable, regardless
of the complexity of the radioelectronic situation. Without thia,control is
impossible in today's warfare. Equally important are firmness and at the same
time flexibility of control. Even the very best decision may prove to be
unexecuted if there is no firm control. At the same time flexibility and ef-
flciency make it possible promptly to make appropriate changes in the original
operation concept, to stay ahead of events, and to guide them in a direction
advantageous to oneself and disadvantageous to the adversary. And finally,
efficient organization of the activities of troop and naval forces control
agencies and skillful placement of manpower and equipment among control
facilities are essential.

In present-day conditions the commander and his staff as a rule have con-
siderably less time available than in the past to organize for combat, and yet
the volume of situation information has increased severalfold and is continuing
to grow. We are faced with a serious, one can say without exaggeration acute,
problem. There are two ways of solving it. The first is [improvement of
operational-tactical training of commanders and staffs,/ and the second --
lfurther automation of troop and naval forces control./ Naturally both are
organically interlinked, and only their combined implementation can guarantee
SUCCESS .

Continuous improvement of operational-tactical training of commanders and

stuffs is a decisive precondition for a high degree of combat readiness of all
elements of the control system. 0! course all measures in this area should

be based on increase in the general and military knowledgeability of officer
cadres and be fortified by development of firm practical control skills. It

is necessary to possess the ability rapidly to draw up a plan and prepare for
combat, precisely to assign missions, to organize coordination and comprehensive
support for a battle or operation.

Automation of control also helps achieve these aims. It substantially speeds
up the collection and processing of information, preparation of data for
decision-making, and makes it possible to optimize planning and promptly to
communicate to troops and naval forces combat missions, instructions, signals,
and comands. As a result of adoption and skilled utilization of means of
automation, commanders and staffs obtain additional time for productive

work in the course of preparing for and conducting combat actions. Control ef-
ficiency also increases.

Opening up extensive opportunities for overcoming conflicts between increased
demands on control and the possibilities of meeting them, automation, however,
of course does not automatically guarantee efficient troop control. Its
adoption should be combined with well-conceived organization of control agency
Jvlivicies. These activities in turn should be provided with technical,
software, information and all other types of support. In particular, operation
and battle modeling based on mathematical mathods substantially expands the
possibilities of forecasting and makes it possible more precisely and fully to
consider the numerous factors which influence the course and outcome ofmeratims.
Operational-strategic and operational forecasts. military-economic, military-
Lcchnical and operational-tactical calculations also rely on these same methods.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFK‘IAI. USE ONLY

Optimal plan variants of the most complex measures are elaborated with their
assistance. schedules of the most efficient control agency work are prepared,
and precise coordination of manpower and weapons and reliable verification of
execution are achieved.

Even with a high degree of automation, however, /the predominant role in control
will always be played by the commander, while his staff will continue to

remain the principal control agency./ This is why it is so important to

make every effort to develop initiative, innovative activity, independence and
responsibility on the part of military cadres in directing troops and naval
forces and to adopt advanced methods of planning and decision-making. Im—
provement of the style of management activity is closely linked with continuous
improvement of the structure of control agencies at all levels -— strategic,
operational, and tactical.

Our command, political and engineer-technician cadres work persistently to

enrich their theoretical arsenal and improve practical skills. They are

keeping pace with the times and possess a high degree of professional training,

firm moral-political conditioning, and are capable of accomplishing any tasks

pertaining to troop and naval forces control. including the most complex.
FOOTNOTES

1. L. I. Brezhnev, "Leninakim kursom" [Following a Leninist Course], Vol 2,
page 49.

2. V. 1. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soeh." [Complete Works], Vol 39, page 55.
3. See K. Marks and P. Engel's, "Soch." [Writings], Vol 23, page 194.
a. Brezhnev, op. cit., Vol 2. page 51.

5. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 41, page 212.

6. lbid., Vol 9, page 156.

7. L. l. Brezhnev, "Na strazhe mira i sotsializma" [Guarding Peace and
Socialism], second. enlarged edition, Moscow, 1981, page 235.

8. Ibid., page 104.

9. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 50.

72

FOR OFHCIAI. USE ONLY
Chapter Five. HIGH QUALITY OF TRAINING AND INNCTRINATION

1. Study in a Proper Banner

Improvement of weapons and combat equipment, the forms and modes of combat
operations, and strengthening of the role of the moral-political factor in con-
temporary war impose high demands on quality of training and indoctrination

of personnel. These demands apply both to those who organize the training and
indoctrination process and direct it on a daily basis and to the trainees
themselves, who are called upon to master military skills and to be staunch and
able defenders of the socialist homeland. IA guarantee of high quality of
training and indoctrination lies in their joint activities and count: goal of
steady increase in the combat readiness of the Armed Forces./

Training and indoctrination in the army and navy is a dual process. Its

main areas include training of conscientious servicemen who possess excellent
combat, moral-political and psychological qualities, and the combat coordina-
tion of subunits, units, and warships. The main efforts of officer cadres and
all army and navy personnel are concentrated in these areas.

The slogan "Study military affairs in a proper manner," advanced by V. I. Lenin,
continues today to serve as a guide to practical action for Soviet military
personnel. Following this slogan, they master the sum total of ideological-
political and military-professional knowledge, weapons and combat equipment,
and develop the willingness and capability to operate skillfully in any and all
combat situation conditions. Efficient utilization of training time,
economizing in funds and resources, and a constant search for an assimilation
of those forms and methods of training which meet today's demands to the _
greatest degree are the direct task of each and every servicemen, each and
every military collective.

A great many measures are being conducted in the troops and fleets aimed at
improving the efficiency and quality of training and indoctrination. Such at-
Lanlon is entirely warranted. Not always, however, is positive experience
publicized and disseminated. Adopted decisions and recommendations are some-
times not implemented. It also sometimes happens that there is discussion,
examination, visits to units - and things end with that. Obviously there is
little benefit from such measures. All valuable innovations should not only
receive approval but must be synthesized and persistently adopted in the
practical combat and political training and indoctrination of personnel. This

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is particularly important since training schedules and curricula are becoming
more heavily packed with material year by year, while the tasks performed by
military personnel are becoming increasingly more complex.

A paramount role in improving the effectiveness and quality of the training and
indoctrination process is played by lsteady implementation of the Leninist
principle of Communist ideological content and party-mindedness of training
and indoctrination, and innovative application of the conclusions and
recommendations of military science and the art of warfare, military education
science and psychology./ It is important to know well the actual state of af-
fairs in the subunit. unit, and on the warship, and to possess accurate, timely
and complete information on the daily life and activities of personnel. V. I.
Lenin highly praised the ability "precisely to determine the state of affairs.
without closing one's eyes to the truth."1

[Skilled planning] occupies an important place in work to improve the ef-
fectiveness and quality of training and indoctrination. Without question a plan
should be realistic in any element of the army or navy organism, at any level of
the structure of the Armed Forces, and its execution should be comprehensively
supported. Comprehensively means not only in a material-technical respect but
also in an organizational and ideological-political respect. Of particular im-
portance is absolute observance of the demands of plan discipline. Important
thereby is precise organization of checking performance and verifying execution.
To command without inquiring into or lacking the ability to verify execution.
wrote V. I. Lenin. "is downright fatal in military affairs."2

Skillful application of /a combined approach to accomplishing combat training
tasks] helps improve effectiveness and quality of training and indoctrination.
Applied to the Armed Forces, a combined approach presupposes an indissoluble
unity of training of personnel with their political, military, and moral in-
doctrination. It makes it possible to utilize training time, funds and re-
sources with maximum return, to form in personnel excellent fighting, moral-
pnlitical and psychological qualities, to arm them in a short period of time
with the requisite knowledge and skills, and to achieve combat coordination of
subunits, units, and warships.

One cannot speak seriously about improving the effectiveness and quality of
training troops and naval forces without [continuous improvement in the forms
and methods of training and indoctrinating personnel./ They should not lag
behind the changes taking place in technical equipment of the Armed Forces,

in the techniques and modes of conduct of combat operations. In particular,
the increasing complexity of tasks pertaining to organizing teamwork and
coordination among the diversified forces and weapons in the battle and opera-
tion present us with many problems. Quite naturally it is extremely difficult
to express today's training and indoctrination process in a single, permanent
methodological formula. “or is there a need to do so. No one method, no one
form oi training and indoctrination, taken separately, can ensure excellent
training of a servicemen, let alone a subunit, unit, or warship. Another
thing is important. It is necessary to employ broadly and innovatively both
traditional. practically-tested forms and methods of training and indoctrina-
tion and new ones, engendered by daily practical activities in the army and

74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
navy. Only under this condition is it possible to improve the effectiveness
and quality of the training and indoctrination process.

In this connection we should note the great importance of combat experience,
particularly the experience of the Great Patriotic War. for training and in-
doctrination of servicemen. This is our priceless wealth. And the ability
to utilize it in the interests of successful accomplishment of the tasks
facing the army and navy is one of the most important indicators of maturity
of officer cadres. The experience of contemporary local wars also merits
careful study.

Alongside the experience of wars, it is necessary extensively to utilize the
experience of daily combat and political training, particularly large-scale
maneuvers and exercises. But this experience can be truly useful only if all
combat and political training, and particularly maneuvers and exercises, are
conducted in conditions maximally approximating actual combat. In other words,
it is necessary [to teach the troops that which is needed in war.l Today this
is an immutable condition of a high degree of combat readiness, and it must be
rigorously fulfilled. Considerable work is being done in this area, and it is
producing positive results. This is attested in particular by the "Zapad-Bl"
[West—81] exercise in September 1981. Problems of combat teamwork and coordina-
tion during the conduct of joint combat actions by combined units and units of
the various branches of service and combat arms were worked on at this exer-
cise. The men who took part in the exercise carried out their duty with honor.
They displayed courage and the ability to act aggressively and with initiative,
and skillfully to employ their weapons in combat. The exercise showed the high
degree of political maturity and outstanding volitional qualities of personnel,
their readiness to come to the self-sacrificing defense of our socialist home-
land, Our friends and allies.

The "Zapad-8l" exercise was a test of the military skill of troops and naval
forces, their report to the party, government and the entire Soviet people on
successes in combat and political training. The performance of the troops
and naval forces at the exercise was given high marks by CPSU Central Com-
mittee General Secretary Har SU Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, chairman of the
Presidium oftheUSSR Supreme Soviet and chairman of the USSR Defense Council.
"A high degree of proficiency, precision teamwork among the combat arms, and
skillful mastery of today's potent hardware," he stressed, ”were all demon—
strated in the course of the exercise.“

0n the whole a solicitous, attentive attitude toward amassed know-how is an im-
portant condition for confident movement forward. of course this experience
must be applied innovatively, taking into account the concrete conditions in
which the subunit, unit, and warship perform their assigned missions. the
specific features of the branch of service and combat arns, and the features of
the weapons and combat equipment.

Improvement of the forms and methods of training and indoctrination of service-
men demands innovativeness and initiative, purposefulness and persistence. It
is important to gather together the new bit by bit, to test it thorOughly and

to develop it further. Clearly what is needed here is not fine phraseslntpains-
taking daily work, work excluding both inertness, impeding the new, and

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR¢0FTWC1AI.US£I)NLV

attempts to adopt any undertaking immediately, without serious elucidation of
its actual benefit, while sweepingly discarding that which was previously used.

With agreat diversity of forms and methods of training and indoctrinating per-
sonnel, the stated objectives can be achieved only when training items are
worked on [with a full effort./ The content and character of the training and
indoctrination process should reflect the state and development prospects

of military affairs, the conditions of the theater of military operations, the
combat capabilities of one's own troops and those of the potential adversary,
his strong and weak points.

These are the general demands on the training and indoctrination process. Cer-
tain points proceed from them, connected with concrete practical work hithe
area of training and indoctrination personnel.

Essential conditions for effectiveness of the training and indoctrination
process -- and this was once again graphically shown by the "Zapad-Bl" exer-
cise -- are precise organization, a high degree of instructiveness, and
creation of a situation which demands of servicemen full exertion of spiritual
and physical resources, maximum yield, initiative, and innovativeness. It is
no secret that unnecessary relaxation of demands and situation simplifications
do serious detriment to the quality of the training and indoctrination. They
are especially intolerable because they impede correct preparation of service—
men for today's combat and can create a false impression of it. And this is
fraught with negative consequences in an actual combat situation.

in the final analysis a serviceman's readiness and ability to carry out his
assigned duties intelligently and skillfully in any combat situation conditions
are the main, determining indicator of effectiveness and quality of the train-
ing and indoctrination process. Just what this indicator will be depends in
large measure on the [ideological-theoretical and professional level as well

as methods skills of consand. political, and engineer-technician cadresJ

In order to teach and indoctrinate subordinates it is necessary to possess a
great deal of knowledge and ability, to possess broad erudition and a high level
of general knowledgeability. It is necessary to have a clear picture not only
of [what [dsll to teach but also [how [dell to teach, to possess a mastery of
thc entire arsenal of means and methods of training and indoctrination, and to
apply it in an innovative manner. Today one of the main criteria of the
methods skill of an instructor is the ability to impart to the trainees a
maximum volume of knowledge and to develop in them solid skills in the
shortest possible time. And this is natural, for demands on level of training
of servicemen are steadily growing, while the term of compulsory military
service remains unchanged. As experience shows, a successful solution to

this problem is achieved through constant consideration of the actual level

of preparation of personnel, the character of the tasks assigned to the sub-
unit, unit, and warship, the sequence and conditions of their execution and
concentration of main efforts on the principal, determining directions and
areas of work involving training and indoctrination of personnel.

76

FOR‘OFFICIAL.USIZ(”ULY
or course concentration of main efforts on the principal items by no means sig-
nifics that other questions can be ignored by the author. The skilled leader
and indoctrinator of subordinates correctly distributes his attention and never
ignores so—called "trivia." These very "trivia? if they are ignored. can
gradually grow into serious errors of omission.

work with people comprises the heart of training and indoctrination. Achieve-
ment of the objectives of the training and indoctrination process depends
directly on the ability of officers to organize the activities of their sub-
ordinates, to impart a purposeful character to it, to rely on party and
Komsomol organisations and on the military collective. Mutual understanding
between superiors and subordinates, coordination of their actions. and a
common striving to accomplish assigned tasks are enormously important.

Unfortunately, some command personnel are inclined to believe that in order to
achieve success it is necessary to maintain a certain "distance" between them-
selves and their subordinates and to impose on them a demandingness based ex-
clusively on considerations of subordination. There is no question about the
fact that the ailitary man must unconditionally observe subordination. but in
no case should he forget that demandingness is truly effective only when it is
combined with respect for subordinates and proceeds from trust in them.
"Trust," stated Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "inspires people. gives then strength
and confidence."‘

A soldier's confidence in himself. in his resources and ability, in his
comrades, shoulder to shOulder with whom he serves, and of course in his
superiors, under the leadership of whom all his activities take place, is a
great help in accomplishing combat training and indoctrination tasks. The
wealth of practical experience of our Armed Forces attests to the fact that
success attends those officers who not only teach their subordinates but who
themselves learn from those under them, who in every possible way develop in
servicemen a feeling of their own worth, encourage initiative and innovative-
ness, and listen to their opinion. Wherever commanders, political workers and
all officers know well the attitudes of personnel, their aspirations and needs,
their strong and weak points, and skillfully combine an individual approach
with reliance on the collective, performance indices in combat and political
training, in meeting socialist pledges. and in maintaining firm observance of
regulations and solid military discipline are invariably high. This relation-
ship is of the nature of a regular pattern which is given practical confirma-
tion every day and every hour.

There is in the hands of organizers and leaders of the training and indoctrina-
tion process a truly powerful lee“: of improving its effectiveness and quality.
It is dictated by the sociopolitical nature of our Armed Forces. It is
[socialist competition./ Comrade L. I. Brezhnev called it one of the vivid
manifestations of a new attitude toward labor. Constituting essentially an
embodiment of the conscientiousness, initiative and creative activity of Soviet
citizens, socialist competition also permeates all elements of the training and
indoctrination process in the Armed Forces. Organized in conformity with the
Lcninist principles of publicity and comparability of results, and full
utilization of advanced know-how. it mobilizes servicemen for high-quality

77

FOR‘0FHK]AI.USE(NVLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

performance of combat and political training tasks and impela them to emulate
outstanding performers, performance-rated specialists, to work with maximum
return on efforts, not to rest on their laurels, but to move forward at all
times and to achieve more. Today socialist competition in the army and navy
encompasses practically all personnel and is aimed at successful implementation
of the decisions of the 26th CPSU Congress.

In conformity with the CPSU Central Committee, USSR Council of Ministers, All-
Union Central Trade Union Council and Komsomol Central Committee decree en-
titled "On All-Union Socialist Competition for Successful Fulfillment and Over-
fulfillment of the Targets of the llth Five-Year Plan," measures ensuring
further enhancement of the role of socialist competition and high-quality accom-
plishment of tasks of combat and political training and increasing combat
readiness have been specified and are being implemented everywhere in the Armed
Forces - in the military districts, the groups of forces, fleets, combined
units, units, on warships, at military educational institutions, at military
enterprises, and in military establishments and organizations. Commanders,
political agencies, party and Komsomol organisations are seeking to achieve,
utilizing all forms of ideological indoctrination work, an increase in the

fine traditions of socialist competition and creation in each collective of a
situation of genuine innovative search, competitiveness, comradely mutual
assistance, a high degree of reaponsiblity and businesslike efficiency. Ini-
tiatives of military personnel, army and navy civilian workers and employees
aimed at further improving work efficiency and quality and at achieving excel-
lent end results of personnel training and indoctrination are receiving ef-
fective support and extensive dissemination.

It is quite obvious that it is impossible to achieve a high level of effective-
ness and quality of the training and indoctrination process without /full
utilization of training facilities and their continuous development./ The
troops and fleets have training centers, training grounds, firing ranges,
classrooms, laboratories, and training drill sites. They ensure high-quality
performance of training drills and exercises, including live~fire gunnery,
live missile firing and bombing. In order to ensure that training facilities
are in conformity with today's demands, however, there must be persistent ef-
fort to continue their development. This applies first and foremost to com-
munications equipment and adoption of electronic gear, various optical,
mechanical and other devices and equipment, and simulators.

The efforts of industrial designers and inventors are focused on developing
new comprehensive aircraft, missile, tank and other simulators, fire simulators
which record target hit effectiveness, plus other training devices. Armed
Forces efficiency innovators and inventors are also making an appreciable
contribution to this effort. There are considerable opportunities in the
troops and fleets for independent fabrication and extensive dissemination of
many types of training devices. simulators and other devices promoting in-
tensification of the training and indoctrination process. It is important

to utilize these opportunities to the fullest possible extent.

Continuous improvement in the general educational and cultural level of per-
sonnel is opening up wide opportunities for extensive employment of programmed

78

FOI‘OFFNJAI.USE¢DNLY
teaching devices. This creates good preconditions for shortening the time
required to train a specialist, for economizing in manpower, funds and
resources, and in the final analysis for improving the effectiveness and
quality of the entire process of training and indoctrination.

Development of training facilities is making them increasingly more costly, and
this is natural, for they are equipped with complex instruments, devices and
equipment. Thanks to the tireless concern of the party and the entire Soviet
people, army and navy personnel have everything they need for fruitful combat
training and performance of duty and for a full spiritual and intellectual life.
Have a thrifty attitude toward everything the Soviet people give the Armed
Forces -- this demand proceeds from the general guideline of the 26th CPSU Con-
gress which states the need to practice thrifty management of public property.
Soviet servicemen accept this as a guide in their daily life and activities.

There exists the most direct link between effectiveness of training and indoc-
trination of personnel and level of [military discipline./ A high degree of
organization and firm observance of regulations give troops and naval forces
the ability to perform swiftly, with precision and teamwork in any situation
and comprise the foundation for prompt, strict and precise execution of train-
ing curricula and schedules and achievement of maximum results from each and
every training class, each and every training hour. At the same time even
isolated instances of lack of organization can lead to serious breakdowns in
combat and political training. They exert the most negative influence on
quality of training activities and do appreciable detriment to the cause of
indoctrinating personnel. Consequently, the stronger discipline is in the
subunit, unit, and warship, the better is the effectiveness and quality of the
training and indoctrination process. Feedback of course also exists: the
better organized training and indoctrination of servicemen is, the more it in-
fluences strengthening of discipline. Our officer cadres should always take
into consideration this dialectical relationship in their daily activities.

Further improvement in effectiveness and quality of the training and indoctrina-
tion process in the Armed Forces is ensured by smooth, coordinated work by com-
manders, political agencies, party and Komsomol organizations, and selfless
labor by all personnel. The ideological conditioning of servicemen is beeoning
stronger, their combat expertise is increasing, and the combat readiness of

the army and navy is steadily growing.

2. Lofty Mission of the Officer

The difficult and responsible labor of the Soviet officer —- labor for the sake
of the freedom and happiness of Soviet citizens, for the sake of a bright future
for the Soviet people, and for the sake of peace and life on earth -— is
respected and honored in this country by the entire people. The man of a new,
socialist system, flesh and blood of the people, their loyal and devoted son,
the Soviet officer has been nurtured and indoctrinated by the party in a

spirit of unswerving dedication to the cause of communism and the principles of
proletarian, socialist internationalism. The officer's mission is to ensure
reliable defense of the socialist homeland. He dedicates all his energy,
knowledge and talent to this lofty mission.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet officer has a fine pedigree. Its scurces are to be found in that
flaming time when the Soviet Republic, which had just gained victory, was
forced to defend its freedOm in a savage struggle against domestic and external
counterrevolution. In that time, one day in the difficult year 1919, V. I.
Lenin addressed future Red Army commanders and predicted that Red officers,
whose origins are in the people, "will enjoy prestige among the soldiers and
will be able to strengthen socialism in our army. Such an army will be in-
vincible."5

The great truth of Lenin's prediction has been convincingly affirmed by history.
Soviet officers carried their lofty name with honor through numerous engage-
ments and battles. The names of the first Soviet military leaders, commanders
and political workers -- S. H. Budennyy, K. Ye. Voroshilov, S. H. Kirov,

V. V. Kuybyshev, H. N. Tukhachevskiy, H. V. Frunze and many other heroes, who
laid down the foundation of new, socialist fighting traditions -- traditions

of selfless, dedicated service to the Soviet homeland - are inscribed with
gold letters in the heroic chronicle of the Soviet Armed Forces.

These outstanding traditions were continued and augmented during the years of
the Great Patriotic War. The exploits of N. Gastello and A. Hares'yev, A.
Pokryshkin and I. Kozhedub, I. Panfilov and L. Dovator, plus thousands of other
combat veteran officers and general officers became bright symbols of an un-
bending strength of spirit, will to win, and combat skill. A weighty contribu-
tion toward increasing our combat traditions and to the treasure house of the
Soviet art of warfare was made by a new pleisd of party-indoctrinated military
lraders and commanders - G. K. Zhukov, A. M. Vasilevskiy, I. Kh. Bagramyan,

i. P. Vatunin, L. A. Govorov, A. G. Colovko, A. I. Yeremenko, I. S. Konev,

N. G. Kuznetsov, R. Ya. Malinovskiy, K. A. Meretskov, K. S. Moskalenko, F. S.
Oktyabr'skiy, I. Ye. Petrov, K. K. Rokossovskiy, P. I. Tolbukhin, I. D.
Chernyakhovskiy, V. I. Chuykov, plus many others. Hundreds of thousands of
officers, general officers and flag officers were awarded USSR medals and
decorations for their great military expertise, courage, staunchness and
heroism, while more than 6000 of these were awarded the title Hero of the Soviet
Union.

Today as well, in peacetime, Soviet offices are worthily carrying the baton of
heroism, glory, and selfless dedication to their patriotic and internationalist
duty. Soviet citizens and the peoples of the brother socialist nations hold
sacred the memory of young pilots of an air unit of the Group of Soviet Forces
in Germany, officers B. Kapustin and Yu. Yanov, who sacrificed their own lives
to guide their falling aircraft away from densely-populated residential

blocks. Lt A. Kisclev displayed self-control and composure at a moment of
mortal danger. 1n saving the lives of his men, he lost both hands. Today this
young officer once again is on active duty in the Armed Forces, enrolled at a
service academy. Capt Tech Serv N. Kuznetsov did not retreat in the face of
death, saving a grainfield from going up in flames. Sr Lt V. Goncharenko died
rescuing people from a fire. Army and navy officers display examples of
heroism. courage, and valor also in performance of their daily duties and
training. Many of them have been awarded combat decorations, while the finest
have been awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union.

80

FOR‘0FFM]A[.USE‘0NLY
The succession of generations which is characteristic of our socialist system
and the Soviet way of life gives the Armed Forces officer corps special
solidarity and increases its spiritual potential. Each new generation of com-
manders, political workers, engineers and technicians takes all the finest
elements from its predecessors, relies on their experience and know-how and,
thanks to this, achieves further improvement in proficiency and,increased con-
bat readiness of troops and naval forces.

It is a great honor to be an officer in the Soviet Armed Forces. At the same
time this is also an enormous responsiblity. The people entrust their sons to
the officer. During their term of active duty in the army or navy, young
people experience a fine school of life under the immediate supervision of
commanders and political workers, become spiritually and physically condi-
tioned, and acquire political, military-technical knowledge and requisite
skills. The development and maturing of a servicenan depend to a decisive

degree on the knowledge, professional and pedagogic expertisessvuul as the
personal example of the officer.

The principal focal area of the complex and diversified professional activity
of the officer is securement of a high level of combat readiness of troopr
and naval forces. This demands of him constant composure and the ability to
Subordinate personal needs and interests to the interests of the military
service. It would be no exaggeration to state that an officer's life com-
prises daily, genuine, practical heroism, the highest degree of good
citizenship, patriotism and internationalism in action.

The enormous importance and exceptional responsibility of the job entrusted to
the officer by the party and people impose high demands on his moral-political,
professional and job-related qualities. The Soviet officer is a person who is
totally dedicated to the Communist Party and his people and who possesses
profound knowledge of Marxism-Leninism, a broad political outlook, and great
general knowledgeability. He is a person who possesses comprehensive
professional training, excellent moral-fighting qualities, and who possesses
consummate knowledge of the combat capabilities of the various weapons, the
techniques and modes of their combat employment. He is a military leader, who
skillfully relies on the collective in his work, who employs modern methods of
training and indoctrinating his men, and who is capable of organizing their
labor and leading them to great feats.

Communist ideological content comprises the foundation of the excellent moral-
puliticai and professional qualities of the Soviet officer. His firmness and
consistency in implementing party policy, his conscientious attitude toward
military duty, and his demandingness on himself and others are based on it.

It determines the officer's spiritual countenance, his feelings and will, and
permeates all his actions and deeds. The Soviet officer is distinguished by
inner composure, faithfulness to his word, the ability in all situations to
maintain self—control and composure, readiness and the capability to execute
orders precisely and promptly. It is not mere happenstance that we link with
the cauntenance of the officer our ideas absut strong will, flawless organiza-
tion and discipline, and an initiative-filled and innovative approach to the
job. All these qualities of the officer beneficially influence his

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

subordinates and the military collective, and help achieve excellent results
in training and indoctrination work.

The heroic history of our Armed Forces and daily army and navy realities show
the enormous, truly inestimable importance of the officer's personal

example in performance of military duty for successful accomplishment of com-
bat missions, personnel training and indoctrination tasks, and strengthening
of military discipline. Without this there is not and cannot be genuine
officer authority, and consequently genuine success in an officer's work.

In general terms, no position per se brings authority and respect. The
authority of a position is by no means synonymous with the authority of the
person who occupies it. And whoever thinks that authority will be automatical-
ly guaranteed to him together with appointment to a given position is
profoundly in error. There is an apt saying that it is not the position which
embellishes the man but rather the man who embellishes the position. This is
why it is important constantly to think about how one can justify through
one's labor, organization of one's job, and achievement of concrete results

in increasing the combat readiness of the subunit, unit, and warship the trust
one has been given and one's conformity with one's position. Only in this
manner is it possible to earn genuine authority.

But earning authority does not end things. It must continuously be reinforced
by deeds, and not only deeds connected with performance of duty. There are
many facets to the authority of the leader which assume special importance in
the conditions of the Armed Forces. An officer is emulated by his subordinates:
in battle during time of war, and during time of peace -- in training, per—
formance of duty, and volunteer work, as well as during off-duty hours. This

is why an officers businesslike efficiency, moral purity, modesty, solicitous
and comradely attitude toward his men, and the ability to gain their affection
are of enormous significance both for the moral climate in a military collective
and for the success of all an officer's activities. Constant living contacts
with his subordinates help an officer find the right path to their hearts. And
he who possesses a soldier's heart possesses the secret of victory.

Perhaps nothing does greater harm t 0 an officer's authority than discrepancy
between his words and deeds and departure from ethical standards. Rudeness,
conceit, and opinionated self-confidence are just as much antipodes of
authority as cowardice, indecision, and attempts to play up to one's Subordi-
nates. Genuine respect does not tolerate excessive familiarity. It is es-
sentiaily no less insulting than haughtiness. Equable, comradely relations
with one's subordinates do not exclude unwavering observance of all the demands
of subordination. At the same time they assume a deep mutual understanding.
No matter how erudite, talented and hard-working an officer may be, without
reliance on his subordinates, without the ability to guide their will. energy
and knowledge toward achieving cosmon success, he will never be able to head
his unit. not technically but in actual fact, or effectively lead his men.
"The leader-Communist," wrote V. I. Lenin, "should prove his right to leader-
ship by the fact and only by the fact that he [finds [it.]/ for himself Imany
lit.]l. and ever more assistants... that he [knows how [it.]/ to help [them
lit.]/ work, to advance Ithem lit.]/. to show and take into consideration
[their [it.]/ experience."

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Such an ability presupposes. in addition to all else, the competency of a
leader. Soviet officers are highly educated individuals, possessing extensive
professional training. Its foundations are laid down at military educational
institutions, and these are reliable, solid foundations. But the main school
for every individual is the school of practical activity, the school of life
itself. And in order to keep up with its demands, an officer must work tireless-
ly, day after day, replenishing his store of political, scientific, military
and specialized knowledge, improving his skills and working with an eye to the
future. Unfortunately one still encounters certain officers who stop in their
ideological and professional growth and are content with the store of knowl-
edge they have already acquired. And they rationalize this with claims of

being busy and lacking opportunities for independent study on a systematic
basis.

What can be said in this regard? Indeed, as a rule an officer does not have
very much time available for independent study. Therefore he must efficiently
utilize his time, learn to pinpoint the main, most important thing in his
work -- that which primarily determines the effectiveness of the training and
indoctrination process and the quality of performance of the tasks facing the
Subunit, unit, or warship. It is no less important to master the ability to
plan work with precision, to organize it, and correctly to distribute time
and resources. Scientific organization of labor begins precisely with this.

Correct organization of the activities of officer personnel should combine
well-conceived individual planning of the workday with the most efficient
distribution of time across the entire vast spectrum of duties performed by
them on a daily basis. on the scale of the subunit, unit, warship, head-
quarters, or establishment. This is particularly essential because continuously
more complex tasks must be accomplished in the shortest possible time and, con-
sequently, efficient utilization of the time and energy of officers directly
determines not only an improvement in the level of their own training but, and
to no less a degree, the effectiveness and quality of training and indoctrina-
tion of personnel. Close oversight in trivial matters, superiors doing the
work for subordinates, and elements of unnecessary duplication and over-
cautiousncss, which are still encountered at times, have nothing in common with
correct organization of labor.

Naturally it is not easy to learn correctly to organize one's own labor and
that of one's subordinates. Military educational institutions should play a
quite appreciable role in resolving this problem. They should lay down the
foundation of a high degree of personal organization of an officer and focus
him on an initiative-filled, innovative approach to the task and persistent
effort to and to and refresh his knowledge. Senior commanders, political
agencies, party and Komsomoi organizations are called upon to work tirelessly
on strengthening and development of such qualities throughout an officer's en-
tire term of service. But the main condition for an officer's successful ac-
tivities and continuous growth is tireless work to improve himself, purposeful
and continuous improvement of his own knowledge and skills.

For inquiring, aggressive officers of initiative, extensive opportunities for
self-improvement and mastery of the summit of military and specialized

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

knowledge are opened up by alert duty, exercises, flight activities and naval
cruises, training drills and classes, in the process of which one studies and
solves in a new way many problems pertaining to mastering operation and
maintenance of weapons and combat equipment as well as organization of training
and indoctrination work. One can state with complete confidence that only that
officer who throughout his entire term of service studies persistently, im-
proves his knowledge and skills, and innovativsly applies than in his daily
activities is capable of meeting the demands of the time and achieves success
in training and indoctrination of subordinates and leading his subunit, unit,
or warship.

officers' work results depend directly ontheirskilled utilization of the
enormous influence of party and Komsomol organizations in the interests of
successfully accomplishing the tasks of combat and political training and
strengthening discipline. Commanders of subunits, units, and naval ships who
are CPSU members, comprising the majority of our command cadres, rely in their
work on the party organizations and direct their activities toward successful
accomplishment of combat missions, combat and political training schedules,
and strengthening of military discipline. Conmmnders who are not members of
the CPSU should also, in accomplishing these tasks, work in the closest
relationship with party organizations, rely on them, and utilize in every pos-
sible way the experience of Communists and the strength of the party ac—
tivists.

Guiding the activities of party organizations and relying on them, cal-sanders
give a personal example of active participation in the life and affairs of the
party organization, foster the development of criticism and self-criticism,
listen to the advice and suggestions of party members, support their
initiative, make use of their experience, and constantly seek to ensure that
the party organization constitutes in actual fact the cementing, mobilizing
force of the military collective.

The ability to obtain support from the party organization and guide its ac-
tivities does not come to an officer automatically. Experience and political
maturity are needed for this. This is why concern for the development of
officers, especially young officers, and concrete, purposeful, daily work by
commanders, political agencies and party organizations to instill in them a
degree of personal responsibility for flawless performance of their duties
are so important.

Naturally each officer has his own specific duties and his own, to a certain
degree individual style of activity. Nor could it be any different, for there
does not exist any uniform recipe of actions "for every case." But there are
demands which are common for all. These include first and foremost mastery of
a Leninist work style, a responsible attitude toward one's duties, in-
dustriousness and modesty, high-mindedness, unity of word and deed, demanding-

ncss and at the same time sensitivity toward others, toward their needs and
aspirations.

Soviet officers work persistently to master modern methods of leadership and
work constantly to improve the effectiveness and quality of their work. They

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mobilize army and navy personnel to implement the decisions of the 26th CPSU
Congress and direct the military labor of personnel, aimed at successful
accomplishment of combat and political training curricula and schedules, so-
cialist pledges, and the tasks assigned by the party and people to the Armed
Forces.

Being individuals with a strong sense of duty, with outstanding ideological-
political, professional and moral qualities, Soviet officers, just as all Armed
Forces personnel, are closely united behind the Conmunist Party and its Central
Comittee. They dedicate their energy, knowledge and experience to the cause of
unswerving increase in the fighting strength and combat readiness of the Armed
Forces and strengthening of the defense capability of the homeland.

3. By the Entire Force of Party Influence

Comrade L. I. Brezhnev called party-political work a powerful weapon of our army.
"The force of this weapon." he emphasized, "has been tested in the flame of
battle. It continues today to frighten our enemies."7

Permeated by Leninist ideas about defense of the socialist homeland, party—
political work, with its characteristic means and methods, mobilizes service-
men for flawless performance of their patriotic and internationalist duty and
for successful accosplishment of the tasks facing the Armed Forces. It exer-
cises a deep influence on the consciousness and feelings of personnel, unites
military collectives, and fosters an improvement in the level of control of
troops and naval forces. It occupies a most important place in implementation
of the indoctrinational role of the Armed Forces.

The significance of party-political work in the army and navy is steadily
growing. This is connected with the increasing complexity of the tasks of
Armed Forces training and combat readiness and with the sociopolitical and
military-technical features of contemporary war, which imposes greater demands

than ever before on the moral-political and psychological conditioning of
pe rsonncl .

11w forms and methods of party-political work are improving year by year.

It is being conducted taking into account the specific features of the

various categories of personnel and in an organic link with the concrete tasks
of the troops and naval forces as well as the conditions in which servicemen
live and work. [Concentration of the coordinated efforts of cor-sanders, politi-
cal agencies, party and Komsomol organizations on the decisive areas of party-
political work,/ which proceed from the demands of the 26th CPSU Congress, the
CI'SU Central Committee decree entitled "On Further Improvement of Ideological
and Political—Indoctrination Work" dated 26 April 1979, plus other party
documents, promotes increased effectiveness of party-political work.

Forming a scientific ideological outlook in servicemen, indoctrination of

lulu]. dedication to the cause of the party and Communist ideals, socialist
patriotism and internationaliSm have been and continue to be the main areas of
party-political work in the army and navy. Resting on the firm foundation of
Marxist-Leninist teaching, this work is called upon to arm personnel, utilizing
all its forms and methods, with a deep and clear understanding of the laws and

85

FOR OFFIOAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFK 1A1. USE ONLY

prospects of societal development. Hell-argued propaganda of the enormous
advantages and achievements of socialism and the socialist way of life com-
prises one more most important area of party-political work. It should also
aggressively and convincingly expose the reactionary, antipopular essence of
imperialism and its domestic and foreign policy, the anti-Soviet thrust of its
military preparations, and form in personnel a high degree of political
vigilance and a clear understanding of their responsiblity for reliable defense
of the achievements of socialism and preserving world peace.

Indoctrination of servicemen in the revolutionary, fighting and labor tradi-
tions of the Communist Party, the Soviet people, and our Armed Forces consti-
tutes the combat sector of party-political work. It is impossible to imagine
today's army and navy life without continuous vital contacts between personnel
and veterans of the party and the Armed Forces, with Heroes of the Soviet Union
and heroes of socialist labor, and with veterans of the Civil war and the

Great Patriotic Har. Words spoken by veterans -- persons who constitute

living embodiment of the legendary fame of the Armed Forces -- exert enormous
influence on the minds and hearts of young servicemen. The activities of
veterans -- both those who continue to serve in the army or navy and those
working in various areas of the building of communism, as well as those who

are today enjoying a deserved rest -- require constant attention and support on
the part of commanders. political agencies, Armed Forces party and Komsomol
organizations.

An important indoctrinational role is played by combat glory evenings organized
in subunits. units, and on naval ships, excursions to the museumsof military
units and combined units, the holding of classes in these museums,and visits to
sites of historic battles and engagements. As a rule all these meausres,

which are distinguished by a strong emotional effect, are transformed into
genuine lessons of courage, staunchness, and faithfulness to patriotic and in-
ternationalist duty. A large, very important and needed job is being done by
those commanders and political workers who seek to ensure that every man
becomes quite familiar with the fighting history of his regiment. ship, or com-
bined unit and feels pride in the fact that he has the honor to serve under a
combat banner covered with heroic glory and is aware of his own personal
responsibility for worthy continuation of and adding to the military valor of
older generations.

Our Armed Forces are correctly called a school of patriotism and socialist in-
ternationalism. Every army and navy collective constitutes an amicable,
unified fighting family. in which serve representatives of the Soviet Union's
various nationalities and ethnic groups. The spiritual ties which bind them
are strong and indissoluble. The fighting friendship of Soviet servicemen with
the men of the armies of the brother socialist nations is also permeated by a
spirit of internationalism.

Genuine patriots and internationalists, the men of the USSR Armed Forces, just
as all Soviet citizens. display class solidarity with the world Communist and
worker move-ant and with fighters for social and national liberation. They
well understand that the military labor of the servicemen of the Soviet Nation
is labor for the sake of peace and the social progress of mankind.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All areas of party—political work are inseparably interlinked, supplement and
enrich one another. And they all should be focused on achieving end results
which would maximally promote steady improvement in the training of troops and
naval forces, strengthening of personnel discipline and organization, and
increased Armed Forces combat readiness.

it is quite obvious that party—political work cannot be effective if it is con-
ducted in separation from the daily life and activities of troops and naval
forces. Its effectiveness depends directly on [the pertinence of the content
and conformity of the work forms and methods to the educational and overall
cultural level of personnel.l Our time is a time of an enormOusly increased
scale and complexity of tasks being performed by the Soviet people. It is
also a time of an extremely acute ideological contest between socialism and
capitalism. And it is very important not to ignore in party-political work
so-called difficult problems which somethnes arise and to answer them in a
prompt and timely manner, for if we do not respond to such questions, as was
stressed at the 26th CPSU Congress by Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, "our country’s
foes will attempt to utilize this to slander socialism."8

Of course it is not easy to discuss sensitive subjects. A high degree of
competence is required, as well as the ability to reveal the class essence of
phenomena and facts and persuasively to expose lies, disinformation, and

forged evidence. It is not mere happenstance that the ideological front is
called the front of struggle for people‘s minds and hearts. And every com-
mander, political worker and officer should possess a consummate mastery of the
art of attacking and winning on this front. To instill in personnel class
self—awareness, implacability toward views and ways which are alien to us, and
to fortify by every means the active life position of the citizen—soldier,
patriot and internationalist is the honorable and responsible task of all those
who carry into the masses the ideas of the party, who explain its policy, who
organize and conduct party—political work.

The effectiveness of party—political work also depends to an enormous degree on
how fully it takes into account [new trends and specific features in the
development of military affairs and changes in the qualitative state of troops
and naval forces./ One must constantly bear in mind those moral, psychological
and physical ordeals which personnel may ancOunter in a contemporary war, and
o‘ulldllc t party-political work in such a manner that it actively helps in-
crease the fighting, ideological, and moral staunchness of personnel. The main
indicator of a serviceman's ability to overcome all difficulties and privations
for the sake of accomplishing the combat mission is his practical actions and
concrete deeds in complex circumstances. One must proceed from this in planning
and organizing party—political work and in evaluating its state and results.

The wealth of experience of our Armed Forces attests to the fact that party-
political work is more fruitful when it has a stronger link with combat train-
ing of troops and naval forces. Today an increasingly important place in
party-political work is occupied by questions connected with mastery by per-
sonnel of modern weapons and combat equipment, improving the quality of combat
training, increasing the return on each training hour and each training class,
and by achieving savings in funds and resources.

87

FOII OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An immutable rule of party-political work is /continuity./ Any pauses whatso-
ever are intolerable. and its vigorousness should be directly proportional to
the complexity of the situation and the tasks being performed. Activeness of
party—political work is measured not by the number of planned and conducted
measures. The determining criterion here is the force of the continuous, ef—
fective party influence on all aspects of the daily life and activities of
servicemen.

The art of attaining such influence was revealed with impressive depth and con-
vincingness in Comrade L. l. Brezhnev's book "Malaya Zemlya." Discussing the
experience of party-political work in a combat situation, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev
notes: "Flowery speeches and auditoriums were not needed, but rather frank, man-
to-man and, I would say, heartfelt talks. I took part in most of the party
meetings held in the combat combined units and units, and I frequently simply
got together and talked with the men. Usually I was able to find a common
tongue with the soldiers and sailors, although I did not use any special tech-
niques for this. Whether it was a serious discussion or a joking conversation,
1 tried to conduct myself in a simple and equable manner. And I always spoke the
the truth, however unpleasant it might be. I should note that there were some
officers who tried to represent themselves as a hail-fellow-well—met. Naturally
the men immediately sensed the phoniness of this deliberate familiarity, and
from that moment on they would no longer be frank and open.

“The majority of our political section people, political instructors, Komsomol
organizers, and agitators succeeded in finding the right approach and enjoyed
authority among the men, and the important thing was that the men knew that at
a difficult moment that person who was appealing to them to hold fast would be
alongside them, would remain with them, and would lead them forward with

weapon in hand. The fact is that our chief weapon was the impassioned party
word bolstered by deed -- personal example in combat. This is why the political
workers became the soul of the Armed Forces."9

One can state without exaggeration that this excerpt from "Malaya Zemlys" offers
a graphic picture of the standard of genuinely effective party-political work
and of what qualities must be possessed by those persons who conduct it among
the masses.

The natural [closeness of commanders, political workers, and all officers to
the enlisted men,/ which has its source in the socialist nature of our Armed
Forces, enables them to become quite familiar with the aspirations, needs, in-
terests, strong points and deficiencies of subordinates. And experienced of-
ficers know how important it is not to limit themselves to the framework of
military service alone. 0f enormOus importance for successfully forming the
requisite moral-political and fighting qualities in personnel is a careful
study of the life of one's subordinates prior to entering the army. Consider-
ahlc indoctrinational effect in this regard is obtained by stable contacts by
commanders, political workers, party and Komsomol organizations with the men's
parents, schools, and the work forces at the enterprises, sovkhozes and
koikhozes, and establishments from which the young men entered the army or
navy. Constituting one of the elements of the indissoluble unity between our
army and the people, these contacts make it possible to ensure succession in

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the indoctrination of a young man and to obtain support from all the finest
elements in him for forming and shaping the person of the defender of the so-
cialist homeland.

Profound and comprehensive knowledge by the officer of his subordinates and
the ability, to quote V. I. Lenin, to earn their boundless trust by a comrade-
ly relationship and solicitous concern for meeting their needs are essential
conditions for effective party influence on personnel. Only by knowing people
and by relying on living contacts with them, on their trust and support, can
one achieve a high state of personnel morale and inspire them to perform self-
less military labor and achieve flawless performance of military duty.

Obviously without knowledge of people's individual peculiarities, proclivities,
and interests, their place and role in the collective, party-political work
cannot be correctly planned. Closely coordinated with the tasks performed by
personnel, it introduces a political element into the organization and content
of combat training, into the development of socialist competition, and into
the campaign for a steady improvement in combat readiness.

IPurty organizations] constitute the political nucleus and cementing force of
military collectives in our Armed Forces. their activeness and aggressiveness
determine to an enormous degree the results of party-political work. Ideologi—
cal and organizational activity by Communists, their living word, and an
example of flawless performance of military duties are effective factors of
party influence on the soldier masses.

Communists have marched in the front ranks of servicemen from the very beginning
of existence of Our Armed Forces. They are always to be found where the going
is most difficult and where success is forged. To be at the forefront is the
sole privilege of a person who carries a party card by his heart. Pointing to
this fact, the Eighth Congress of the Russian Communist Party (of Bolsheviks)
emphasized that belonging to a Communist party cell does not give a soldier any
special rights but merely imposes upon him the obligation to be the most self-
less and courageous fighting man.

Army and navy Communists are unswervingly faithful to this lofty obligation.
Just as in the past. today as well they display examples of flawless performance
or party and military duty, tireless improvement of ideological conditioning and
professional expertise, opposition to complacency, support of Isrsbslling unused
reserve potential and capabilities, as well as unswerving increase in the
vigilance and combat readiness of troops and naval forces.

lKomsomol organizations/ are reliable and faithful assistants of Armed Forces
party organizations. They make a worthy contribution to the development of
young servicemen who enter the army and navy direct from factory machines, from
kolkhox fields, and from the schoolroom. And the activeness and aggressiveness
of Komsomol organizations of subunits, units, and warships determine to a con-
siderable degree whether young servicemen feel from their very first steps in
the service the Support of the collective and whether they develop a firm faith
In success and the endeavor to continue and build upon the achievements of
their predecessors.

89

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
F0R10FFKJAL.USEGDNLY

Initially raw recruits naturally encounter many difficulties. They do not im-
mediately become accustomed to the rigorous army and navy life, the intensive
rhythm of military labor, and the high demands of military service. The over-
whelming majority of soldiers rapidly overcome these difficulties. But it
also sometimes happens that many things fail to work out smoothly for a new
conscript. It is important here to encourage a person in a timely manner and,
if necessary, to correct him, to keep him from stunbling, to help him assume

a worthy place in the glorious ranks of armed defenders of the socialist home-
land.

Party-political work in the Soviet Army and Navy actively promotes successful
accomplishment of all the tasks facing them. Its effectiveness and the steady
strengthening of party influence on all aspects of the life and activities of
personnel are attested by the persistent struggle by servicemen to achieve
excellent, stable performance indices in training and service, complete
achievement of socialist pledges, and for further impr0vement in Armed Forces
combat readiness.

FOOTNOTES
1. V. I. Lenin, “Poln. Sobr. Soch." [Complete Works], Vol 36, page 366.
2. Ibid., Vol 51, page 50.

3. PRAVDA, 16 September 1981.

a. L. I. Brezhnev. "Leninskim kursom" [Following a Leninist Course], Vol 2,
page 206.

5. Lenin, op. cit., Vol 37, page 200.
6. Ibid., Vol 42, page 325.
7. Brezhnev, op. cit., Vol 2, page 51.

8. "Materialy XXVI s"yezda KPSS" [Proceedings of the 26th CPSU Congress],
page 75.

9. L. l. Brezhnev, "Na strazhe mira i sotsializma" [Guarding Peace and
Socialism], page 560.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CONCLUSION

Under the guidance of their tested and proven fighting vanguard -- the Leninist
Communist Party -- the Soviet people are consistently and tirelessly implement-
ing the historic guidelines of the 26th CPSU Congress. Engaging in shock-work
labor in all areas of building communism, they are increasing the economic and
defense might of the homeland. Day by day the international position of the
Soviet Union is growing stronger, as is the beneficial influence of its inal-
terabiy peace-seeking, firm foreign policy.

The USSR Armed Forces are reliably guarding the peaceful labor of the Soviet
people, the great achievements of socialism, and world peace. They comprise an
organic part of the developed socialist society and are inseparably linked with
the worker masses. Embodied in their countenance are the finest traits of our
people. Soviet servicemen possess a high degree of ideological conditioning,

a consummate mastery of the potent weapons and combat equipment, and are
honorably carrying out their duty.

The defense capability of the USSR and the combat readiness of our Armed Forces
are at the level of today's demands. This is a result of consistent and un-
swcrving implementation of the course of policy of the CPSU and the Soviet
State, in which are inseparably merged tasks of construction and defense, a
love of peace, and constant readiness to offer a decisive rebuff to an
aggressor. Continuing this Leninist course of policy, the 26th CPSU Congress
adopted an extensive program of further building of communism and demonstrated
the unswerving resolve of the Communist Party and Soviet people to defend peace.

A serious threat to peace proceeds from aggressive imperialist and other
reactionary circles. They are attempting to impede at all costs the objective
course of the progressive development of mankind. Under the phony pretext of
"Soviet military threat,“ militant U.S. and NATO circles are escalating
milltnrist preparations with the aim of disrupting the present world military-
utrutcgic balance and achieving the unattainable -- military superiority over
the USSR and the Warsaw Pact. They are encouraging focal points of tension in
various parts of the world and are waging unbridled psychological warfare
against genuine socialism and the national liberation movement, against all
the forces of peace and progress.

All this demands of Soviet citizens, the peoples of the brother socialist
countries, and of all progressive mankind a high degree of political vigilance.

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFTWCIAI.USEZCNMLY

an aggressive and resolute campaign to preserve détente and strengthen world
peace.

The Soviet Union is marching in the vanguard of this campaign. Displaying firm
political will and boldness as well as a realistic, farsighted approach to
pressing international problems, it persistently seeks to eliminate the threat

of war and strengthen the security of peoples. The new and important peace-
seeking initiatives advanced at the 26th CPSU Congress have gained widespread in-
ternational recognition and support as a peace program for the 1980's.

Marching shoulder to shoulder with the Soviet Union in building and defending
the new society and in the struggle for peace are its allies and friends —- the
nations of the socialist community. Unification of their efforts promotes suc-
cessful accomplishment of both national and internationalist tasks and ob-
jectively corresponds to the root interests of all mankind.

The solid unity and fruitful cooperation among the nations of the socialist
community is a great achievement of the brother parties and peoples, our common
possession. It is steadily increasing and growing stronger. Defense of the
great achievements of socialism and peace is reliably prompted by the Warsaw
Pact Organization.

The Soviet Armed Forces, marchingshmdma'to shoulder with the brother armies,
are carrying out their patriotic and internationalist duty. They possess
everything needed for successfully accomplishing their assigned tasks. Soviet
servicemen respond tc the concern of the party and people, to the love and
trust of the working people with selfless military labor. Campaigning together
with the entire people to carry out the guidelines of the 26th CPSU Congress,
they are working persistently to improve the effectiveness and quality of com—
bat and political training and are tirelessly strengthening the vigilance and
combat readiness of the army and navy.

The Soviet people can be assured that their offspring, the Armed Forces, are on
guard and vigilant at all times, always prepared to repel aggression from any
quarter. lndoctrinated by the party and closely united behind it, Soviet
servicemen are honorably carrying out their duty and are selflessly and
devotedly serving the homeland andthe cause of communism.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1982

3026

650: 8165/10h5

- END -

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY